
Amberley Village, OH Code of Ordinances


TITLE I: GENERAL PROVISIONS



      Chapter




         10.   GENERAL PROVISIONS




CHAPTER 10: GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   10.01   Short titles



   10.02   Definitions



   10.03   Rules of construction



   10.04   Revivor; effect of amendment or repeal



   10.05   Construction of section references



   10.06   Conflicting provisions



   10.07   Severability



   10.08   Reference to offices



   10.09   Errors and omissions



   10.10   Ordinances repealed



   10.11   Ordinances unaffected



   10.12   Ordinances saved



   10.13   Salary or bond saved



   10.14   Application to future ordinances



   10.15   Interpretation



   10.16   Amendments to code; amendatory language



   10.17   Statutory references



   10.18   Preservation of penalties, offenses rights and liabilities



 



   10.99   General penalty



§ 10.01  SHORT TITLES.



   (A)   All ordinances of a permanent and general nature of the
municipality, as revised, codified, rearranged, renumbered, and consolidated
into component codes, titles, chapters, and sections, shall be known and
designated as the "municipal code," for which designation "codified
ordinances" or "code" may be substituted.  Code, title, chapter, and section
headings do not constitute any part of the law as contained in the code. 



(R.C. § 1.01)



   (B)   All references to codes, titles, chapters, and sections are to
such components of the code unless otherwise specified.  Any component code
may be referred to and cited by its name, such as the "traffic code." 
Sections may be referred to and cited by the designation "§" followed by the
number, such as "§ 10.01."  Headings and captions used in this code other
than the title, chapter, and section numbers, are employed for reference
purposes only and shall not be deemed a part of the text of any section.



('69 Code, §§ 1.01, 1.03)



§ 10.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this code the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.



   AND. May be read OR, and OR may be read AND, if the sense requires it. 



(R.C. § 1.02(F))  ('69 Code, § 1.04)



   ANOTHER.  When used to designate the owner of property which is the
subject of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other
owner of property. 



(R.C. § 1.02(B))



   CITY,TOWN,VILLAGE,MUNICIPAL CORPORATION, or MUNICIPALITY. When used in
this code, shall denote the municipality irrespective of its population or
legal classification. 



('69 Code, § 1.04)



   COUNCIL.  The legislative authority of the municipality. 



('69 Code, § 1.04)



   COUNTY.  The county or counties in which the municipality is located.



   IMPRISONED.  Shall have the same meaning as in R.C. § 1.05. 



(R.C. § 1.05)



   INTERNET. The international computer network of both federal and
non-federal interoperable packet switched data networks, including the
graphical subnetwork known as the world wide web.



   KEEPER or PROPRIETOR.  Includes all persons, whether acting by
themselves or as a servant, agent, or employee.



   LAND or REAL ESTATE.  Includes rights and easements of incorporeal
nature. 



(R.C. § 701.01(F))



   MAY.  Is permissive.



   MONTH.  A calendar month.



   OAC.  Refers to the Ohio Administrative Code.



   OATH.  Includes affirmation; and SWEAR includes affirm.



(R.C. § 1.59, § 701.01)



   OWNER.  When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole
or part of such property, either alone or with others. 



('69 Code, § 1.04)



   PERSON.  Includes an individual, corporation, business trust, estate,
trust, partnership, and association. 



(R.C.  §  1.59(C), § 701.01)  ('69 Code, § 1.04)



   PERSONAL PROPERTY.  Includes all property except real.



('69 Code, § 1.04)



   PLAN OF SEWERAGE,SYSTEM OF SEWERAGE,SEWER, and SEWERS. Includes sewers,
sewage disposal works and treatment plants, and sewage pumping stations,
together with facilities and appurtenances necessary and proper therefor. 



(R.C. § 701.01)



   PREMISES.  As applied to property, includes land and buildings.



   PROPERTY.  Includes real, personal, and mixed estates and interests.



(R.C. § 701.01(E))  ('69 Code, § 1.04)



   PUBLIC AUTHORITY.  Includes boards of education; the municipal,
county, state, or federal government, its officers, or an agency thereof; or
any duly authorized public official.



   PUBLIC PLACE.  Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school
yard, body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for
the sale of merchandise, public accommodation, or amusement.



   R.C. or REVISED CODE.  Refers to the Revised Code of Ohio.



('69 Code, § 1.04)



   REAL PROPERTY.  Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.



('69 Code, § 1.04)



   REGISTERED MAIL.  Includes certified mail; and CERTIFIED MAIL includes
registered mail.



(R.C. § 1.02(G))



   SHALL.  Is mandatory.



('69 Code, § 1.04)



   SIDEWALK.  That portion of the street between the curb line and the
adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.



('69 Code, § 1.04)



   STATE.  The State of Ohio.



   STREET.  Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, highways,
viaducts, and all other public thoroughfares within the municipality, and
shall mean the entire width between property lines of every way or place when
any part thereof is open to the use of the public as a matter of right.



('69 Code, § 1.04)



   SUBCHAPTER.  A division of a chapter, designated in this code by a
bold heading in the chapter analysis and a capitalized heading in the body of
the chapter, setting apart a group of sections related by the subject matter
of the heading.  Not all chapters have subchapters.



   TENANT  or OCCUPANT. As applied to premises, includes any person
holding a written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any
part of such premises, alone or with others.



   WEEK. Seven consecutive days.



(R.C. § 1.44)



   WHOEVER.  Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners;
principals, agents, and employees; and all officials, public or private.



(R.C. § 1.02(A))  ('69 Code, § 1.04)



   WRITTEN or IN WRITING.  Includes printing and any representation of
words, letters, symbols, or figures; this provision does not affect any law
relating to signatures. 



(R.C. § 1.59, § 701.01)



   YEAR. 12 consecutive months.



(R.C. § 1.44)



§ 10.03  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Common and technical usage.  Words and phrases shall be read
in context and construed according to the rules of grammar and common
usage.  Words and phrases that have acquired a technical or particular
meaning, whether by legislative definition or otherwise, shall be construed
accordingly.



(R.C. § 1.42)



   (B)   Singular and plural; gender; tenses; general terms.  As used
in this code, unless the context otherwise requires:



      (1)   The singular includes the plural, and the plural
includes the singular.



      (2)   Words of one gender include the other genders.



      (3)   Words in the present tense include the future tense.



(R.C. § 1.43)



      (4)   A general term following specific enumeration of terms
is not limited to the class enumerated unless expressly so limited.



('69 Code, § 1.04)



   (C)   Calendar; computation of time.



      (1)   The time within which an act is required by law to be
done shall be computed by excluding the first and including the last day;
except that when the last day falls on Sunday or a legal holiday, then the
act may be done on the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a legal
holiday.



('69 Code, § 1.09)



      (2)   When a public office, in which an act required by law is
to be performed, is closed to the public for the entire day that constitutes
the last day for doing the act or before its usual closing time on that day,
the act may be performed on the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a
legal holiday.



      (3)   LEGAL HOLIDAY, as used in divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2) of
this section, means the following days:



         (a)   The first day of January, known as New Year's day;



         (b)   The third Monday in January, known as Martin
Luther King day;



         (c)   The third Monday in February, known as
Washington-Lincoln day;



         (d)   The day designated in the "Act of June 28, 1968,"
82 Stat. 250, 5 U.S.C. 6103, as amended, for the commemoration of Memorial
day;



         (e)   The fourth day of July, known as Independence day;



         (f)   The first Monday in September, known as Labor day;



         (g)   The second Monday in October, known as Columbus
day;



         (h)   The eleventh day of November, known as Veteran's
day;



         (i)   The fourth Thursday in November, known as
Thanksgiving day;



         (j)   The twenty-fifth day of December, known as
Christmas day;



         (k)   Any day appointed and recommended by the Governor
of this state or the President of the United States as a holiday.



      (4)   If any day designated in this section as a legal holiday
falls on a Sunday, the next succeeding day is a legal holiday.



(R.C. § 1.14)  ('69 Code, § 1.10)



      (5)   When an act is to take effect or become operative from
and after a day named, no part of that day shall be included.  If priority
of legal rights depends upon the order of events on the same day, such
priority shall be determined by the times in the day at which they
respectively occurred.



(R.C. § 1.15)



      (6)   If a number of months is to be computed by counting the
months from a particular day, the period ends on the same numerical day in
the concluding month as the day of the month from which the computation is
begun, unless there are not that many days in the concluding month, in which
case the period ends on the last day of that month.



(R.C. § 1.45)



      (7)   In all cases where the law shall require any act to be
done in a reasonable time or reasonable notice to be given, reasonable time
or notice shall mean such time only as may be necessary for the prompt
performance of such duty or compliance with such notice.



   (D)   Authority.  When the law requires an act to be done which may
by law as well be done by an agent as by the principal, such requirement
shall be construed to include all such acts when done by an authorized agent.



   (E)   Joint authority.  All words purporting to give joint
authority to three or more municipal officers or other persons shall be
construed as giving such authority to a majority of such officers or other
persons, unless it shall be otherwise expressly declared in the law giving
the authority, or it is inconsistent with state law or municipal charter
provisions.



   (F)   Exceptions.  The rules of construction shall not apply to any
law which contains any express provision excluding such construction, or when
the subject matter or context of such law is repugnant thereto.



§ 10.04  REVIVOR; EFFECT OF AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.



   (A)   The repeal of a repealing statute does not revive the
ordinance originally repealed nor impair the effect of any saving clause
therein.



(R.C. § 1.57)



   (B)   The reenactment, amendment, or repeal of an ordinance does
not, except as provided in division (C) of this section:



      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the ordinance or any prior
action taken thereunder.



      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege,
obligation, or liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded, or incurred
thereunder.



      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal.



      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding, or remedy in
respect of any privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture, or
punishment; and the investigation, proceeding, or remedy may be instituted,
continued, or enforced, and the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment imposed,
as if the ordinance had not been repealed or amended.



   (C)   If the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment for any offense is
reduced by a reenactment or amendment of an ordinance, the penalty,
forfeiture, or punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according
to the ordinance as amended.



(R.C. § 1.58)



§ 10.05  CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.



   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation
of a section or an inclusive group of sections, or of divisions or
subdivisions of a section, such reference shall be construed to mean a
violation of any provision of the section, sections, divisions or
subdivisions included in the reference.



   (B)   References in the code to action taken or authorized under
designated sections of the code include, in every case, action taken or
authorized under the applicable legislative provision which is superseded by
this code.



(R.C. § 1.23)



   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section
hereof, the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as
subsequently amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered, unless the subject
matter be changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.



(R.C. § 1.55)  ('69 Code, § 1.06)



§ 10.06  CONFLICTING PROVISIONS.



   If the provisions of different codes, chapters, or sections of the
codified ordinances conflict with or contravene each other, the provisions
bearing the latest passage date shall prevail.  If the conflicting
provisions bear the same passage date, the conflict shall be so construed as
to be consistent with the meaning or legal effect of the questions of the
subject matter taken as a whole.



§ 10.07  SEVERABILITY.



   If any provisions of a section of this code or the application thereof
to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not affect
other provisions or applications of the section or related sections which can
be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end
the provisions are severable.



(R.C. § 1.50)  ('69 Code, § 1.05)



§ 10.08  REFERENCE TO OFFICES.



   Reference to a public office or officer shall be deemed to apply to any
office, officer, or employee of the village exercising the powers, duties, or
functions contemplated in the provision, irrespective of any transfer of
functions or change in the official title of the functionary. 



('69 Code, § 1.07)



§ 10.09  ERRORS AND OMISSIONS.



   If a manifest error be discovered consisting of the misspelling of any
words, the omission of any word or words necessary to express the intention
of the provisions affected, the use of words to which no meaning can be
attached, or the use of words when another word was clearly intended to
express the intention, the spelling shall be corrected, and the words
supplied, omitted, or substituted as will conform with the manifest
intention, and the provision shall have the same effect as though the correct
words were contained in the text as originally published.  No alteration
shall be made or permitted if any question exists regarding the nature or
extent of such error.



('69 Code, § 1.08)



§ 10.10  ORDINANCES REPEALED.



   This code, from and after its effective date, shall contain all of the
provisions of a general nature pertaining to the subjects herein enumerated
and embraced.  All prior ordinances pertaining to the subjects treated by
this code shall be deemed repealed from and after the effective date of this
code of ordinances, except insofar as the same are included herein.



§ 10.11  ORDINANCES UNAFFECTED.



   All ordinances of a temporary or special nature, and all other
ordinances pertaining to subjects not enumerated and embraced in this code of
ordinances, shall remain in full force and effect unless herein repealed
expressly or by necessary implication. 



§ 10.12  ORDINANCES SAVED.



   Whenever an ordinance by its nature either authorizes or enables the
legislative body, or a certain municipal officer or employee, to make
additional ordinances or regulations for the purpose of carrying out the
intention of the ordinance, all ordinances and regulations of a similar
nature serving the purpose, effected prior to the codification and not
inconsistent thereto, shall remain in effect, and are saved.



§ 10.13  SALARY OR BOND SAVED.



   Whenever the salary or bond of an official or employee is established
by council, the last ordinance enacted establishing such salary or bond is
saved.



('69 Code, § 1.11)



§ 10.14  APPLICATION TO FUTURE ORDINANCES.



   All provisions of Title I compatible with future legislation shall
apply to ordinances hereafter adopted amending or supplementing this code
unless otherwise specifically provided.



§ 10.15  INTERPRETATION.



   Unless otherwise provided herein, or by law or implication required,
the same rules of construction, definition, and application shall govern the
interpretation of this code as those governing the interpretation of state
law.



§ 10.16  AMENDMENTS TO CODE; AMENDATORY LANGUAGE.



   (A)   Any chapter, section, or division amended or added to this
code by ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this code may be
numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this code and need not be
inserted in this code, but shall be treated as if printed for inclusion
herein.



   (B)   The following language should be used by the municipality to
amend, add, or repeal a chapter, section, or division:



      (1)   To amend a section: "Section             of the
Municipal Code of Ordinances is amended to read as follows: . . . ."



      (2)   To add a section: "Section               of the
Municipal Code of Ordinances, which is to be added to and amends the
Municipal Code of Ordinances, reads as follows: . . . ."



      (3)   To repeal a section: "Section               of
the Municipal Code of Ordinances, which reads as follows, is repealed: . . .
."



§ 10.17  STATUTORY REFERENCES.



   (A)   If a statutory cite is included in the history, located in
parenthesis immediately following a division or section of this code, this
indicates that the text of the division or section reads substantially the
same as the statutory provision.  Example:  (R.C. § 4511.02)



   (B)   If a statutory cite is set forth as a "statutory reference"
following the text of a section, this indicates that the reader should refer
to that statute for further information.  Example:



   § 30.08 PUBLIC RECORDS AVAILABLE.



   Unless otherwise exempted by state law, all public records shall be
promptly prepared and made available for inspection to any person.



(R.C. § 149.43(B))



Statutory reference:



   Public records, see R.C. § 149.43



§ 10.18  PRESERVATION OF PENALTIES, OFFENSES, RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.



   All offenses committed under laws in force prior to the effective date
of this code shall be prosecuted and remain punishable as provided by those
laws.  This code does not affect any rights or liabilities accrued,
penalties incurred, or proceedings begun prior to the effective date of this
code.  The liabilities, proceedings and rights are continued; punishments,
penalties, or forfeitures shall be enforced and imposed as if this code had
not been enacted.  In particular, any agreement granting permission to
utilize highway rights-of-way, contracts entered into or franchises granted,
the acceptance, establishment or vacation of any highway, and the election of
corporate officers shall remain valid in all respects, as if this code had
not been enacted.



§ 10.99  GENERAL PENALTY.



   Where an act or omission is prohibited or declared unlawful in this
code of ordinances, and no penalty of fine or imprisonment is otherwise
provided, the offender is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined
not more than $100 for each offense or violation.



('69 Code, § 2.01)  (Ord. C-469, passed 9-11-78; Am. Ord. C-489, passed
9-10-79)



Statutory reference:



   Penalty, see R.C. § 2929.21(D)



TITLE III: ADMINISTRATION



      Chapter




         30.   EXECUTIVE





         31.   LEGISLATIVE





         32.   JUDICIAL





         33.   BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS





         34.   OPEN MEETINGS





         35.   PERSONNEL POLICIES





         36.   POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS





         37.   PUBLIC EMERGENCY





         38.   FINANCES AND TAXATION





         39.   PROPERTY




CHAPTER 30: EXECUTIVE



Section



   30.01   Executive power; where vested



   30.02   Mayor; powers and duties



   30.03   Vice Mayor; powers and duties



   30.04   Clerk; powers and duties



   30.05   Treasurer; powers and duties



   30.06   Residency requirements prohibited; exceptions



Other Officials



   30.10   Solicitor; powers and duties



   30.11   Village Manager; powers and duties



   30.12   Appointment, removal of officials



   30.13   Creation, abolishment of offices



   30.14   Village Financial Administrator; duties



   30.15   Zoning and Project Administrator; duties



§ 30.01  EXECUTIVE POWER; WHERE VESTED.



   The executive power and authority of the municipality shall be vested
in the Mayor, Clerk, Treasurer, Marshal, Street Commissioner, and such other
officers and departments as are created by law.



(R.C. § 733.23)



§ 30.02  MAYOR; POWERS AND DUTIES.



   For provisions regarding the powers and duties of the Mayor, see
Charter, Article IV, § l.



§ 30.03  VICE MAYOR; POWERS AND DUTIES.



   For provisions regarding the powers and duties of the Vice Mayor, see
Charter, Article IV, § 2.



§ 30.04  CLERK; POWERS AND DUTIES.



   For provisions regarding the powers and duties of the Clerk, see
Charter, Article IV, § 3.



§ 30.05  TREASURER; POWERS AND DUTIES.



   For provisions regarding the powers and duties of the Treasurer, see
Charter, Article IV, § 4.



§ 30.06  RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      POLITICAL SUBDIVISION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2743.01.



      VOLUNTEER. A person who is not paid for service or who is
employed on less than a permanent full-time basis.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C) of this section,
no political subdivision shall require any of its employees, as a condition
of employment, to reside in any specific area of the state.



   (C)   (1)   Division (B) of this section does not apply to a
volunteer.



      (2)   To ensure adequate response times by certain employees
of political subdivisions to emergencies or disasters while ensuring that
those employees generally are free to reside throughout the state, the
electors of any political subdivision may file an initiative petition to
submit a local law to the electorate, or the Legislative Authority may adopt
an ordinance or resolution, that requires any individual employed by that
political subdivision, as a condition of employment, to reside either in the
county where the political subdivision is located or in any adjacent county
in this state. For purposes of this section, an initiative petition shall be
filed and considered as provided in R.C. §§ 731.28 and 731.31, except that
the Fiscal Officer of the political subdivision shall take the actions
prescribed for the Auditor or Clerk if the political subdivision has no
Auditor or Clerk, and except that references to a municipal corporation shall
be considered to be references to the applicable political subdivision.



   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C), employees of
political subdivisions of this state have the right to reside any place they
desire.



(R.C. § 9.481) 



OTHER OFFICIALS



§ 30.10  SOLICITOR; POWERS AND DUTIES.



   For provisions regarding the powers and duties of the Solicitor, see
Charter, Article IV, § 5.



§ 30.11  VILLAGE MANAGER; POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   For provisions regarding the powers and duties of the Village
Manager, see Charter, Article V, § 2.



   (B)   The Village Manager's unmarked vehicle shall be available for
the Manager's unlimited use, 24 hours per day, except for out of town
vacations, so that the Village Manager may be contacted and available to
respond to the village whenever necessary.



(Ord. C-828, passed 9-9-96)



Cross-reference:



   Guidelines for the use of village automobiles, see § 36.07



§ 30.12  APPOINTMENT; REMOVAL OF OFFICIALS.



   For provisions regarding the appointment and removal of officials, see
Charter, Article IV, § 6, and Article V, § l.



§ 30.13  CREATION, ABOLISHMENT OF OFFICES.



   For provisions regarding the creation and abolishment of offices, see
Charter, Article IV, § 7.



§ 30.14  VILLAGE FINANCIAL ADMINISTRATOR; DUTIES.



   There shall be appointed for the village a Financial Administrator
whose duties will be to assist the Village Manager in all financial matters
relating to the village including, but not limited to, preparation of
budgets, financial reports and accounting, and such other duties as may be
assigned by the Village Manager.



(Ord. C-756, passed 7-12-93; Am. Ord. C-832, passed 10-15-96)



§ 30.15  ZONING AND PROJECT ADMINISTRATOR; DUTIES.



   There is hereby created the position of Zoning and Project
Administrator, whose duties are to assist the Village Manager in all matters
of enforcement and compliance with the Village Code of Ordinances, including
but not limited to the Village Building Code, cut and fill regulations, flood
damage prevention, soil erosion and sediment control, Zoning Code, zoning
inspection and plan review, subdivision regulations, property maintenance,
storm water management, cellular or wireless communications towers and
systems, and with state of Ohio statutes, rules and regulations, budget
development and control for capital improvement projects, facility
management, contract administration, compliance with EPA and OSHA
regulations, oversight of the Village Maintenance Department, and to perform
such other duties as may be assigned by the Village Manager.  The position
of Zoning and Project Administrator, as an administrative position, shall be
filled by the Village Manager in his discretion from within or without the
village, and compensation for this position shall be as determined by Council
from time to time.



(Ord. 1997-3, passed 4-14-97; Am. Ord. 2014-11, passed 8-11-14)



CHAPTER 31: LEGISLATIVE



Section



General



   31.01   Members of Council; powers; terms



   31.02   Councilmanic districts



   31.03   Qualifications



   31.04   Removal and vacancies



   31.05   Salaries



Meetings



   31.10   Regular meetings



   31.11   Special meetings



   31.12   Quorum and voting



Rules of Council



   31.20   Calling meeting to order



   31.21   Mayor's absence



   31.22   Questions



   31.23   Holding the floor



   31.24   Right to dissent



   31.25   Order of business



   31.26   Standing committees; chairman



   31.27   Petitions



   31.28   Motions



   31.29   Consideration of question



   31.30   Suspension of rules



   31.31   Reconsideration vote



   31.32   Readings of proposed ordinances



   31.33   Permission to address Council or committee



Posting Ordinances



   31.40   Posting ordinances; locations



GENERAL



§ 31.01  MEMBERS OF COUNCIL; POWERS; TERMS.



   For provisions regarding the members of Council, their powers and terms
of office, see Charter, Article III, § 1.



§ 31.02  COUNCILMANIC DISTRICTS.



   For a listing of the Councilmanic districts and their boundaries, see
Charter, Article III, § 2.



§ 31.03  QUALIFICATIONS.



   For the qualifications for Council members, see Charter, Article III,
§ 3.



§ 31.04  REMOVAL AND VACANCIES.



   For provisions regarding the removal of Council members and vacancies
on Council, see Charter, Article III, § 6.



§ 31.05  SALARIES.



   For provisions regarding the salaries of Council members, see Charter,
Article III, § 7.



MEETINGS



§ 31.10  REGULAR MEETINGS.



   One regular meeting of the Village Council shall be held each month in
the Village Administration Building on the second Monday of that month at
6:30 p.m.  Village Council may change the time or date of any regular
meeting for any reason by motion approved by a majority of Council.



('69 Code, § 30.01)  (Ord. C-803, passed 5-8-95; Am. Ord. 2011-21, passed
12-12-11; Am. Ord. 2015-1, passed 2-9-15)



Cross-reference:



   Meetings, see Charter, Article III, § 4



   Open meetings, see Ch. 34



§ 31.11  SPECIAL MEETINGS.



   Special meetings of Council shall be held in the administration
building at such time as shall be designated by the Mayor, or by the Mayor
upon written request of any three members of Council, and upon at least
12-hours' notice to each member, served personally or left at his usual place
of residence. 



('69 Code, § 30.02)  (Ord. 11, passed 2-3-41)



Cross-reference:



   Meetings, see Charter, Article III, § 4



   Open meetings, see Ch. 34



§ 31.12  QUORUM AND VOTING.



   For provisions regarding quorum and voting, see Charter, Article III,
§ 5.



RULES OF COUNCIL



§ 31.20  CALLING MEETING TO ORDER.



   The Mayor shall take the chair at the hour appointed for the Council to
meet, and shall immediately call the members to order.  The roll shall then
be called and the Clerk shall enter on the minutes the names of the members
present at each meeting.



('69 Code, § 30.03)



§ 31.21  MAYOR'S ABSENCE.



   In the absence of the Mayor, the Vice Mayor shall preside and perform
the duties of the Mayor.



('69 Code, § 30.03)



§ 31.22 QUESTIONS.



   All questions are to be stated and put by the chair, who shall decide
all votes.  In doubtful cases he may direct, or any member may call for, a
division, which shall be taken by a rising vote.



('69 Code, § 30.03)



§ 31.23  HOLDING THE FLOOR.



   (A)   Any member who is about to speak on a question, or make a
motion, shall rise and respectfully address the Mayor or presiding officer,
who shall pronounce the name of the member entitled to the floor.  He shall
confine himself to the question under debate, shall avoid personalities and
shall sit down when he has finished.



   (B)   Time limit.  No member shall be allowed to speak more than
once until every member choosing to speak has spoken, nor more than twice on
the same subject without consent of Council.



('69 Code, § 30.03)



§ 31.24  RIGHT TO DISSENT.



   Any member shall have the liberty to dissent from and protest against
any ordinance, resolution or order of Council, and have the reason for his
dissent entered upon the minutes.



('69 Code, § 30.03)



§ 31.25  ORDER OF BUSINESS.



   At the regular meeting of the Council, after the roll has been called,
the minutes of the preceding meeting shall be considered, and if there is no
objection, they shall be approved.  Council shall then proceed to business
in the following order:



   (A)   Financial report.



   (B)   Ordinances for second and third readings.



   (C)   Reports of standing committees.



   (D)   Reports of special committees.



   (E)   Unfinished business.



   (F)   Offering of original ordinances and resolutions.



   (G)   Reports of Solicitor.



   (H)   Reports of Village Manager.



   (I)   Reports of Mayor.



   (J)   Miscellaneous business.



('69 Code, § 30.03)



§ 31.26  STANDING COMMITTEES; CHAIRMAN.



   (A)   There shall be appointed six standing committees of Council
and each committee shall have three members.  The standing committees shall
be:



      (1)   Streets, public utilities and sewers



      (2)   Finance



      (3)   Police and fire



      (4)   Law



      (5)   Public buildings and parks



      (6)   Education, health and welfare



   All committees shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the approval of
Council.



   (B)   The members of a committee shall meet on the call of the
chairman, who shall be the first named person on the committee.  In the case
of the absence of the chairman, the person named second on the committee
shall be recognized as acting chairman.  A majority shall constitute a
quorum to do business.



('69 Code, § 30.03)



§ 31.27  PETITIONS.



   All petitions shall be presented and read by the Clerk, or by a member
in his place, and the contents being briefly stated, shall be referred to a
committee.



('69 Code, § 30.03)



§ 31.28  MOTIONS.



   (A)   Making a motion.  When a motion is made and seconded, it
shall, before debate, be stated by the Mayor or presiding officer. Every
motion shall be reduced to writing, if the Mayor or any member requests it,
and cannot be withdrawn without consent of the Council.



   (B)   Motion to adjourn.  A motion to adjourn shall always be in
order except upon immediate repetition, or when a member has the floor, or
when the previous question has been ordered, or when Council is engaged in
voting.  When any business is pending, the motion must be made in its
simplest form and is not subject to amendment or debate.



('69 Code, § 30.03)



§ 31.29  CONSIDERATION OF QUESTION.



   (A)   When a question is before Council, no motion shall be
entertained unless it is:



      (1)   To adjourn



      (2)   To table



      (3)   For the previous question



      (4)   To postpone (either indefinitely or to a certain day)



      (5)   To refer



      (6)   To amend



   Motions shall have precedence in the order set forth above.



   (B)   (1)   When the consideration of a question is interrupted
by an adjournment, it is removed from before Council and must be brought
forward in the usual way.  A motion to table shall preclude all debate or
amendments.  If the motion prevails, the consideration of the subject cannot
be resumed, except as unfinished business, without the consent of a majority
of the members present.



      (2)   The previous question shall be put in these words:
"Shall the main question be now put?"  It shall be admitted on the demand of
two members, and, until decided, shall preclude all further debate, or
amendment, but pending amendments shall be put before the main question. 
All motions to postpone may be amended as to time, but preclude debate on the
main question.



      (3)   An indefinite postponement is equivalent to a rejection
of the proposition.



      (4)   A motion to refer shall preclude debate or amendment of
the main question.  A motion to refer it to a standing committee shall have
preference.



('69 Code, § 30.03)



§ 31.30  SUSPENSION OF RULES.



   A motion to suspend the rules shall require the concurrence of
three-fourths of all the elected members, and shall be decided without debate.



('69 Code, § 30.03)



§ 31.31  RECONSIDERATION VOTE.



   (A)   Any member who voted with the prevailing side of a question
may move a reconsideration at any time, and a motion to reconsider having
been once put and lost, shall not be renewed.  This is a privileged motion
and takes precedence of all other questions and may be considered at any time
after the pending business is disposed of.



   (B)   A majority of those present can reconsider any vote, except
the vote by which an ordinance or resolution was passed, which shall require
not less than four votes, and no resolution or ordinance shall be
reconsidered after one regular meeting has intervened after its passage.



('69 Code, § 30.03)



§ 31.32  READINGS OF PROPOSED ORDINANCES.



   The first reading of a proposed ordinance shall be for information; and
if objection is made to it, the question shall be: "Shall the proposition be
rejected?"  If, at the third reading, an ordinance shall be ordered tabled,
it shall not be again taken up, except by a two-thirds vote of all elected
members.



('69 Code, § 30.03)



§ 31.33  PERMISSION TO ADDRESS COUNCIL OR COMMITTEE.



   (A)   The public is invited to attend and observe all public
meetings of the Council and its committees. No person other than a member of
Council or its committees may be heard at any public meeting except as
provided herein.



   (B)   In order to address Council at a regularly scheduled public
meeting, a member of the public must first make a request by notifying the
Village Manager or Clerk, either orally or in writing, no later than 12:00
p.m. on the day of the meeting of the person’s request to address
Council.  For special Council meetings or committee meetings, a member of
the public must notify village staff of a request to address Council before
the commencement of the meeting.  Requests to address Council or its
committees must include the person’s name, address, and a general statement
of the subject matter on which the person desires to speak.



   (C)   At any public meeting for which a member of the public has
properly requested to address Council or its committees, such person may
address the Council as to the purpose set forth in the request to speak. 
After acknowledgment from the Mayor or Chairperson, each person to address
Council or its committees must state his or her name and residence or
business address.  Members of the public are limited to a three minute time
limit to address Council or its committees.  The time limit does not apply
(1) to persons invited by the Council or its committees to address the
respective governing body, or (2) to the extent said person is responding to
a question posed by a Council or committee member. The Mayor may restrict or
limit the time allotted to a person whose remarks are repetitive or not
germane to the matter under consideration by Council. At meetings with
unusually large attendance, the Mayor or Chairperson may impose such
additional rules or time limitations as are deemed appropriate from time to
time based on business before the Council or its committees and the number of
persons wishing to speak.



   (D)   If a person makes a proper request to address Council or its
committees on a particular matter being considered by the Council or
committee at that meeting, said person shall be allowed to speak before
Council or its committees take a final vote or other dispositive action on
the matter.



   (E)   Members of the public are not permitted to ask questions of,
or debate with, Council or its committees unless permitted to do so by the
Mayor or Chairperson. All remarks shall be addressed to the Council or its
committees as a body and not to any member thereof.



   (F)   No member of the public, or any other person in attendance at
a meeting of Council or its committees, shall engage in any personally
offensive or abusive remarks or conduct. No person shall behave in any manner
that is unruly, disruptive, or may endanger the health, safety, or welfare of
said person or other members of the public, or otherwise act in a manner not
in compliance with these rules. Any person violating the rules herein is
subject to removal from the meeting.



   (G)   No unauthorized recording devices, cell phones, computers, or
other devices which cause a distraction or annoyance at a public meeting are
permitted.



(Ord. 2011-07, passed 5-9-11; Am. Ord. 2013-18, passed 10-15-13)



POSTING ORDINANCES



§ 31.40  POSTING ORDINANCES; LOCATIONS.



   (A)   All ordinances and resolutions required by law to be
advertised or posted shall be posted at the five most prominent locations in
the village.



   (B)   The five most prominent places in the village for the posting
of ordinances and resolutions, as required by law and the Village Charter,
are as follows:



      (1)   The village administration building



      (2)   The intersection of Knoll and Section Roads



      (3)   The intersection of Sagamore and Galbraith Roads



      (4)   On Fair Oaks Drive at the mail boxes, 300 feet north of
Section Road



      (5)   On Glen Acre Drive at the mail boxes, 200 feet south of
Section Road



('69 Code, § 30.04)  (Res. C-1, passed 11-22-54; Am. Res. C-33, passed
3-12-56)



Cross-reference:



   Publication of ordinances and resolutions, see Charter Art. IX, § 2



CHAPTER 32: JUDICIAL



Section



   32.01   Jurisdiction in ordinance cases and traffic violations



   32.02   Powers of Mayor in criminal matters



   32.03   Duties; fees; office; seal



   32.04   Powers and duties of Mayor's Court Magistrate



   32.05   Contempt powers



   32.06   Power to suspend driver's license in OVI cases



   32.07   Court costs and fines



 



   32.99   Penalty



§ 32.01  JURISDICTION IN ORDINANCE CASES AND TRAFFIC VIOLATIONS.



   (A)   In all municipalities  having a population of more than 200
not being the site of a municipal court nor a place where a judge sits
pursuant to R.C. § 1901.021 or by designation of the judges pursuant to R.C.
§ 1901.021, the Mayor has jurisdiction, except as provided in divisions (B),
(C) and (E) of this section and subject to the limitation contained in R.C.
§ 1905.03 and the limitation contained in R.C. § 1905.031, to hear and
determine any prosecution for the violation of an ordinance of the
municipality, to hear and determine any case involving a violation of a
vehicle parking or standing ordinance of the municipality unless the
violation is required to be handled by a parking violations bureau or joint
parking violations bureau pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4521, and to hear and
determine all criminal cases involving any moving traffic violation occurring
on a state highway located within the boundaries of the municipality, subject
to the limitations of R.C. §§ 2937.08 and 2938.04.



   (B)   (1)   In all municipalities having a population of more
than 200 not being the site of a municipal court nor a place where a judge of
a court sits as required pursuant to R.C. § 1901.021 or by designation of
the judges pursuant to R.C. § 1901.021, the Mayor has jurisdiction, subject
to the limitation contained in R.C. § 1905.03, to hear and determine
prosecutions involving a violation of an ordinance of the municipality
relating to operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug
of abuse, or a combination of them or relating to operating a vehicle with a
prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite
of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath,
or urine, and to hear and determine criminal causes involving a violation of
R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance that occur on
a state highway located within the boundaries of the municipality, subject to
the limitations of R.C. §§ 2937.08 and 2938.04, only if the person charged
with the violation, within ten years of the date of the violation charged,
has not been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any of the following:



         (a)   A violation of an ordinance of any municipality
relating to operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug
of abuse, or a combination of them or relating to operating a vehicle with a
prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite
of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath,
or urine;



         (b)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
similar municipal ordinance;



         (c)   A violation of any ordinance of any municipality
or of any section of the Revised Code that regulates the operation of
vehicles upon the streets, to which all of the following apply:



            1.   The person, in the case in which the
conviction was obtained or the plea of guilty was entered, had been charged
with a violation of an ordinance of a type described in division (B)(1)(a) of
this section, or with a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially
similar municipal ordinance;



            2.   The charge of the violation described in
division (B)(1)(c)1. of this section was dismissed or reduced;



            3.   The violation of which the person was
convicted or to which he or she pleaded guilty arose out of the same facts
and circumstances and the same act as did the charge that was dismissed or
reduced;



         (d)   A violation of a statute of the United States or
any other state or a municipal ordinance of a municipality located in any
other state that is substantially similar to R.C. § 4511.19.



      (2)   The Mayor does not have jurisdiction to hear and
determine any prosecution or criminal cause involving a violation described
in division (B)(1)(a) or (b) of this section, regardless of where the
violation occurred, if the person charged with the violation, within ten
years of the violation charged, has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
any violation listed in division (B)(1)(a), (b), (c), or (d) of this section.



      (3)   If the Mayor, in hearing a prosecution involving a
violation of an ordinance of the municipality he or she serves relating to
operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
a combination of them or relating to operating a vehicle with a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or
urine, or in hearing a criminal cause involving a violation of R.C. §
4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance, determines that the
person charged, within ten years of the violation charged, has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to any violation listed in division (B)(1)(a), (b), (c),
or (d) of this section, the Mayor immediately shall transfer the case to the
county court or municipal court with jurisdiction over the violation charged,
in accordance with R.C. § 1905.032.



   (C)   (1)   In all municipalities having a population of more
than 200 not being the site of a municipal court and not being a place where
a judge of a court listed in division (A) of this section sits as required
pursuant to R.C. § 1901.021 or by designation of the judges pursuant to R.C.
§ 1901.021, the Mayor, subject to R.C. §§ 1901.031, 2937.08, and 2938.04,
has jurisdiction to hear and determine prosecutions involving a violation of
a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to R.C. §§
4510.14(A) or 4510.16 and to hear and determine criminal causes that involve
a moving traffic violation, that involve a violation of R.C. §§ 4510.14(A)
or 4510.16, and that occur on a state highway located within the boundaries
of the municipality only if all of the following apply regarding the
violation and the person charged:



         (a)   Regarding a violation of R.C. § 4510.16 or a
violation of a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that
division, the person charged with the violation, within six years of the date
of the violation charged, has not been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any
of the following:



            1.   A violation of R.C. § 4510.16;



            2.   A violation of a municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4510.16;



            3.   A violation of any municipal ordinance or
section of the Revised Code that regulates the operation of vehicles upon the
highways or streets, in a case in which, after a charge against the person of
a violation of a type described in division (C)(1)(a)1. or 2. of this section
was dismissed or reduced, the person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation that arose out of the same facts and circumstances and the same act
as did the charge that was dismissed or reduced.



         (b)   Regarding a violation of R.C. § 4510.14(A) or a
violation of a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that
division, the person charged with the violation, within six years of the date
of the violation charged, has not been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any
of the following:



            1.   A violation of R.C. § 4510.14(A);



            2.   A violation of a municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4510.14(A);



            3.   A violation of any municipal ordinance or
section of the Revised Code that regulates the operation of vehicles upon the
highways or streets, in a case in which, after a charge against the person of
a violation of a type described in division (C)(1)(b)1. or 2. of this section
was dismissed or reduced, the person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation that arose out of the same facts and circumstances and the same act
as did the charge that was dismissed or reduced.



      (2)   The Mayor does not have jurisdiction to hear and
determine any prosecution or criminal cause involving a violation described
in division (C)(1)(a)1. or 2. of this section if the person charged with the
violation, within six years of the violation charged, has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to any violation listed in division (C)(1)(a)1. through 3.
of this section and does not have jurisdiction to hear and determine any
prosecution or criminal cause involving a violation described in division
(C)(1)(b)1. or 2. of this section if the person charged with the violation,
within six years of the violation charged, has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to any violation listed in division (C)(1)(b)1. through 3. of this
section.



      (3)   If the Mayor, in hearing a prosecution involving a
violation of an ordinance of the municipality he or she serves that is
substantially equivalent to R.C. §§ 4510.14(A) or 4510.16 or a violation of
R.C. §§ 4510.14(A) or 4510.16, determines that, under division (C)(2) of
this section, he or she does not have jurisdiction of the prosecution, the
Mayor immediately shall transfer the case to the county court or municipal
court with jurisdiction over the violation in accordance with R.C. §
1905.032.



   (D)   If the Mayor has jurisdiction pursuant to division (B)(1) of
this section to hear and determine a prosecution or criminal cause involving
a violation described in division (B)(1)(a) or (b) of this section, the
authority of the Mayor to hear or determine the prosecution or cause is
subject to the limitation contained in R.C. § 1905.03(C). If the Mayor has
jurisdiction pursuant to division (A) or (C) of this section to hear and
determine a prosecution or criminal cause involving a violation other than a
violation described in division (B)(1)(a) or (b) of this section, the
authority of the Mayor to hear or determine the prosecution or cause is
subject to the limitation contained in R.C. § 1905.031(C).



   (E)   (1)   The Mayor of a municipal corporation does not have
the jurisdiction to hear and determine any prosecution or criminal cause
involving any of the following:



         (a)   A violation of R.C. §§ 2919.25 or 2919.27;



         (b)   A violation of R.C. §§ 2903.11, 2903.12,
2903.13, 2903.211 or 2911.211 that involves a person who was a family or
household member of the defendant at the time of the violation;



         (c)   A violation a municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to an offense described in division (E)(1)(a) or
(E)(1)(b) of this section and that involves a person who was a family or
household member of the defendant at the time of the violation.



      (2)   The Mayor of a municipal corporation does not have the
jurisdiction to hear and determine a motion filed pursuant to R.C. § 2919.26
or filed pursuant to a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent
to that section or to issue a protection order pursuant to that section or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



      (3)   As used in this section, FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER has
the same meaning as in R.C. § 2919.25.



   (F)   In keeping his or her docket and files, the Mayor and a
Mayor's Court Magistrate appointed under R.C. § 1905.05 shall be governed by
the laws pertaining to county courts.



(R.C. § 1905.01)



Cross-reference:



   Mayor, see § 30.02 and Charter, Article IV, § 1



§ 32.02  POWERS OF MAYOR IN CRIMINAL MATTERS.



   (A)   The Mayor has, within the corporation limits, all the powers
conferred upon sheriffs to suppress disorder the keep the peace.



   (B)   The Mayor shall award and issue all writs and process that are
necessary to enforce the administration of justice throughout the
municipality.  The Mayor shall subscribe his or her name and affix his or
her official seal to all writs, process, transcripts, and other official
papers.  A Mayor's Court Magistrate, in hearing and determining prosecutions
and criminal causes that are within the scope of his or her authority under
R.C. § 1905.05, has the same powers and duties as are granted to or imposed
upon a Mayor under this division.



   (C)   The Mayor shall be disqualified in any criminal case in which
he or she was the arresting officer, assisted in the arrest, or was present
at the time of arrest, and shall not hear the case.



(R.C. § 1905.20)



Statutory reference:



   Mayor's power in OVI cases to suspend driver's licenses, see R.C. §
1905.201



§ 32.03  DUTIES; FEES; OFFICE; SEAL.



   (A)   The Mayor and a Mayor's Court Magistrate shall keep a
docket.  Neither the Mayor nor a Mayor's Court Magistrate shall retain or
receive for his or her own use any of the fines, forfeitures, fees, or costs
he or she collects.  A Mayor's Court Magistrate shall account for all such
fines, forfeitures, fees, and costs he or she collects and transfer them to
the Mayor.  The Mayor shall account for and dispose of all such fines,
forfeitures, fees, and costs he or she collects, including all such fines,
forfeitures, fees, and costs that are transferred to him or her by a Mayor's
Court Magistrate, as provided in R.C. § 733.40.



   (B)   The Mayor shall be paid such fixed annual salary as the
Legislative Authority provides under R.C. §§ 731.08 and 731.13, and a
Mayor's Court Magistrate shall receive compensation as provided in R.C. §
1905.05.



   (C)   The Mayor shall keep an office, provided by the Legislative
Authority, at a convenient place in the municipality, and shall be furnished
by the Legislative Authority with the corporate seal of the municipality. In
the center of the seal shall be the words, "Mayor of the Village of Amberley
Village."



(R.C. § 1905.21)



§ 32.04  POWERS AND DUTIES OF MAYOR'S COURT MAGISTRATE.



   (A)   A Mayor of a municipality that has a Mayor's Court may appoint
a person as Mayor's Court Magistrate to hear and determine prosecutions and
criminal cases in the Mayor's Court that are within the jurisdiction of the
Mayor's Court, as set forth in R.C. § 1905.01.  No person shall be
appointed as a Mayor's Court Magistrate unless the person has been admitted
to the practice of law in this state and, for a total of at least three years
preceding his or her appointment or the commencement of his or her service as
magistrate, has been engaged in the practice of law in this state or served
as a judge of a court of record in any jurisdiction in the United States, or
both.



      (1)   A person appointed as a Mayor's Court Magistrate under
this division is entitled to hear and determine prosecutions and criminal
cases in the Mayor's Court that are within the jurisdiction of the Mayor's
Court, as set forth in R.C. § 1905.01.  If a Mayor is prohibited from
hearing or determining a prosecution or cause that charges a person with a
violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a municipal OVI ordinance as defined in R.C.
§ 4511.181 due to the operation of R.C. § 1905.03(C), or is prohibited from
hearing or determining any other prosecution or cause due to the operation of
R.C. § 1905.031(C), the prohibition against the Mayor hearing or determining
the prosecution or causes does not affect and shall not be construed as
affecting the jurisdiction or authority of a person appointed as a Mayor's
Court Magistrate under this division to hear and determine the prosecution or
cause in accordance with this section. In hearing and determining such
prosecutions and causes, the magistrate has the same powers, duties, and
authority as does a Mayor who conducts a Mayor's Court to hear and determine
prosecutions and causes in general, including, but not limited to, the power
and authority to decide the prosecution or cause, enter judgement, and impose
sentence; the powers, duties, and authority granted to Mayors of Mayor's
Courts by this chapter, in relation to the hearing and determination of
prosecutions and causes in Mayor's Courts; and the powers, duties, and
authority granted to Mayors of Mayor's Courts by any provisions of the
Revised Code, in relation to the hearing and determination of prosecutions
and causes in Mayor's Courts.  A judgement entered and a sentence imposed by
a Mayor's Court Magistrate do not have to be reviewed or approved by the
Mayor who appointed the Magistrate, and have the same force and effect as if
they had been entered or imposed by the Mayor.



      (2)   A person appointed as a Mayor's Court Magistrate under
this division is not entitled to hear or determine any prosecution or
criminal cause other than prosecutions and causes that are within the
jurisdiction of the Mayor's Court, as set forth in R.C. § 1905.01.



      (3)   A municipality that a Mayor's Court Magistrate serves
shall pay the compensation for the services of the Magistrate, which shall be
either a fixed annual salary set by the Legislative Authority or a fixed
annual amount or fees for services rendered set under a contract the
Magistrate and the municipality enter into.



   (B)   The appointment of a person as a Mayor's Court Magistrate
under division (A) of this section does not preclude the Mayor that appointed
the Magistrate, subject to the limitation contained in R.C. § 1905.03 and
the limitation contained in R.C. § 1905.031, from also hearing and
determining prosecutions and criminal causes in the Mayor's Court that are
within the jurisdiction of the Mayor's Court, as set forth in R.C. § 1905.01.



(R.C. § 1905.05)



Statutory reference:



   Mayor's power in OMVI cases to suspend or revoke driver's or commercial
driver's licenses, see R.C. § 1905.201



§ 32.05  CONTEMPT POWERS.



   (A)   Summary punishment.  The Mayor, or a duly appointed
Magistrate, of Mayor's Court, at chambers, may summarily punish a person
guilty of misbehavior in the presence of or so near the Court, the Mayor or
Magistrate, as to obstruct the administration of justice.



   (B)   Acts of contempt.  A person guilty of any of the following
acts may be punished for contempt of court.



      (1)   Failure to appear in Mayor's Court of the village at the
time and place on the date noted on a citation issued to such person for
violation of an ordinance of the village or the state.



      (2)   Failure to appear in Mayor's Court of the village at the
time and on the date noted on an arrest notice issued to such person
subsequent to his or her failure to appear as initially cited.



      (3)   If given a stay to pay his or her fine, the failure to
appear and pay the fine on the stay date, unless the fine has been previously
paid.



      (4)   Conducting himself or herself in such a manner as to
violate any of the provisions of the ordinances of the village or state while
present in the courtroom or in areas adjacent to the courtroom.



      (5)   Failure to obey an order of Mayor's Court with respect
to the imposition of sentence.



      (6)   Failure of a person recognized to appear as a witness in
court to appear in compliance with the terms of his or her recognizance.



   (C)   Hearing.  In case of the occurrence of any of the acts
enumerated in division (B) of this section, a charge in writing shall be
filed with the clerk of the court, an entry thereof made upon the journal and
an opportunity given to the accused to be heard by himself or herself.  This
division does not prevent the court from issuing process to bring the accused
into court or from holding him or her in custody pending such proceedings.



   (D)   Right of accused to bail.



      (1)   In proceedings under division (B) of this section, if
the writ is not returnable forthwith, the court may fix the amount of the
bond to be given by the accused with surety to the satisfaction of the
court.  Upon the return of a writ, when it is not convenient to hear the
charge without delay, the court shall fix the amount of a bond to be given
with surety to the satisfaction of the clerk of the court for the appearance
of the accused to answer the charge.



      (2)   On the execution of such bond, the accused shall be
released from custody.



   (E)   Trial.  In all contempt proceedings the court shall conduct a
hearing.  At the hearing the court shall investigate the charge and hear any
answer or testimony which the accused makes or offers and shall determine
whether or not the accused is guilty of the contempt charge. 



   (F)   Imprisonment until order obeyed.  When the contempt consists
of the omission to an act which the accused yet can perform, he or she may be
imprisoned until he or she performs it.



   (G)   Failure of party released on bail to appear.  If a party
released on bail under division (D) of this section fails to appear in court
on the day named, the court may issue another order of arrest or order the
bond for his or her appearance to be prosecuted or both.  If the bond is
prosecuted, the measure of damages in the action is the extent of the loss or
injury sustained by reason of the misconduct for which the contempt was
prosecuted, plus the costs of the proceeding. 



   (H)   Appeal of judgment. The judgment of the Mayor or Magistrate
made in cases of contempt may be reviewed on appeal.  Appeal proceedings
shall not suspend execution of the judgment until the person in contempt
files a bond the court with sureties acceptable to the clerk of such court. 
A minimum amount fixed by the Magistrate thereof conditioned that if judgment
is rendered against such person, he or she will abide by and perform the
order of judgment. 



   (I)   Release of a prisoner committed for contempt.  When a person
is committed to jail for contempt, the Mayor or Magistrate who made the order
may discharge him or her from imprisonment when it appears that the public
interest will not suffer thereby.



(Ord. 2007-15, passed 5-14-07)



§ 32.06  POWER TO SUSPEND DRIVER'S LICENSE IN OVI CASES.



   (A)   (1)   The Mayor of a municipal corporation that has a
Mayor's Court, and a Mayor's Court Magistrate, are entitled to suspend, and
shall suspend, in accordance with R.C. §§ 4510.02, 4510.07, and 4511.19,
the driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident
operating privilege of any person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), of a municipal ordinance relating to
operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
a combination of them, or of a municipal ordinance relating to operating a
vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance,
or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or
plasma, breath, or urine that is substantially equivalent to R.C. §
4511.19(A).



      (2)   The Mayor of a municipal corporation that has a Mayor's
Court, and a Mayor's Court Magistrate, are entitled to suspend, and shall
suspend, in accordance with R.C. §§ 4510.02, 4510.07, and 4511.19, the
driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege of any person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation
of R.C. § 4511.19(B) or of a municipal ordinance relating to the operating
of a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol in the whole blood,
blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine that is substantially equivalent to
R.C. § 4511.19(B).



   (B)   Suspension of a commercial driver's license under this section
shall be concurrent with any period of disqualification or suspension under
R.C. § 3123.58 or 4506.16. No person who is disqualified for life from
holding a commercial driver's license under R.C. § 4506.16 shall be issued a
driver's license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period for which the
commercial driver's license was suspended under this section.



(R.C. § 1905.201)



Cross-reference:



   Driving while intoxicated or drugged, see § 73.01



§ 32.07  COURT COSTS AND FINES.



   (A)   Unless otherwise specified, all fines, penalties, fees, costs
and pay-outs may, at the sole discretion of the Mayor or Mayor’s Court
Magistrate, be reduced by any amount or imposed up to the maximum limit.



   (B)   In addition to fines, forfeitures, fees, and costs otherwise
provided by the Municipal Code of Ordinances, each person who appears before
the Mayor’s Court shall be assessed court costs payable to the Village in
the amount of $50 for each appearance before the Mayor’s Court. Such court
costs may not be reduced or altered.



(Ord. 2011-17, passed 12-12-11)



§ 32.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever is found guilty of performing any of the acts enumerated in §
32.05(B) is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(Ord. 2007-15, passed 5-14-07)



CHAPTER 33: BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS



Section



   33.01   Investment Committee



   33.02   Planning Commission



   33.03   Board of Zoning Appeals



   33.04   Long-Range Planning Committee



   33.05   Environmental Stewardship Committee



Cross-reference:



   Appeals Board (flood damage reduction), see § 152.065



§ 33.01  INVESTMENT COMMITTEE.



   There is hereby created an Investment Committee which shall have the
authority and responsibility for the supervision of the village's investments
in securities.  The Committee shall consist of the Mayor, the Chairman of
the Finance Committee and an additional member of Council to be selected by
the Mayor.  The Committee members shall serve for the term of Council during
which they are appointed.



(Ord. C-428, passed 5-10-76)



§ 33.02  PLANNING COMMISSION.



   For provisions regarding the powers and duties of the Planning
Commission, see Charter, Article VI, § 2.



§ 33.03  BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.



   (A)   Creation of Board.  A Board of Zoning Appeals is hereby
created and shall consist of the five members of the Planning Commission who
shall serve for such terms of office as will coincide with their appointments
as members of the Planning Commission.



   (B)   Authority.  The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the
authority to adopt rules and regulations governing its procedure, and shall
have the authority granted it under the Village Charter.



('69 Code, § 30.01)  (Ord. C-7, passed 12-13-54)



Cross reference:



   Board of Zoning Appeals, see Charter, Article VI, § 4



§ 33.04  LONG-RANGE PLANNING COMMITTEE.



   (A)   There is hereby established a committee to be known as the
Long-Range Planning Committee, and the Mayor shall appoint as members the
Vice Mayor as Chairperson and, subject to approval by Council, six additional
members consisting of the immediate past Mayor of Council, one current member
of Council, and at least four residents of the village.



   (B)   The Committee is charged with considering and, where
determined to be appropriate, making recommendations to Council for action to
be taken in the areas of land development, intergovernmental issues,
financial management, ordinances review, communications, personnel,
schooling, recreation, and any other areas of long-range planning the
Committee wishes to consider, and to make recommendations to Council.



(Res. 1997-37, passed 7-15-97; Am. Res. 1998-5, passed 2-9-98)



§ 33.05  ENVIRONMENTAL STEWARDSHIP COMMITTEE.



   (A)   Established.  The Amberley Village Council established a
Beautification Committee in 2004 and this committee has served the residents
in an effective manner. The Committee is renamed as the Environmental
Stewardship Committee (ESC).



   (B)   Purpose.  The primary purpose of the ESC is to preserve and
enhance the natural park-like heritage of Amberley Village and to improve the
visual appearance of the properties in the village as well as maintain or
enhance the environment in the village. This includes all trees, shrubs,
gardens and streetscapes within the public areas. The ESC will also strive to
provide information to residents so that they understand the most appropriate
ways to maintain their properties.



   (C)   Objectives; powers and duties.



      (1)   To review, on at least an annual basis, the trees,
shrubs and landscaping in all pubic areas and right-of-ways, and present
suggestions for improvement including possible new plantings as well as
maintenance ideas to the Amberley Village Administration.



      (2)   The Committee when requested by Council, shall consider,
investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special matter or
question regarding street or park trees.



      (3)   Oversee the village's annual application process for
Tree City USA.



      (4)   Develop and present programs to village residents that
will provide information to residents concerning options for property
maintenance that are considered best practice in terms of maintaining an
environmental balance. This will also include making resources available to
residents such as information on the internet.



      (5)   Develop options that will improve the village's
recycling record.



      (6)   Develop programs and projects that will enhance the tree
canopy in the village, especially on public properties.



      (7)   Host the annual Arbor Day and Earth Day celebration.



      (8)   Along with Village Administration provide relevant
information to residents via village newsletters.



   (D)   Membership and terms. The ESC shall consist of a minimum of
seven members but could include up to 12 members as designated by the Mayor.
One member of Village Council and one member from the Village Planning
Commission shall be members of the ESC. The remaining members of the ESC
shall be residents of the village or residents of bordering communities. The
number of members from bordering communities is limited to two such persons
on the Committee at any time.



      (1)   All members of the ESC shall be appointed by the Mayor.



      (2)   Members so appointed shall serve at the pleasure of the
Mayor. The term shall match the term of Council and all members of the ESC
should be appointed at the same time as the Council begins its term. The
Mayor may fill any vacancies on the Committee at any point during the his or
her term. The Mayor shall designate one member as the chairperson of the ESC.



      (3)   All members of the ESC shall serve without compensation.



      (4)    The ESC shall meet at least six times per year with all
meetings to be called by the chairperson.



      (5)   The ESC is advisory and shall have no authority to bind
the village with respect to any matters.



      (6)   The ESC shall keep minutes for its meetings and make
these available to the Village Clerk.



      (7)   A simple majority of the members of the ESC shall be a
quorum for the transaction of business. A majority of a quorum present at a
Committee meeting is sufficient to take action on any Committee matter.



      (8)   A representative from the Village's Maintenance
Department shall be designated as a point of contact for the ESC and will
meet with the Committee chairperson on a regular basis to receive updates on
ESC direction.



(Ord. 2004-16, passed 9-13-04; Am. Ord. 2016-11, passed 7-11-16)



CHAPTER 34: OPEN MEETINGS



Section



   34.01   Purpose



   34.02   Definitions



   34.03   Notice of regular meetings



   34.04   Notice of special meetings



   34.05   Notice to news media



   34.06   Notice of discussion of specific types of business



   34.07   Availability of information



   34.08   Duties of Clerk



   34.09   Duties of municipal body chairmen



   34.10   Reasonable attempt to notify



§ 34.01  PURPOSE.



   Pursuant to Article III, Section 5 of the Charter, the following rules
are adopted for the purposes of:



   (A)   Establishing a reasonable method for any person to determine
the time and place of all regularly scheduled meetings, and the time, place
and purpose of all special meetings;



   (B)   Making provisions for giving advance notice of special
meetings to the news media that have requested notification; and



   (C)   Making provisions for persons to request and obtain reasonable
advance notification of all meetings at which any specific type of public
business is to be discussed.



   These rules apply to each municipal body of this village, as defined in
§ 34.02, and are in addition to any applicable legal requirements as to
notices to members of a municipal body or to others in connection with
specific meetings or specific subject matters.



('69 Code, § 35.01)  (Ord. 416, passed 1-12-76)



§ 34.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter of following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CLERK.  The Clerk of Council.



   DAY.  A calendar day.



   MEETING.  Any prearranged discussion of the public business of the
municipal body by a majority of the members of the municipal body.



   MUNICIPAL BODY.  Each of the following:  Council, Planning
Commission, Zoning Board of Appeals, and committees of these municipal bodies
comprised of members of such bodies if such committees are comprised of a
majority of the members of the main municipal body, or are decision-making
committees.



   ORAL NOTIFICATION.  Notification given orally either in person or by
telephone, directly to the person for whom such notification is intended, or
by leaving an oral message for such person at the address, or if by telephone
at the telephone number, of such person as shown on the records kept by the
Clerk under these rules.



   POST.  To post in an area accessible to the public during the usual
business hours at the office of the Clerk and at the posting places for
ordinances and resolutions as previously determined by Council.  A notice
identifying the locations at which notifications will be posted pursuant to
these rules shall be published by the Clerk within ten calendar days after
the adoption of these rules.



   PUBLISHED.  Published once in a newspaper having a general circulation
in the municipality, as defined in R.C. § 7.12, except that no portion of
such newspaper need be printed in the municipality.  If at the time of any
such publication, there is no such newspaper of general circulation, then
such publication shall be in the newspaper then determined by the Clerk to
have the largest circulation in the municipality.



   SPECIAL MEETING.  A meeting which is neither a regular meeting nor an
adjournment of a regular (or special) meeting to another time or day to
consider items specifically stated on the original agenda of such regular (or
special) meeting.



   WRITTEN NOTIFICATION.  Notification in writing mailed, telegraphed or
delivered to the address of the person for whom such notification is intended
as shown on the records kept by the Clerk under these rules, or in any way
delivered to such person.  If mailed, such notification shall be mailed by
first-class mail, deposited in a U.S. Postal Service mailbox no later than
the second day preceding the day of the meeting to which such notification
refers, provided that at least one regular mail delivery day falls between
the day of mailing and the day of such meeting. 



('69 Code, § 35.02)  (Ord. C-416, passed 1-12-76)



§ 34.03  NOTICE OF REGULAR MEETINGS.



   (A)   The Clerk shall post a statement of the time(s) and place(s)
of regular meetings of each municipal body for each calendar year not later
than the second day preceding the day of the first regular meeting (other
than the organizational meeting) of the calendar year of that municipal
body.  The Clerk shall check at reasonable intervals to ensure that such
statement remains so posted during such calendar year.  If at any time
during the calendar year the time or place of regular meetings, or of any
regular meeting, is changed on a permanent or temporary basis, a statement of
the time and place of such changed regular meeting(s) shall be so posted by
the Clerk at least 24 hours before the time of the first changed regular
meeting.



   (B)   The Clerk shall post a statement of the time and place of any
organizational meeting of a municipal body at least 24 hours before the time
of such organizational meeting.



   (C)   Upon the adjournment of any regular or special meeting to
another day, the Clerk shall promptly post notice of the time and place of
such adjourned meeting. 



('69 Code, § 35.03)  (Ord. C-416, passed 1-12-76)



§ 34.04  NOTICE OF SPECIAL MEETINGS.



   (A)   Except in the case of a special meeting referred to in §
34.05(F) the Clerk shall, no later than 24 hours before the time of a special
meeting of a municipal body, post a statement of the time, place and purposes
of such special meeting.



   (B)   The statement under this section and the notifications under
§ 34.05 shall state such specific or general purpose or purposes then known
to the Clerk to be intended to be considered at such special meeting and may
state, as an additional general purpose, that any other business as may
properly come before such municipal body at such meeting may be considered
and acted upon.



   (C)   In addition to the posting of the statement as provided in
division (A), the Clerk shall cause to be published once, no later than 12
hours prior to the time of a special meeting of a municipal body, a statement
of the time, place and purposes of such special meeting. 



('69 Code, § 35.04)  (Ord. C-416, passed 1-12-76)



§ 34.05  NOTICE TO NEWS MEDIA.



   (A)   Any news medium organization that desires to be given advance
notification of special meetings of a municipal body shall file with the
Clerk a written request therefor.



   (B)   Except in the event of an emergency requiring immediate
official action as referred to in division (F), a special meeting shall not
be held unless at least 24 hours advance notice of the time, place and
purposes of such special meeting is given to the news media that have
requested such advance notification in accordance with division (C).



   (C)   News media requests for such advance notification of special
meetings shall specify:  the municipal body that is the subject of such
request; the name of the medium; the name and address of the person to whom
written notifications to the medium may be mailed, telegraphed or delivered;
and the names, addresses and telephone numbers (including addresses and
telephone numbers at which notifications may be given either during or
outside of business hours) of at least two persons to either one of whom oral
notification to the medium may be given.



   (D)   Any such request shall be effective for one year from the date
of filing with the Clerk or until the Clerk receives written notice from such
medium canceling or modifying such request, whichever is earlier.  Each
requesting news medium shall be informed of such period of effectiveness at
the time it files its request.  Such requests may be modified or extended
only by filing a complete new request with the Clerk.  A request shall not
be deemed to be made unless it is complete in all respects, and such request
may be conclusively relied on by the village, the municipal body that is the
subject of such request, and the Clerk.



   (E)   The Clerk shall give such oral notification or written
notification, or both, as the Clerk determines, to the news media that have
requested such advance notification in accordance with division (C), of the
time, place and purposes of each special meeting, at least 24 hours prior to
the time of such special meeting.



   (F)   In the event of an emergency requiring immediate official
action, a special meeting may be held without giving 24 hours advance
notification thereof to the requesting news media.  The persons calling such
meeting, or any one or more of such persons or the Clerk on their behalf,
shall immediately give oral notification or written notification, or both, as
the person or persons giving such notification determine, of the time, place
and purposes of such special meeting to such news media that have requested
such advance notification in accordance with division (C).  The minutes or
the call, or both, of any such special meeting shall state the general nature
of the emergency requiring immediate official action.



('69 Code, § 35.05)  (Ord. C-416, passed 1-12-76)



§ 34.06  NOTICE OF DISCUSSION OF SPECIFIC TYPES OF BUSINESS.



   (A)   Any person, upon written request and as provided herein, may
obtain reasonable advance notification of all meetings at which any specific
type of public business is scheduled to be discussed.



   (B)   Such person may file a written request with the Clerk
specifying: the person's name, and the address(es) and telephone number(s) at
or through which the person can be reached during and outside of business
hours; the specific type of public business the discussion of which the
person is requesting advance notification; the municipal body that is the
subject of such request; and the number of calendar months (not to exceed
three) which the request covers.  Such request may be canceled by request
from such person to the Clerk.



   (C)   Each such written request must be accompanied by cash or a
check or money order payable to the village in the amount of $5 for each
month covered by the request, which amount has been determined by the Council
to represent a reasonable fee to cover costs of providing such advance
notification.



   (D)   Such requests may be modified or extended only by filing a
complete new request with the Clerk.  A request shall not be deemed to be
made unless it is complete in all respects, and such request may be
conclusively relied on by the village, municipal body that is the subject of
such request, and the Clerk.



   (E)   The Clerk shall, if possible, give such advance notification
under this section by written notification.  If such written notification
cannot be given or has not been given, the Clerk shall give oral notification.



   (F)   The contents of written notification under this section may be
a copy of the agenda of the meeting.  Written notification under this
section may be accomplished by giving advance written notification, by copies
of the agendas, of all meetings of the municipal body that is the subject of
such request.



('69 Code, § 35.06)  (Ord. C-416, passed 1-12-76)



§ 34.07  AVAILABILITY OF INFORMATION.



   Any person may visit or telephone the office of the Clerk during that
office's regular office hours to determine, based on information available at
that office: the time and place of regular meetings; the time, place and
purposes of any then-known special meetings; and whether the available agenda
of any such future meeting states that any specific type of public business,
identified by such person, is to be discussed at such meeting.



('69 Code, § 35.07)



§ 34.08  DUTIES OF CLERK.



   (A)   The Clerk shall maintain a record of the date and manner, and
time if pertinent, under these rules, of all actions taken with regard to
notices and notifications under §§ 34.04, 34.05, and 34.06 and shall retain
copies of proofs of publication of any notifications or notices published
thereunder.



   (B)   Any notification provided in this chapter to be given by the
Clerk may be given by any person acting in behalf of or under the authority
of the Clerk.



('69 Code, § 35.07)



§ 34.09  DUTIES OF MUNICIPAL BODY CHAIRMEN.



   To better insure compliance with these rules as to notice and
notification, it shall be the responsibility of the chairman or secretary of
a municipal body other than Council, or the person or persons calling the
meetings, to timely advise the Clerk of future meetings, and the subject
matter to be discussed thereat, of such municipal body.



('69 Code, § 35.07)  (Ord. C-416, passed 1-12-76)



§ 34.10  REASONABLE ATTEMPT TO NOTIFY.



   A reasonable attempt at notification shall constitute notification in
compliance with these rules.



('69 Code, § 35.07)



CHAPTER 35: PERSONNEL POLICIES



Section



General



   35.01   Salaries; bonds



   35.011   Designation of employee



   35.02   Holidays



   35.03   Vacation



   35.04   Sick leave



   35.05   Deferred compensation plans



   35.06   Longevity pay



   35.07   Overtime compensation for administrative personnel and
maintenance employees



   35.08   Maternity leave



   35.09   Contribution to the Public Employees Retirement System



Insurance



   35.10   Life insurance



   35.11   Medical insurance



   35.12   Process for acquiring insurance coverage



GENERAL



§ 35.01  SALARIES; BONDS.



   The salaries and bonds of all elected officers, appointed officers and
employees of the village shall be as established by Council through
ordinance.  Ordinances shall be in effect at the time of adoption of this
code and shall be deemed as saved by reference.



('69 Code, § 32.01)



§ 35.011  DESIGNATION OF EMPLOYEE.



   (A)   All village employees are to be classified as full-time,
part-time, temporary, or seasonal, as defined below:



      (1)   A "full-time" employee is an employee whose regular work
week consists of no less than 35 hours.



      (2)   A "part-time" employee is any employee whose regular
work week consists of less than 35 hours.



      (3)   A "temporary" employee is any employee hired for a
limited period of time, either full-time or part-time, for a limited
project(s) or purpose, or when necessary to fill in for other employees who
are absent for any reason or due to a temporary reduction in force.



      (4)   A "seasonal" employee is any employee who works in a
position that may only be performed during certain times or seasons of the
year, whether full-time or part-time.



   (B)   A "regular work week" means the average number of hours worked
over the course of a consecutive 12-month period.  An employee does not
necessarily exceed the number of hours in a regular work week by occasionally
working more than the stated number of hours in any particular week.



   (C)   Full-time employees are eligible for all benefits provided by
the village.



   (D)   All employees designated in division (A) of this section are
eligible for compensation and benefits established by law or as otherwise
specified by the village.



   (E)   Temporary and seasonal employees are employed at will and may
be dismissed at any time for any reason, and do not have the same rights or
privileges as full-time employees except when specifically granted.



   (F)   Except as used in this section, all references to "employees"
set forth in this chapter, whether designated therein as "employees" or
"full-time employees," refers to full-time employees of the village unless
otherwise indicated.  The term "employee" in §§ 35.07 and 35.09 refers to
all employees designated in division (A) of this section.



(Ord. C-714, passed 11-11-91; Am. Ord. 2005-18, passed 7-11-05; Am. Ord.
2010-16, passed 7-12-10)



§ 35.02  HOLIDAYS.



   (A)   All employees of the village shall be granted ten and one half
days of holiday with pay per year; such holidays as they apply to police
officers being a matter of compensation only.  The holidays so granted are
as follows.



      (1)   New Year’s Day.



      (2)   Martin Luther King, Jr., Day.



      (3)   President’s Day.



      (4)   One-half day on the Friday preceding Easter commencing
at noon.



      (5)   Memorial Day.



      (6)   Independence Day.



      (7)   Labor Day.



      (8)   Thanksgiving Day.



      (9)   Day after Thanksgiving.



      (10)   Christmas Eve Day.



      (11)   Christmas Day.



   (B)   All holidays shall be observed on a day other than Saturday or
Sunday, and any holiday that occurs on a Saturday or Sunday shall, at the
direction of the Village Manager, be observed on the preceding Friday or the
following Monday. Should any administrative employee work the day or the half
day that the holiday is observed, she or he shall be paid for such time
worked at the rate of two times her or his normal hourly rate. Should any
police officer be on duty during the time the holiday is observed, except as
otherwise provided in division (C), she or he shall be compensated for the
time worked at the rate of two and one-half times her or his normal hourly
rate. Should any police officer, because it is her or his regularly scheduled
off day, be off-duty during the time the holiday is observed, she or he shall
be compensated for that time at the rate of two times her or his normal
hourly rate. Should any employee, during the time a holiday is observed, be
on an earned and scheduled paid vacation, said employee shall receive
additional compensation in the amount of her or his regular rate of pay for
such holiday time observed. The foregoing policies as to compensation for
police officers shall also apply to any police department dispatcher whose
regular work schedule is the same as that of police officers.



   (C) If the day of Christmas Eve or the day of Christmas falls on a
Saturday or Sunday, any member of the Police Department who is on duty on
that holiday shall receive holiday compensation at the rate provided in
division (B), except such compensation shall be for the day the police
officer is on duty rather than the preceding Friday or following Monday.



   (D) As to those holidays granted by § 35.02(A), and if approved by the
Chief of Police, police officers and those dispatchers whose regular work
schedule is the same as that of police officers, and as to four of those
holidays on which the officer or dispatcher was on duty, may elect to receive
compensatory time off in lieu of the extra holiday monetary compensation,
subject, however, to the limitation on accumulated unused time off as
provided in § 36.05(B) and to the prohibition that it will not result in
overtime for any Police Department personnel.



(Ord. C-460, passed 4-10-78; Am. Ord. C-482, passed 4-9-79; Am. Ord. C-551,
passed 4-11-83; Am. Ord. C-563, passed 4-9-84; Am. Ord. C-617, passed
4-16-87; Am. Ord. C-660, passed 6-12-89; Am. Ord. C-709, passed 7-8-91; Am.
Ord. C-730, passed 4-13-91; Am. Ord. 1998-1, passed 1-12-98; Am. Ord.
2014-05, passed 3-10-14)



§ 35.03  VACATION.



   (A)   All full-time village employees, after 12 consecutive months
and through five consecutive years of employment, shall be entitled, each
year, to 12 working days vacation with pay, which shall be taken during the
12-month period commencing with the anniversary date of the employee's
employment, and the time during which the vacation is taken shall be subject
to approval by the Village Manager.



   (B)   All full-time village employees, after six and through ten
consecutive years of employment, shall be entitled to 15 working days
vacation with pay.  The vacation shall be taken during the 12-month period
commencing with the anniversary date of the employee's employment, and the
time during which the vacation is taken shall be subject to approval by the
Village Manager.



   (C)   All full-time village employees, after 11 and through 14
consecutive years of employment, shall be entitled to 18 days of vacation
with pay.  The vacation shall be taken during the 12-month period commencing
with the anniversary date of the employee's employment, and the time during
which the vacation is taken shall be subject to approval by the Village
Manager.



   (D)   All full-time village employees, after 15 and through 19
consecutive years of employment, shall be entitled to 21 days of vacation
with pay. The vacation shall be taken during the 12-month period commencing
with the anniversary date of the employee's employment, and the time during
which the vacation is taken shall be subject to approval by the Village
Manager.



   (E)   All full-time village employees, after 20 and through 24
consecutive years of employment, shall be entitled to 25 days of vacation
with pay. The vacation shall be taken during the 12-month period commencing
with the anniversary date of the employee's employment, and the time during
which the vacation is taken shall be subject to approval by the Village
Manager.



   (F)   All full-time village employees, after 25 or more consecutive
years of employment, shall be entitled to 27 days of vacation with pay. The
vacation shall be taken during the 12-month period commencing with the
anniversary date of the employee's employment, and the time during which the
vacation is taken shall be subject to approval by the Village Manager.



   (G) Any employee currently earning vacation credits is entitled to have
his or her prior service with the State of Ohio or any political subdivision
of the state counted as service with the village for the purpose of computing
the vacation leave to which the employee becomes entitled.



   (H) Any full-time employee whose employment is terminated by the
village for any cause shall not be entitled to receive vacation or pay
therefor.



   (I)   Any full-time employee who terminates his employment shall
receive the vacation pay to which he would be entitled at the time of such
termination, which shall be based pro rata upon the portion of the 12-month
period in which the termination takes place.



('69 Code, § 32.03)  (Ord. C-459, passed 4-10-78; Am. Ord. C-517, passed
4-13-81; Am. Ord. C-539, passed 4-13-82; Am. Ord. C-589, passed 11-11-85; Am.
Ord. C-660, passed 6-12-89; Am. Res. C-741, passed 7-10-89; Am. Ord. C-665,
passed 8-14-89; Am. Ord. C-817, passed 4-8-96; Am. Ord. 2010-15, passed
7-12-10)



§ 35.04  SICK LEAVE.



   (A)   Unused sick leave accumulated. Each full-time village employee
shall be entitled, for each completed month of service, to sick leave of ten
hours with pay. Employees may use sick leave for absence due to a short-term
or long-term illness, injury, exposure to contagious disease which could be
communicated to other employees, and illness or death in the employee's
immediate family. All sick leave must be approved by the administrative
officer in charge of the department in which the employee serves. Department
heads may develop policies to curb and discipline sick leave abuse.



   (B)   Maximum of accumulated hours. Unused sick leave may be
accumulated up to a maximum of 1,600 hours.



   (C)   Compensation for unused sick leave. The village will
compensate employees for unused sick leave under the terms and conditions set
forth herein.



      (1)   Existing employees of the village as of June 1, 2013 are
entitled to payment of unused sick leave upon a qualifying separation from
employment with the village. Payment will be made on a two-for-one basis,
with every two hours of unused sick leave (up to a maximum of 1,440 hours)
qualifying for one hour of paid sick leave (up to a maximum of 720 hours,
equivalent to 90 eight-hour days). The amount of the payment is subject to an
amortization schedule as follows, depending on the employee's term of service
with the village:



         After ten years of service    50%



         After 11 years of service    55%



         After 12 years of service    60%



         After 13 years of service    65%



         After 14 years of service    70%



         After 15 years of service    75%



         After 16 years of service    80%



         After 17 years of service    85%



         After 18 years of service    90%



         After 19 years of service    95%



         After 20 years of service    100%



      (2)   All employees commencing employment with the village on
or after June 1, 2013 are entitled to payment of 25% of their unused sick
leave upon a qualifying separation from employment with the village, provided
that the total value of unused sick leave that is paid shall not exceed 240
hours (equivalent to 30 eight-hour days). This section applies to any person
that previously worked for the village and is rehired on or after June 1,
2013.



      (3)   Payment for unused sick leave shall be at the employee's
rate of pay at the time of a qualifying separation of employment from the
village.



      (4)   Qualifying separation of employment. For the purposes of
this section, a qualifying separation of employment from the village means:
(1) the employee has at least ten years of service with the village
immediately prior to separation; and (2) the employee retires from the
village. The retirement condition includes death, an involuntary separation
without cause, or a disability or service retirement under any state
retirement system in this state, as defined in R.C. § 124.39.



      (5)   The village shall make payment of unused sick leave with
the employee's last paycheck, or no later than 30 days after the employee's
last date of employment with the village.



      (6)   If an employee does not choose to receive payment for
unused sick leave, the employee may retain those hours and transfer them to
any future employer which accepts the hours.



      (7)   Payment will be made in a single lump sum. Except as
otherwise provided herein, payment will not be made for a portion of unused
sick leave. A payment for unused sick leave constitutes a full payment of all
sick leave at the time of separation.



   (D)   Proof of illness. The employee requesting sick leave shall
furnish a satisfactory affidavit or doctor's statement that his or her
absence was caused by illness or any other cause mentioned above.



   (E)   Upon the death of a village employee who has less than ten
years of service with the village, said employee's estate shall receive a
lump sum payment equivalent to eight hours of pay for each 32 hours of
accumulated, unused sick leave.



   (F)   Each full-time employee of the village shall be entitled up to
16 personal hours off each calendar year which shall be charged against
accumulated and unused sick leave. Such personal hours must be used by the
end of the calendar year and do not accumulate or roll over to future years.



   (G)   Transfer of sick leave credits.



      (1)   Within 30 days of initial employment, and upon
presentation of appropriate written documentation, a full-time employee shall
be given credit for up to 1,600 hours of unused sick leave accumulated while
in the employment of another Ohio municipality, township, school district,
county or the state of Ohio, including prior employment with the village, for
which the employee has not been compensated. The deadline can be extended by
the Village Manager for good cause.



      (2)   The transfer of sick leave credits to the village is
allowed only if the employee has been employed with an Ohio public agency
within the previous ten years, and if the credits have not previously been
converted to a cash benefit or other compensation.



   (H)   All sick leave credits will be accumulated, used, and
otherwise administered by the number of hours. If sick leave maintained by,
or transferred to, the village is stated as a number of days, those days will
be converted to hours at an eight-hour per day basis as long as the
conversion does not cause the employee to lose any sick leave previously
earned.



   (I)   Payment of unused sick leave as provided herein is a benefit
of employment granted voluntarily by the village. Such benefit is not one
that vests except upon retirement and the satisfaction of any other
conditions specified herein. Such benefit may be increased, reduced,
eliminated, or otherwise amended in the future at the discretion of Council
for any reason.



   (J)   Donation of sick leave.



      (1)   Purpose.  To support employees that are forced to
endure a catastrophic illness or injury, employees are permitted to donate
sick leave to other employees in order to supplement their paid sick leave
while absent from work.



      (2)   Definitions.



         DONEE.  The person receiving a donation of leave.



         DONOR.  The person donating leave to another employee.



      (3)   Each donation of sick leave must be for a minimum of
eight hours. An employee may donate up to a maximum of 80 hours of sick leave
to another employee each time there is a need and it is approved by the
Manager and Fiscal Officer. Donors must retain a sick leave balance of at
least 400 hours after a donation. No donated leave will be returned to the
donor, whether or not the leave is used by the donee. All requests to donate
sick leave must be in writing by the donor to the Village Fiscal Officer.
Donation requests must be approved by the Fiscal Officer, the donor's and
donee's respective department heads, and the Village Manager, before the
leave can be donated.



      (4)   A separate sick leave bank will be established for each
donee in need. Donated time may be used by a donee only after he or she has
exhausted his or her paid leave, including but not limited to all sick leave,
vacation leave, comp time, etc. Each donee's sick leave bank may not exceed a
total accumulation of more than 240 hours at any time. All unused leave in
the donee's sick leave bank will expire 90 days after the donee returns to
work. Donated sick leave may be used by the donee as his or her regular sick
leave is used, except that time in the sick leave bank cannot be used by the
donee to receive payment upon retirement.



      (5)   Donors and donees must be in good standing with his or
her department in order to participate in the donation program.



      (6)   The Village Manager has the authority to determine
whether a potential donee's illness or injury warrants participation in the
donation program. The Manager may require whatever proof of illness or injury
from the potential donee or his or her medical providers deemed necessary to
enable the determination.



('69 Code, § 32.02)  (Am. Ord. C-449, passed 11-14-77; Am. Ord. C-772,
passed 4-11-94; Am. Ord. 2000-8, passed 5-8-00; Am. Ord. 2001-21, passed
11-12-01; Am. Ord. 2003-16, passed 11-10-03; Am. Ord. 2006-11, passed
6-12-06; Am. Ord. 2013-04, passed 4-8-13; Am. Ord. 2018-8, passed 3-12-18)



§ 35.05  DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLANS.



   (A)   Adoption of State Plan.



      (1)   Council hereby adopts the Ohio Public Employees Deferred
Compensation Program and extends to all eligible employees the opportunity to
join the program.



      (2)   The Village Manager is hereby authorized by the village
to execute an agreement with the Ohio Public Employees Deferred Compensation
Board on terms and conditions which the Village Manager determines are in the
best interest of the village, which agreement shall authorize the Board to
offer the program to all eligible employees of the village, and thereafter to
administer the program on behalf of such employees.



(Res. C-388, passed 10-9-79)



   (B)   Adoption of ICMA Plan.



      (1)   The village hereby adopts the deferred compensation
plan, attached to Res. C-562 as Appendix A, and appoints the ICMA Retirement
Corporation to serve as administrator thereunder.



      (2)   The village hereby executes the ICMA Retirement Trust,
attached to Res. C-562 as Appendix B.



      (3)   The village hereby adopts the trust agreement, attached
to Res. C-562 as Appendix C, and appoints the ICMA Retirement Corporation as
trustee thereunder, and directs the ICMA Retirement Corporation, as trustee,
to invest all funds held under the deferred compensation plan through the
ICMA Retirement Trust as soon as is practicable.



      (4)   The Village Manager shall be the coordinator for this
program and shall receive necessary reports, notices, and the like from the
ICMA Retirement Corporation as administrator, and shall cast, on behalf of
the village, any required votes under the program. Administrative duties to
carry out the plan may be assigned to the appropriate departments.



(Res. C-562, passed 6-11-84)



Statutory reference:



   Ohio public employees deferred compensation programs, see R.C. §
145.71 et seq.



§ 35.06  LONGEVITY PAY.



   (A)   In addition to other wages and benefits granted to employees
of the village, the following schedule of annual compensation, payable in a
lump sum on the first regular pay date following the anniversary of
employment as set forth below, is hereby established:



      (1)   $500 per year after the completion of five years service.



      (2)   $750 per year after the completion of ten years service.



      (3)   $1,000 per year after the completion of 15 years service.



      (4)   $1,250 per year after the completion of 20 years service.



   (B)   The longevity pay provided in division (A) herein is not
available as a benefit for any village employee hired on or after June 2,
2013.



(Ord. C-550, passed 4-11-83; Am. Ord. C-569, passed 10-9-84; Am. Ord. C-578,
passed 4-8-85; Am. Ord. C-613, passed 4-16-87; Am. Ord. 2001-13, passed
5-14-01; Am. Ord. 2013-05, passed 4-8-13)



§ 35.07  OVERTIME COMPENSATION FOR ADMINISTRATIVE PERSONNEL AND MAINTENANCE
EMPLOYEES.



   (A)   No overtime work by the Village Clerk, other administrative
personnel, and maintenance employees shall be permitted unless such overtime
work is authorized beforehand by the Village Manager, except, however, as to
the Civilian Senior Dispatcher/Clerk and Civilian Dispatcher/Clerks assigned
to the Police Department, overtime work may also be authorized beforehand by
the Chief of Police.



   (B)   Overtime work authorized as provided above shall be
compensated at the rate of one and one-half times the employee's normal
hourly rate, or, if requested by the employee and authorized by the Village
Manager, or by the Chief of Police as to the Civilian Senior Dispatcher/Clerk
and Civilian Dispatcher/Clerks, the employee may be given compensatory time
off in lieu of such monetary compensation at the same rate; except, however,
no employee may accumulate unused compensatory time off in excess of 60 hours.



   (C)   Employees of the Maintenance Department who are required to
work on Christmas Day, Christmas Eve Day, New Year's Day or Thanksgiving Day
between the hours of 12:00 midnight to 8:00 a.m. or 4:30 p.m. to 12:00
midnight, shall receive compensation for the hours worked at the rate of two
and one-half times the employee's regular rate of pay.



(Ord. C-560, passed 4-9-84; Am. Ord. C-584, passed 6-10-85; Am. Ord. C-592,
passed 3-10-86; Am. Ord. C-681, passed 4-16-90; Am. Ord. C-711, passed
7-8-91; Am. Ord. C-776, passed 4-11-94; Am. Ord. 1998-12, passed 5-11-98)



§ 35.08  MATERNITY LEAVE.



   (A)   Pregnant employees who give birth shall be entitled to a
maternity leave of up to six weeks beginning with the day of birth of the
child, or beginning one day earlier in the event the mother's medical status
has required hospitalization prior to the birth of the child.



   (B)   Any employee who utilizes maternity leave of absence may apply
to the time so utilized any sick leave, vacation time, and/or compensatory
time off which such employee has to her credit.



(Ord. C-738, passed 9-14-92)



§ 35.09  CONTRIBUTION TO THE PUBLIC EMPLOYEES RETIREMENT SYSTEM.



   (A)   (1)   Effective April 18, 1993, the full amount of the
statutorily required contributions to the Public Employees Retirement System
of Ohio shall be withheld from the gross pay of each person within the class
established in division (B) herein and shall be "picked-up" (assumed and paid
to the Public Employees Retirement System of Ohio) by the village.  This
"pick-up" by the village is, and shall be designated as, public employee
contributions and shall be in lieu of contributions to the Public Employees
Retirement System of Ohio by each person within the class established in
division (B) herein.  No person subject to this "pick-up" shall have the
option of choosing to receive the statutorily required contribution to the
Public Employees Retirement System of Ohio directly instead of having it
"picked-up" by the village or of being excluded from the "pick-up."



      (2)   The village shall, in reporting and making remittance to
the Public Employees Retirement System of Ohio, report that the public
employee's contribution for each person subject to this "pick-up" has been
made as provided by the statute.



   (B)   The "pick-up" by the village provided by this section shall
apply to all persons who are or become employees of Amberley Village and who
are or become contributing members of the Public Employees Retirement System
of Ohio.



   (C)   The village's method of payment of salary to employees who are
participants in PERS is hereby modified as follows, "in order to provide for
a salary reduction pick-up of employee contributions to PERS."



   (D)   The total salary for each employee shall be the salary
otherwise payable under village ordinances.  Such total salary of each
employee shall be payable by the village in two parts: deferred salary and
cash salary.  An employee's deferred salary shall be equal to that
percentage of that employee's total salary which is required from time to
time by PERS to be paid as an employee contribution by that employee, and
shall be paid by the village to PERS on behalf of that employee as a pick-up
and in lieu of the PERS employee contribution otherwise payable by that
employee.  An employee's cash salary shall be equal to that employee's total
salary less the amount of the pick-up for that employee, and shall be
payable, subject to applicable payroll deductions, to that employee.  The
village shall compute and remit its employer contributions to PERS based upon
an employee's total salary.  The total combined expenditures of the village
for such employees' total salaries payable under applicable village policies
and the pick-up provisions of this section shall not be greater than the
amounts it would have paid for those items had this provision not been in
effect.



   (E)   The Treasurer and/or the Clerk are hereby authorized and
directed to implement the provisions of this section to institute the
"pick-up" of the statutorily required contributions to the Public Employees
Retirement System of Ohio for those persons reflected in division (B) herein
so as to enable them to obtain favorable tax treatment in federal and state
tax deferments and other benefits.



(Ord. C-749, passed 4-12-93)



Statutory reference:



   Public Employees Retirement System (PERS), see R.C. Ch. 145



INSURANCE



§ 35.10  LIFE INSURANCE.



   (A)   Premiums for straight life insurance benefits in an amount
equal to two times the employee's annual base salary, rounded off to the
nearest $1,000.00, with a maximum of $250,000.00, as provided by the carrier,
shall be paid by the village on behalf of all present full-time employees. 
The amount of the premiums for such insurance shall be paid from the general
funds of the village.



   (B)   The Village Manager is authorized to make the premium payments
above indicated on behalf of all qualifying personnel.  The premiums are to
be paid as an inducement for continued employment, and in addition to any
salary presently paid or to be paid.



   (C)   The life insurance benefit is twice an employee's annual
salary, up to a maximum limit of $200,000.



('69 Code, § 32.05)  (Am. Ord. C-518, passed 4-13-81; Am. Ord. C-521,
passed 7-13-81; Am. Ord. C-698, passed 12-10-90; Am. Res. 2001-13, passed
6-11-01; Am. Ord. 2005-17, passed 7-11-05)



§ 35.11  MEDICAL INSURANCE.



   (A)   Premiums for hospitalization insurance and medical payment
insurance shall be paid by the village on behalf of all full-time village
employees and their families subject to any rules, regulations, procedures,
terms or conditions established by the village or the insurance provider,
self-insurance pool, or cooperative purchasing organization within which the
village has chosen to participate.  The sum necessary for the payment of
these premiums shall be paid from the general funds of the village.



   (B)   The Village Manager is hereby authorized to make the premium
payments above indicated on behalf of all full-time employees of the village.
The premium is to be paid as an inducement for continued employment, and is
in addition to any salary or other compensation paid or to be paid to any
current or future full-time employee of the village.



   (C)   For any village employee prohibited from obtaining family plan
coverage under the village's medical insurance, resulting from the employee's
spouse having family plan insurance coverage that causes the village medical
coverage plan to disallow enrollment of said village employee, the village
shall establish and fund a Section 105 Health Reimbursement Arrangement (HRA)
equal to the single employee insurance premium.



('69 Code, § 32.04)  (Ord. C-174, passed 4-10-61; Am. Ord. 2003-18, passed
11-10-03; Am. Ord. 2004-04, passed 1-12-04; Am. Ord. 2011-06, passed 3-14-11)



§ 35.12  PROCESS FOR ACQUIRING INSURANCE COVERAGE.



   Until otherwise determined by the Village Council, the village will
not, in seeking insurance coverage for the village, utilized the process of
advertisement and receipt of bids, but will utilize insurance brokerage/risk
management services to recommend to Council for its consideration the types,
terms and cost of insurance coverage to be furnished to the village, as well
as recommending the providers for such insurance coverage.



(Ord. 2006-17, passed 11-13-06)



CHAPTER 36: POLICE AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS



Section



   36.01   Departmental duties



   36.02   Positions and classifications



   36.03   Residency provisions for hiring and compensation



   36.04   Actions performed in course of employment



   36.05   Overtime work



   36.06   Disposition of property held by department



   36.07   Guidelines for the use of village automobiles



   36.08   Retiring police officers able to purchase sidearm; receive
badge as gift



   36.09   Contribution to the Police and Fire Pension Fund



   36.10   Recovery of user fees for Police and Fire emergency services



   36.11   Auxiliary Police Unit



   36.12   Heroin Task Force Commander



§ 36.01  DEPARTMENTAL DUTIES.



   In order to provide for police and fire protection of the village,
there is hereby created a Police Department which, in addition to regularly
recognized police duties, shall have the duty of providing fire and property
protection for the village.



('69 Code, § 31.01)  (Ord. C-235, passed 3-8-65)



§ 36.02  POSITIONS AND CLASSIFICATIONS.



   The Police Department is authorized to employ up to 18 police officers
of various positions and classifications. Positions and classifications
within the Department shall be established by the Village Manager after
consultation with the Chief of Police. The Department may employ dispatchers,
clerks, or other administrative personnel as needed. Compensation for all
Police Department employees shall be established by Council.



(Ord. C-710, passed 7-8-91; Am. Ord. C-737, passed 9-14-92; Am. Ord. C-791,
passed 4-10-95; Am. Ord. 1997-11, passed 5-12-97; Am. Ord. 1998-12, passed
5-11-98; Am. Ord. 2000-12, passed 7-10-00; Am. Ord. 2003-10, passed 4-14-03;
Am. Ord. 2004-25, passed 10-12-04; Am. Ord. 2006-13, passed 8-14-06; Am. Ord.
2007-04, passed 5-14-07; Am. Ord. 2007-17, passed 7-16-07; Am. Ord. 2016-4,
passed 2-8-16)



Cross-reference:



   Dismissal of department members, see Charter Art. VIII



§ 36.03  RESIDENCY PROVISIONS FOR HIRING AND COMPENSATION.



   (A)   No person appointed to any position named in § 36.02 need be
a resident or elector of the village.  The Village Manager shall have the
authority, with Council's approval, and upon recommendation of the Police
Chief, to make all appointments necessary to carry out the duties of the
Police Department.



('69 Code, § 31.01)  (Ord. C-235, passed 3-8-65)



   (B)   Should a patrolman at the time he commences employment be a
Commissioned Peace Officer of the State of Ohio with at least one year of
employment as a patrolman with a political subdivision of the State of Ohio,
such patrolman, for the purpose of establishing his beginning and future rate
of compensation, shall, from his first day of employment, be treated as
though he completed on that day one year of employment with the village.



(Ord. C-535, passed 4-13-82; Am. Ord. C-562, passed 4-9-84; Am. Ord. C-581,
passed 4-8-85; Am. Ord. C-597, passed 4-14-86)



§ 36.04  ACTIONS PERFORMED IN COURSE OF EMPLOYMENT.



   Any action taken by any member of the Police Department outside the
village's territorial limits, if taken in pursuance of any police matter
involving the village or if taken in the line of cooperation upon official
police business with any of the other governmental units of Hamilton County,
which action is approved or ordered by the Police Chief, or if done upon an
emergency basis is subsequently ratified by the Police Chief, shall be
considered an action performed in the course of employment by said member of
the Police Department.



('69 Code, § 31.02)  (Res. C-75, passed 5-12-58)



§ 36.05  OVERTIME WORK.



   (A)   Except for the hours of work of the Chief of Police which
shall be at his discretion, the work schedule of all members of the Police
Department shall be based on 40 hours during each consecutive seven-day
period so scheduled by the Chief of Police as to the consecutive number of
work days and designated days off to afford total 24-hour police and fire
service.



   (B)   Any police officer or police dispatcher, with the approval of
the Chief of Police, who works in excess of his regularly assigned work
schedule shall be compensated for such additional work at one and one-half
times his regular hourly rate, except, however, if requested by the police
officer or dispatcher and authorized by the Chief of Police, the officer or
dispatcher may be given compensatory time off in lieu of such monetary
compensation at the same rate, provided, however, no police officer or
dispatcher may accumulate unused compensatory time off in excess of 60 hours.



   (C)   Police officers shall be compensated for three hours at one
and one-half times their hourly rate for appearances at sessions of Mayor's
Court and for four hours at one and one-half times their hourly rate for
appearances at any other court or grand jury.



('69 Code, § 31.03)  (Ord. 167, passed 1-11-54; Am. Ord. C-567, passed
6-11-84; Am. Ord. C-584, passed 6-10-85; Am. Ord. C-592, passed 3-10-86; Am.
Ord. C-758, passed 9-13-93; Am. Ord. 1998-12, passed 5-11-98)



§ 36.06  DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY HELD BY DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   Property that has been lost, abandoned, stolen or lawfully
seized or forfeited and that is in the custody of the Police Department,
shall be safely kept pending the time it is no longer needed as evidence or
may otherwise be disposed of, and shall be disposed of pursuant to this
section.



   (B)   The Police Department that has any lost, abandoned, stolen,
seized, or forfeited property as described in division (A) of this section
shall adopt a written internal control policy with respect to such property,
and shall maintain an accurate record, in accordance with its written
internal control policy, of each item of the property.



   (C)   The Police Department shall make a reasonable effort to locate
persons entitled to possession of property in its custody, and to notify them
when and where it may be claimed.  In the absence of evidence identifying
persons entitled to custody, it is sufficient notice to advertise in a
newspaper of general circulation, briefly describing the nature of the
property in custody, and inviting persons to view and establish their rights
to it.



   (D)   A person loses any right he may have to the possession, or the
possession and ownership, of property if determined by Mayor's Court or a
court of record that either of the following applies:



      (1)   The property was the subject, or was used in a
conspiracy or attempt to commit, or in the commission, of an offense other
than a traffic offense, and such person is a conspirator, accomplice, or
offender with respect to the offense; or



      (2)   When, in light of the nature of the property or the
circumstances of such person, it is unlawful for the person to acquire or
possess the property.



   (E)   Unclaimed and forfeited property in the custody of the Police
Department shall be disposed of as follows:



      (1)   Drugs shall be destroyed, converted for educational
and/or enforcement utilization by the Police Department, or shall be placed
in the custody of the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States for
disposal or use for medical or scientific purposes under applicable federal
law.



      (2)   Firearms and dangerous ordnance suitable for police work
may be used for that purpose. Firearms suitable for sporting use, or as
museum pieces or collectors' items, may be sold at public auction pursuant to
subdivision (5). Other firearms and dangerous ordnance shall be destroyed.



      (3)   Obscene materials shall be destroyed.



      (4)   Beer, intoxicating liquor or alcohol seized from a
person who is not the holder of a permit issued under R.C. Chapters 4301 and
4303 or is an offender, and forfeited to the state under R.C. §§ 4301.45 or
4301.53 shall be sold by the Department of Liquor Control, if the Department
determines that the beer, intoxicating liquor or alcohol is fit for sale. 
If any tax imposed under Title XLIII of the Ohio Rev. Code has not been paid
in relation to the beer, intoxicating liquor or alcohol, the proceeds of the
sale shall first be used to pay the tax. All money collected under this
subdivision shall be paid into the State Treasury. Any such beer,
intoxicating liquor or alcohol that the Department determines to be unfit for
sale shall be destroyed.



      (5)   Other unclaimed or forfeited property may be used by the
Police Department, sold at public auction, or disposed of as the Chief of
Police or his or her designee considers proper under the circumstances.



   (F)   The proceeds from property disposed of pursuant to this
section shall be placed in the general fund of the village except that if the
Hamilton County Commissioners recognize a citizens' reward program as
provided in R.C. § 9.92, and notify the Police Department by filing with it
a copy of their resolution conferring such recognition, the village shall pay
25% of the proceeds from each sale of property disposed of pursuant to this
section to the designated citizens' reward program for use exclusively for
the payment of rewards.



   (G)   This section does not apply to the collection, storage or
disposal of abandoned junk motor vehicles.



(Ord. C-462, passed 7-10-78; Am. Ord. C-734, passed 5-11-92)



Cross-reference:



   Mayor's court, see Ch. 32



§ 36.07  GUIDELINES FOR THE USE OF VILLAGE AUTOMOBILES.



   The Police Chief's unmarked vehicle shall be available for the Chief's
unlimited use, 24 hours per day, except for out of town vacations, so that
the Chief may be contacted and available to respond to the village whenever
necessary.



(Ord. C-829, passed 9-9-96)



§ 36.08  RETIRING POLICE OFFICERS ABLE TO PURCHASE SIDEARM; RECEIVE BADGE
AS GIFT.



   (A)   Effective as of April 1, 1992, a police officer who is
retiring from service with the village under honorable conditions, who has
completed at least 25 years of service as a police officer, of which at least
13 years of service has been continuous with the village, shall be entitled
to retain as a gift his or her Police Department badge and shall be permitted
to purchase his or her Police Department sidearm for a fee not to exceed $1;
the sale of the sidearm being conditioned upon the agreement of the police
officer that he or she will neither sell nor make a gift of the firearm
during his or her lifetime.



   (B)   A retiring police officer wishing to purchase his or her
sidearm shall first present the sidearm to the Police Chief who will check
the firearm for correct serial number which shall be recorded in a permanent
record of the Police Department.



   (C)   Upon termination of active duty with the Police Department,
before receiving his or her firearm, the police officer shall sign a receipt
for such firearm to be prepared by the Police Chief, such receipt to include
the serial number of the firearm and a statement by the retiring officer that
he or she will neither sell nor make a gift of the firearm during his or her
lifetime.



(Ord. C-843, passed 6-8-92)



§ 36.09  CONTRIBUTION TO THE POLICE AND FIRE PENSION FUND.



   (A)   (1)   Effective January 12, 2004, Amberley Village has
determined to continue to pick-up all of the 10% mandatory contributions by
the employees who are members of the Ohio Police and Fire Pension Fund by
paying the contributions on behalf of the employee.



   (B)   That the picked-up contributions paid by the village, even
though designated as employee contributions for state law purposes, are being
paid by the village in lieu of contributions by the employee.



   (C)   That the picked up contributions will not be included in the
gross income of the employees for tax reporting purposes, that is, for
federal or state income tax withholding taxes, until distributed from the
Ohio Police and Fire Pension Fund.



   (D)   That the picked-up contributions will be included in the gross
income of the employees, for employment tax purposes, as the contributions
are made to the Ohio Police and Fire Pension Fund.



   (E)   That the employee shall not be entitled to any option of
choosing to receive the contributed amounts directly instead of having them
paid by the village to the Ohio Police and Fire Pension Fund.



(Ord. C-754, passed 6-14-93; Am. Ord. 2004-02, passed 1-12-04; Am. Ord.
2004-12, passed 6-14-04)



Statutory reference:



   Police and Fire Pension Fund, see R.C. Ch. 742



§ 36.10  RECOVERY OF USER FEES FOR POLICE AND FIRE EMERGENCY SERVICES.



   (A)   The village hereby adopts a policy that it shall attempt to
recover any and all costs incurred by it in carrying out its police and/or
fire duties while performing emergency services, including but not limited to
the provision of personnel, supplies, equipment, medical care, extinguishment
of fires, and debris.



   (B)   The Chief of the Police Department/Fire Department shall
establish reasonable fees to be charged for the delivery of such services,
including the repair or replacement costs of any equipment damaged in
connection with the delivery of such services.



   (C)   Such fees will be charged and billed to the individual or
company who or which is the beneficiary of such services, and/or his, her or
its insurance carrier.



(Res. 2006-15, passed 9-11-06)



§ 36.11  AUXILIARY POLICE UNIT.



   (A)   Amberley Village hereby establishes the Auxiliary Police Unit
within the Amberley Village Police Department. The primary purpose of the
Auxiliary Unit is to provide part-time trained peace officers to supplement
and complement existing full-time peace officers.



   (B)   The Police Chief shall be the executive head of the Auxiliary
Unit and shall make all decisions concerning the appointment and removal of
officers to or from the Auxiliary Unit. Such decisions shall be made in
accordance with the Police Department policy and procedures. The Police Chief
is authorized to establish policies and procedures governing the employment
of auxiliary peace officers. Auxiliary peace officers shall be part-time
employees of the village.



   (C)   Compensation of auxiliary peace officers is to be at a rate of
$28 per hour with an hourly extra or special detail rate of $38.



   (D)   Auxiliary officers are not permitted to perform the full-time
police officer duties of road work, or operate and identify themselves as an
Amberley Village full-time unit officer. Auxiliary police officers are not
required to be certified as firefighters, nor are they employed by the
village as such.



(Ord. 2017-09, passed 11-13-17)



§ 36.12  HEROIN TASK FORCE COMMANDER.



   The Police Department is authorized to employ one police officer, in
addition to and supplemental to any previous authority granted to the
Department to hire officers, for the purpose of creating the position of the
Commander for the Hamilton County Heroin Coalition Task Force. The Commander
shall be an employee of the village, but his or her day-to-day duties and
responsibilities will be dictated by the Task Force. The position is a
salaried position as such salary or other compensation is determined by the
county. The position will exist only as long as the Task Force or other
agency provides funds for the position. The village will not be responsible
for any wages, benefits, pension contributions, or expenses for the commander
position, which will instead be paid from non-village funds such as a QRT
grant or other such funds facilitated by the Task Force. So long as the
position as described exists, the village will support the position with
miscellaneous equipment such as a firearm, bullet-proof vest, and all gear
associated with the position. Any person filling the position of Commander
will not be entitled to carry forward accumulated vacation, sick time, or
other leave from another governmental agency.



(Ord. 2017-11, passed 10-9-17)



CHAPTER 37: PUBLIC EMERGENCY



Section



   37.01   Purpose



   37.02   Definitions



   37.03   Duties of Village Manager



   37.04   Notice to Governor, Sheriff



   37.05   Duties of Mayor



   37.06   Proclamation of emergency



   37.07   Emergency orders



   37.08   Duration of emergency



   37.09   Prohibited conduct



   37.10   Adopting the National Incident Management System (NIMS)



   37.11   Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan



 



   37.99   Penalty



§ 37.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter shall be to define and authorize actions
and procedures to be taken by the Village Manager, the Mayor and other
officers of the village in time of public danger and emergency.  Nothing
herein shall be interpreted as limiting the authority of the Mayor or Village
Manager to take, in time of public danger or emergency, any appropriate
action which is authorized under any other provisions of the ordinances or
charter of the village, the statutes or constitution of the state or the laws
and constitution of the United States. 



('69 Code, § 34.01)  (Ord. C-286, passed 8-21-68)



§ 37.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABSENCE.  Shall include incapacity of the Mayor, Vice Mayor, or
Village Manager or inability to make immediate contact with the Mayor, Vice
Mayor or Village Manager.



   PUBLIC DANGER or EMERGENCY.  A riot, as defined in any degree by the
Ohio Revised Code, any civil disturbance, disorder, or other occurrence that
constitutes a clear and present danger to the health, safety and property of
the citizens of the village, or substantially impairs the functioning of the
village government and its ability to protect the lives and property of the
people.  Any natural disaster or man-made calamity, or clear and present
danger thereof, including but not limited to flood, conflagration, cyclone,
tornado, earthquake, or explosion within the corporate limits of the village
resulting in the death or injury of persons or the destruction of property to
such an extent that extraordinary measures must be taken to protect the
public peace, safety, or welfare.



('69 Code, § 34.02)  (Ord. C-286, passed 8-21-68)



§ 37.03  DUTIES OF VILLAGE MANAGER.



   In time of public danger and emergency until the Mayor, or in his
absence the Vice Mayor, assumes the duties of commanding the police,
maintaining order and maintaining the law under Article IV, Section 1, of the
Charter, the Village Manager shall assume such duties and shall take all
action necessary to preserve and protect the public peace and the lives,
property and persons within the village that are endangered or potentially
endangered by the factors constituting such public danger or emergency.



('69 Code, § 34.03)  (Ord. C-286, passed 8-21-68)



Cross-reference:



   Duties of Mayor, see Charter, Article IV, § 1



§ 37.04  NOTICE TO GOVERNOR, SHERIFF.



   It shall be the duty of the Village Manager and Mayor to convey to the
Governor of the state information which may come to them concerning an
existing or potential public danger or emergency in the village which might
require assistance from the militia, national guard or other state forces. 
It shall also be the duty of the Village Manager and the Mayor to convey to
the Sheriff any information which relates to his duty to preserve the peace
throughout the county, when such breach of peace or potential breach of peace
is related to a public danger or emergency as defined in this chapter.  The
Village Manager or Mayor may seek and obtain military assistance from the
Governor of the state or from the federal government and law enforcement
assistance from the Sheriff whenever such assistance is necessary to support
the actions of the Police Department.



('69 Code, § 34.04)  (Ord. C-286, passed 8-21-68)



§ 37.05  DUTIES OF MAYOR.



   In time of public danger or emergency, as defined in this chapter, the
Mayor, or in his absence the Vice Mayor, is authorized by the Village Council
to take command of the police, maintain order, and enforce the law under the
provisions of Article IV, Section 1 of the Charter and to do all things
necessary or advisable in regard thereto. He may exercise any power or
authority granted to Mayors, administrative heads of cities or police chiefs
by the laws of the state.



('69 Code, § 34.06)  (Ord. C-286, passed 8-21-68)



Cross-reference:



   Duties of Mayor, see Charter, Article IV, § l



§ 37.06  PROCLAMATION OF EMERGENCY.



   When the Mayor, or in his absence the Vice Mayor, or in the absence of
both the Mayor and the Vice Mayor, the Village Manager determines that a
public danger or emergency as defined in this chapter exists, he shall
forthwith proclaim in writing the existence of the same and the time of its
inception and shall issue proclamation thereof to the public through the news
media and such other means of dissemination as he deems advisable.



('69 Code, § 34.05)  (Ord. C-286, passed 8-21-68)



§ 37.07  EMERGENCY ORDERS.



   The Village Manager, or the Mayor if he has assumed command as provided
in § 37.05, or the Vice Mayor, if he has assumed command in the absence of
the Mayor, may, as he deems advisable in the interest of the public peace,
health, safety or welfare and in regard to the specific area or areas of the
village imperiled by the public danger or emergency or in regard to the city
as a whole, make and enforce orders to do any or all of the following:



   (A)   Restrict or prohibit movement within, above, or beneath the
area or areas which, in his judgment, are imperiled by the public danger or
emergency.



   (B)   Establish a curfew during such hours of the day or night as he
deems advisable and prohibit persons from being out-of-doors during such
curfew.



   (C)   Prohibit or restrict the sale, distribution, dispensing or
giving away of any firearms or ammunition of any character whatsoever.



   (D)   Prohibit or restrict the carrying or possession on the public
streets or public sidewalks or in any public park or any other public place,
a weapon or any object intended to be used as a weapon including but not
limited to firearms, bows and arrows, air rifles, sling shots, knives,
razors, broken bottles, fire bombs, missiles of any kind, clubs, blackjacks,
billies, chains or similar items.



   (E)   Prohibit or restrict the retail sale, distribution, dispensing
or giving away of acids, caustics, or any chemicals or other substances
capable of being used singly or in combination to cause injury or damage to
persons or property.



   (F)   Prohibit or restrict the retail sale, distribution, dispensing
or giving away of any alcoholic beverage of any character whatsoever.



('69 Code, § 34.07)  (Ord. C-286, passed 8-21-68)



§ 37.08  DURATION OF EMERGENCY.



   The public danger or emergency proclaimed in accordance with this
chapter shall exist until the officer declaring such emergency shall
determine that the event or occurrences constituting the public danger or
emergency no longer exists, provided that, such duration shall not extend
beyond two weeks from the time of its proclamation unless extended by action
of Council, and further provided that Council may, at any time it determines
that the public danger or emergency no longer exists, declare it to be at an
end.



('69 Code, § 34.08)  (Ord. C-286, passed 8-21-68)



§ 37.09  PROHIBITED CONDUCT.



   (A)   No person, in time of public danger or emergency, shall
knowingly fail to obey any lawful order of the Village Manager, the Mayor, or
the Vice Mayor issued under the authority of this chapter.



   (B)   No person, in time of public danger or emergency, shall
knowingly fail to obey the lawful order of any police officer, militiaman,
fireman, member of the national guard or other authorized person acting under
orders or authority issued under the authority of this chapter.



   (C)   No person, in time of public danger or emergency, shall
knowingly interfere with any person lawfully acting under authority granted
by this chapter or under any lawful order issued under the provisions of this
chapter.



   (D)   No person shall knowingly in any way interfere with any police
officer, militiaman, fireman, member of the national guard or any other
authorized person who in time of public danger or emergency is engaged in the
protection and preservation of life, person, property or the public peace.



('69 Code, § 34.09)  (Ord. C-286, passed 8-21-68)  Penalty, see § 37.99



§ 37.10  ADOPTING THE NATIONAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM (NIMS).



   (A)   All departments and offices of the village shall utilize the
Incident Management System prescribed by the Department of Homeland Security,
as implemented by the State of Ohio Department of Public Safety Homeland
Security.



   (B)   The Village Manager shall determine the timetable and steps
necessary for the implementation of section.



   (C)   The village will begin training on NIMS and revise the
village's Emergency Operations Plan as soon as possible.



(Res. 2005-15, passed 11-14-05)



§ 37.11  NATURAL HAZARD MITIGATION PLAN.



   (A) The village does hereby adopt the Natural Hazard Mitigation Plan
for the county.



   (B)   The County Emergency Management Agency should prepare and
submit to the Federal Emergency Management Agency in accordance with the
draft rules and regulations published by FEMA, the Hamilton County Hazard
Mitigation Plan.



(Res. 2007-10, passed 6-11-07; Am. Res. 2014-02, passed 1-13-14)



§ 37.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of § 37.09 shall be fined not
more than $500 or confined in the county jail not more than six months, or
both.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as preventing
prosecution of a person under any other ordinance of the village or law of
the state.



('69 Code, § 34.99)  (Ord. C-286, passed 8-21-68)



CHAPTER 38: FINANCES AND TAXATION



Section



   38.01   Investment and depository policy adopted



   38.02   280 Federal Grant Fund



   38.03   210 Mayor's Court Computer Fund



   38.04   220 Drug Fund



   38.05   801 Unclaimed Monies Agency Fund



   38.06   9915, 9917, and 9919 Kenwood SWJEDZ Funds



§ 38.01  INVESTMENT AND DEPOSITORY POLICY ADOPTED.



   Council shall adopt an investment and depository policy for village
funds by resolution. The policy shall be amended from time to time at
Council's discretion.



(Res. C-1001, passed 9-9-96; Am. Ord. 2013-10, passed 5-13-13)



§ 38.02  280 FEDERAL GRANT FUND.



   The village hereby establishes a separate fund, the 280 Federal Grant
Fund, for all FEMA money.  The village authorizes disbursement of the funds
received into the Fund for the projects approved under the Public Assistance
Grant Program.



(Res. C-1004, passed 10-15-96)



§ 38.03  210 MAYOR'S COURT COMPUTER FUND.



   (A)   Effective March 1, 2001, the Mayor is hereby authorized and
directed, in addition to any other court costs, to charge and collect from
each defendant thereafter convicted in Mayor's Court special costs in the sum
of $10; subject, however, to the right of the Mayor to waive payment of such
costs.



   (B)   The village hereby establishes a special fund, the 210 Mayor's
Court Computer Fund, to receive such court costs to be charged in Mayor's
Court.



(Ord. 2001-4, passed 2-12-01)



§ 38.04  220 DRUG FUND.



   That there is hereby established the following village fund:



      #220 Minimum Mandatory Drug Fines



(Ord. 2005-16, passed 7-11-05)



§ 38.05  801 UNCLAIMED MONIES AGENCY FUND.



   There is hereby established the following village fund for the purpose
of maintaining and managing unclaimed funds:



      #801 Unclaimed Monies Agency Fund.



(Ord. 2013-14, passed 8-12-13)



§ 38.06  9915, 9917, AND 9919 KENWOOD SWJEDZ FUNDS.



   There are hereby established the following village funds:



   (A)   #9915 Kenwood SWJEDZ Fund.



   (B)   #9917 Kenwood SWJEDZ Escrow Fund.



   (C)   #9921 Kenwood SWJEDZ Long-term Maintenance and Expense Fund.



(Ord. 2013-27, passed 12-9-13)



CHAPTER 39:  PROPERTY



Section



   39.01   Disposition of real property



§ 39.01  DISPOSITION OF REAL PROPERTY.



   (A)   Purpose.  This section governs the sale or conveyance of real
property by the village, whether the interest possessed by the village is in
fee or any lesser interest, and whether the interest is to be conveyed in
whole or in part.



   (B)   Council action.  The disposition of real property shall be by
ordinance approved by a vote of at least two-thirds of the members of
Council.  Proceeds from the conveyance of real property, if any, shall be
paid into the General Fund unless otherwise required by law or directed by
Council.



   (C)   Method of conveyance.



      (1)   Real property may be sold, donated, disposed of,
transferred, leased, or otherwise conveyed.  Council is authorized to
exchange real property, in while or in part, if the property being obtained
by the village is equally or more suitable to municipal purposes than the
property being conveyed by the village, as determined by Council.



      (2)   The village may use any reasonable means to advertise or
convey property as determined by Council to be in the best interest of the
village, including, but not limited to, competitive bid, auction, market
listing with or without a broker or agent, appraisal, direct conveyance to a
third party, by using the Internet or other electronic means, or by any other
means as determined by Council.



   (D)   Consideration for property.  The village shall achieve a fair
return in consideration for the conveyance of real property.  The fair
return shall be determined by Council, and may include obtaining fair market
value for the property.  Council may also consider factors other than, or in
addition to, obtaining fair market value, which may include, but are not
limited to, economic development objectives, the facilitation of development
or other improvements to the village, the creation of jobs, the creation of
revenue to the village, avoiding costs to maintain or own the property, and
fulfillment of objectives regarding the planning and development of the
village.



(Ord. 2015-3, passed 3-11-15)



TITLE V: PUBLIC WORKS



      Chapter




         50.   SEWERS





         51.   STORM SEWERS





         52.   WASTE COLLECTION





         53.   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONTRACTS





         54.   STORMWATER UTILITY




CHAPTER 50: SEWERS



Section



General



   50.01   Definitions



   50.02   Sewer tappers; approval and bond



Permits and Fees



   50.10   Connection permit required



   50.11   Connection permit fee



   50.12   Permit issued only to approved sewer tapper



   50.13   Fraudulent use of name prohibited



   50.14   Refusal to issue permit



   50.15   Conditions of permit



   50.16   Repair deposit



   50.17   Assessments to be paid before issuance of permit



   50.18   Statutory assessments; waiver of objections



   50.19   Deferred assessments; waiver of objections



   50.20   Collection of equivalent charge



   50.21   Lateral sewer permits



   50.22   Maintenance deposit



   50.23   Subdivision or street dedication deposits



Connections



   50.30   Connecting pipe



   50.31   Inspection of connections



   50.32   Private connection; property owner responsible



Damage; Obstructions



   50.40   Breaking or removing sewers



   50.41   Depositing obstructive refuse prohibited



   50.42   Dumping prohibited



   50.43   Notice to remove obstructions



   50.44   Elimination of obstruction by village



 



   50.99   Penalty



GENERAL



§ 50.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   SEWER.  Any storm sewer, sanitary sewer, combination sewer, catch
basin, inlet, and any kind of pipe or conduit for the carrying of water or
water-borne wastes.



   SEWER TAPPER.  A person holding a plumber's license who is authorized
by the county sanitary engineer to engage in the business of making sewer
connections.



(Ord. 138, passed 4-15-56)



   STREET.  Every public way set apart for travel by whatever word
designated, including the area from property line to property line.



('69 Code, § 50.01)



§ 50.02  SEWER TAPPERS; APPROVAL AND BOND.



   (A)  No person shall engage in the business of making connections with
sewers or drains, or lateral connections within the village, or making
repairs thereto, unless he has been duly licensed as a plumber and is
approved by the county sanitary engineer.  He must also file with the
Village Building Commissioner a bond in favor of the village in a sum of not
less than $1,000, as prescribed by said Village Building Commissioner.



   (B)  The conditions of the bond shall be that the applicant will
indemnify and save the village harmless from all damage or loss which may be
occasioned in any way by accident, or the want of care or skill on his part
in the prosecution of the work of making sewer connections, or that may be
occasioned by reason of any surface or subsurface opening made or caused to
be made by him in connection with the work.



('69 Code, § 50.04)  (Ord. 138, passed 4-15-56)  Penalty, see § 50.99



PERMITS AND FEES



§ 50.10  CONNECTION PERMIT REQUIRED.



   No person, firm or corporation shall directly or indirectly cause or
permit any connection to be made with any sewer within the village limits
without a permit from the Building Commissioner, nor shall any person cause
or permit such connection to be made contrary to the provisions of this
chapter.  Each ten days' use of a sewer connection unlawfully made shall
constitute a separate offense.



('69 Code, § 50.02)  (Ord. 138, passed 4-15-56)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.11  CONNECTION PERMIT FEE.



   Where a sewer connection is made directly with a street or other sewer
within the village, a permit fee of $10 shall be paid by the sewer tapper
applicant.  Where the connection is made with an existing house lateral,
either at the curb line or at the property line, or within the property line,
a permit fee of $10 shall be paid by the applicant.



('69 Code, § 50.03)  (Ord. 138, passed 4-15-56)



§ 50.12  PERMIT ISSUED ONLY TO APPROVED SEWER TAPPER.



   No permit for the making of sewer connections shall be issued to any
person other than a sewer tapper, approved as provided in § 50.02.



('69 Code, § 50.06)  (Ord. 138, passed 4-15-56)



§ 50.13  FRAUDULENT USE OF NAME PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to obtain a sewer permit under a
name other than his own, or for a licensed sewer tapper to permit his name to
be used in obtaining a permit for the benefit of an unauthorized person.



('69 Code, § 50.07)  (Ord. 138, passed 4-15-56)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.14  REFUSAL TO ISSUE PERMIT.



   The Building Commissioner is authorized to refuse permit issuance for
any sewer or drain connection within the purview of this chapter when the
sewer tapper engaged to make the connection has previously violated any
provisions relating to the making of sewer connections, or has failed or
refused to perform any of the duties imposed on him by this chapter.



('69 Code, § 50.05)  (Ord. 138, passed 4-15-56)



§ 50.15  CONDITIONS OF PERMIT.



   Every permit to make a connection with a sewer within the village shall
show on its face that it is granted subject to the express condition that the
owner of the premises for whose benefit the connection is made and the lessee
of such premises where the connection is made for the benefit of the lessee,
and every succeeding owner or lessee, shall, in consideration of the
privilege thereby granted and enjoyed, save and hold the village harmless of
any loss of damage which may in any way result from, or be occasioned by the
installation or maintenance of the sewer connection.



('69 Code, § 50.09)  (Ord. 138, passed 4-15-56)



§ 50.16  REPAIR DEPOSIT.



   Before undertaking the work of making a sewer connection for the
benefit of any premises, the permittee shall deposit with the Village
Treasurer a sum of money sufficient to restore streets and sidewalks over any
opening made in accordance with provisions dealing with the restoration of
streets and sidewalks.



('69 Code, § 50.08)  (Ord. 138, passed 4-15-56)



Cross-reference:



   Streets and sidewalks, see Ch. 97



§ 50.17  ASSESSMENTS TO BE PAID BEFORE ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.



   Whenever an application is made for a permit to connect private
premises with a village sewer, the Building Commissioner shall ascertain
whether the installation of such sewer was financed, in whole or in part, by
an assessment or other system of public charges on abutting property or on a
benefitted district.  If the sewer is found to have been so financed, no
permit shall be issued to connect any premises therewith, unless and until
all sewer assessments or charges assessed against the said premises, or
equivalent charges, have been paid or secured to be paid as provided in §§
50.18, 50.19 and 50.20.



('69 Code, § 50.18)  (Ord. 138, passed 4-15-56)



§ 50.18  STATUTORY ASSESSMENTS; WAIVER OF OBJECTIONS.



   Where an assessment has been duly levied against the premises applied
for in accordance with the Ohio Revised Code, no permit shall be issued
unless the owner of the premises shall, as a condition of receiving his
permit, waive in writing all objections to the validity and amount of the
assessment.



('69 Code, § 50.19)  (Ord. 138, passed 4-15-56)



§ 50.19  DEFERRED ASSESSMENTS; WAIVER OF OBJECTIONS.



   If, as to any premises, Council has imposed a deferred assessment for a
sewer improvement, payable only if and when a sewer permit is applied for to
connect the premises, no permit for sewer connections shall be issued until
either the deferred assessment has been paid in full or payment has otherwise
been made or provided for in accordance with ordinance provisions.  If
payment is not made in full, the permittee shall waive all objections to the
validity and amount of the assessment.



('69 Code, § 50.20)  (Ord. 138, passed 4-15-56)



§ 50.20  COLLECTION OF EQUIVALENT CHARGE.



   (A)  Where Council has imposed neither a regular assessment nor a
deferred assessment or other charge against a tract abutting a sewer
improvement or included in a benefited sewer district, on the claim or belief
that the sewer would not be available for or of benefit to the tract, or for
any other reason, and thereafter an application shall be made to connect said
premises so exempted, the Building Commissioner, with the approval of the
Solicitor or an Assistant Solicitor, shall determine the amount which would
have been payable for the premises, had the same been duly assessed according
to the front-foot rate or other rate used.  Such equivalent charge, when so
determined, shall have the same status as the deferred charge referred to in
§ 50.19, and no permit shall be issued until the same has been paid in full.



   (B)  The property owner shall have the right to appeal to Council
concerning the amount of the charge fixed.  The appeal shall be taken within
20 days from the date on which notification issues from the office of the
Building Commissioner as to the amount.



('69 Code, § 50.21)  (Ord. 138, passed 4-15-56)



§ 50.21  LATERAL SEWER PERMITS.



   No person, firm or corporation, directly or indirectly, shall install a
private lateral sewer within the village without first obtaining a permit
from the Building Commissioner.  Application for the permit shall be
accompanied by a plat showing the proposed location of the sewer, its
beginning and terminus, and the details as to its size, materials and
construction.  If the plan meets with the approval of the Building
Commissioner, he shall issue a permit authorizing the construction of the
sewer and shall require the applicant to deposit with the Building
Commissioner an amount estimated to cover the cost of the inspection.  Each
ten days' use of the sewer unlawfully installed shall constitute a separate
offense.



('69 Code, § 50.22)  (Ord. 138, passed 4-15-56)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.22  MAINTENANCE DEPOSIT.



   The permit required by § 50.21 shall not be issued until the applicant
has deposited with the Village Treasurer a sum equal to 2% of the contract
price for the sewer construction.  If there is no contract, the applicant
shall deposit 2% of the estimated cost of the sewer construction, as
determined by the Village Engineer.  The deposited funds shall be held in a
separate fund by the village and be used for the cost of sewer maintenance in
the village.



('69 Code, § 50.23)  (Ord. 138, passed 4-15-56)



§ 50.23  SUBDIVISION OR STREET DEDICATION DEPOSITS.



   No street or subdivision in which a private lateral sewer has already
been constructed shall be accepted for dedication by the village until the
person seeking such acceptance has deposited with the Village Treasurer a sum
equal to 2% of the construction cost of the private lateral line sewer.  The
deposited funds shall be held in a separate fund by the village to be used
for the cost of sewer maintenance in the village.



('69 Code, § 50.24)  (Ord. 138, passed 4-15-56)



CONNECTIONS



§ 50.30  CONNECTING PIPE.



   No sewer connection from any building shall be less than six inches in
diameter, but shall be of a size adequate for the required service, as
determined by the Building Commissioner.  The sewer connection shall have a
gravity flow with a minimum satisfactory to the Building Commissioner.



('69 Code, § 50.10)  (Ord. 138, passed 4-15-56)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.31  INSPECTION OF CONNECTIONS.



   Not less than 12 hours previous to making a sewer connection the sewer
tapper shall notify the Building Commissioner as to the time when the work
will be ready for inspection.  The sewer tapper shall keep the work
uncovered, free, and clear until it is inspected and approved by the
Inspector.



('69 Code, § 50.11)  (Ord. 138, passed 4-15-56)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.32  PRIVATE CONNECTION; PROPERTY OWNER RESPONSIBLE.



   Every property owner shall be responsible for the maintenance and good
condition of any lateral sewer branch connecting his premises with any street
or village sewer.  In the event that, by reason of a defective sewer
connection, damage shall be occasioned to a village street or sidewalk, the
Building Commissioner shall notify the property owner to take immediate steps
to repair the defect and damage.  Upon receipt of the notice, the property
owner or a representative shall apply to the Building Commissioner for the
necessary permit and shall make a deposit in the amount required for the
making of a street opening.  If the property owner fails within seven days
of the issue of such notice, to make the required application for a street
opening permit, the Building Commissioner shall undertake the work of
repairing the sewer connection and restoring the street and pavement, and
shall charge the cost thereof, including permit fee, to the owner.  Notice
required by this section may be served on the property owner personally, by
mail or by delivery to any occupying lessee or tenant, if the owner does not
reside on the premises.



('69 Code, § 50.12)  (Ord. 138, passed 4-15-56)



DAMAGE; OBSTRUCTIONS



§ 50.40  BREAKING OR REMOVING SEWERS.



   It shall be unlawful to injure, break or remove any part of any
receiving basin, covering plate, manhole cover, or any part of any sewer or
appurtenance thereto, except as duly authorized in the course of making an
improvement, repair or sewer connection.



('69 Code, § 50.13)  (Ord. 138, passed 4-15-56)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.41  DEPOSITING OBSTRUCTIVE REFUSE PROHIBITED.



   No person shall deposit or cause or permit to be deposited refuse of
any kind which is liable to become an obstruction in any sewer receiving
basin, tributary water course or other place from which it may be carried or
washed into a village sewer.  It shall also be unlawful to deposit any such
refuse matter in any place where it will obstruct the mouth of a sewer or
drain.



('69 Code, § 50.14)  (Ord. 138, passed 4-15-56)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.42  DUMPING PROHIBITED.



   No owner of a tract of land shall dump or allow to be dumped thereon
material of any kind in such matter as to interfere with existing drains,
sewers or natural water courses.



('69 Code, § 50.15)  (Ord. 138, passed 4-15-56)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.43  NOTICE TO REMOVE OBSTRUCTIONS.



   Whenever the Building Commissioner finds that, by reason of the making
of a fill or partial fill thereon, a tract of land is inadequately drained,
or that such fill obstructs or interferes with lawfully existing sewerage or
drainage, the Building Commissioner shall notify the owner of the tract to
remove the fill or to provide the necessary sewerage to eliminate the
obstruction.  Notice may be served upon the owner by personal delivery, by
mail at his last known place of residence or by posting on the premises. 
Failure after receipt of notice to remove the fill or to provide the
necessary sewerage within ten days shall constitute an unlawful act.  Each
additional period of ten days thereafter during which the owner fails to
carry out the order of the Mayor shall constitute a separate offense.



('69 Code, § 50.16)  (Ord. 138, passed 4-15-56)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.44  ELIMINATION OF OBSTRUCTION BY VILLAGE.



   In case of an emergency, or in any case where an obstruction caused by
a fill or partial fill has continued for more than 30 days after the serving
of notice as provided in § 50.43, the Building Commissioner is authorized to
cause any necessary measures to be taken to protect existing drainage
systems, and to charge the expense thereof to the owner of the property on
which the obstructing fill was made.  This section shall not be construed to
relieve the owner of any penalties prescribed by other sections of this
chapter.



('69 Code, § 50.17)  (Ord. 138, passed 4-15-56)  Penalty, see § 50.99



§ 50.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a
minor misdemeanor, and each day or 10-day period of violation, as applicable,
shall be considered a separate offense.



('69 Code, § 50.99)  (Ord. 138, passed 4-15-56)



CHAPTER 51: STORM SEWERS



Section



   51.01   Discharge of storm or other clean water



   51.02   Illegal discharge of storm water



   51.03   Availability of storm sewer



   51.04   Inspection of premises; dye test



   51.05   Notice of violation



 



   51.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Storm water utility, see Ch. 156



§ 51.01  DISCHARGE OF STORM OR OTHER CLEAN WATER.



   Surface water, rain water from roofs, subsoil drainage water, building
foundation drainage water, cistern overflow water, clean water from
condensers, waste water from motors and elevators, and any other clean and
unobjectionable waste water shall be discharged into a storm sewer (or
combined sewer) whenever and wherever such sewer is available to receive the
water.  Where the sewer is not available, the water shall be discharged into
street gutters or natural watercourses. In no case shall the water be
discharged into a sanitary sewer.



('69 Code, § 51.01)  (Ord. C-118, passed 9-8-58)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.02  ILLEGAL DISCHARGE OF STORM WATER.



   No person shall discharge any storm water into a house sewer or drain,
driveway approach, downspout or other rain water leader connected to or with
a sanitary sewer, nor shall any person tap a house drain or sewer so
connected for the purpose of discharging any water into it.  Any existing
connection in violation of this section shall be abandoned and removed.



('69 Code, § 51.02)  (Ord. C-118, passed 9-8-58)  Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.03  AVAILABILITY OF STORM SEWER.



   (A)   A storm (or combined) sewer shall be deemed available to
receive the water from the land of each particular person owning real
property in the village whenever the sewer is located within such property or
within 100 feet from any boundary of such property.



   (B)   Wherever a storm (or combined) sewer is available to receive
such water, downspouts shall be connected to the sewer as directed by the
Village Manager.



('69 Code, § 51.03)  (Ord. C-118, passed 9-8-58)



§ 51.04  INSPECTION OF PREMISES; DYE TEST.



   (A)   The Building Inspector of the village, or any deputy
designated by him, is hereby authorized and empowered to enter and inspect,
at any reasonable time, any premises, building, or structure within the
village in regard to the condition, arrangement, capacity, efficiency and
connections of all devices on or in such premises, building or structure, for
the disposition of storm water, with regard to the existence of any violation
of this chapter which may constitute a health hazard or, which may create
such a hazard in case of rain.



   (B)   Pursuant to the inspection and in addition to the provisions
of division (A), the Building Inspector is authorized to make or cause to be
made on behalf of the village a dye test or other reasonable test of the
house drains, driveway approaches, downspouts and other facilities and means
for the disposition of the water of any such premises, building or structure.



('69 Code, § 51.04)  (Ord. C-118, passed 9-8-58)



§ 51.05  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   The Building Inspector shall notify by registered mail the person(s)
having the right to the possession of any such premises, building or
structure where a determination has been made that any drains, approaches,
downspouts, facilities or means are faulty, improperly constructed or
connected, or otherwise in, or facilitative of, violation of this chapter. 
The notice shall apprise the person of the conditions and violations found to
exist and shall require correction of the same within 60 days from the
mailing of the notice.  The notified person shall comply with the
requirement of the notice within the 60-day period.  Failure to receive
notice shall not relieve any person from compliance with the provisions of
this chapter.



('69 Code, § 51.05)  (Ord. C-118, passed 9-8-58) 



Penalty, see § 51.99



§ 51.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provisions of this chapter shall be fined not less
than $10 nor more than $50 for each offense.  A separate offense shall be
deemed committed each 24-hour period that the violation continues after a
30-day period following the first conviction.



('69 Code, § 51.99)  (Ord. C-118, passed 9-8-58) 



CHAPTER 52: WASTE COLLECTION



Section



   52.01   Public liability and property damage insurance



   52.02   Solid waste collection fee



Cross-reference:



   Dumping refuse in village, see § 95.26



   Sanitation, health, and safety, see Ch. 96



§ 52.01  PUBLIC LIABILITY AND PROPERTY DAMAGE INSURANCE.



   Any person or business entity providing garbage and refuse collection
services in the village shall maintain at all times comprehensive public
liability and property damage insurance with a total coverage of at least $2
million to protect such person or business entity and the village during the
performance of this work from claims or damages for bodily injuries,
including accidental death, as well as for claims for property damages.



(Res. C-649, passed 8-11-86)



§ 52.02  SOLID WASTE COLLECTION FEE.



   (A)   DWELLING UNIT means a room or group of rooms located within a
structure intended for residential use and forming a single habitable unit
with living, sleeping, cooking, eating and sanitary facilities used or
intended to be used by one family.



   (B)   All residential dwelling units are required to utilize the
solid waste collection and recycling services of the vendor or provider
selected by the village.



   (C)   All residential dwelling units shall be charged a fee for such
services as may be determined by Council by ordinance from time to time.



   (D)   The fee provided for by this section shall be included and
collected on the water bill for the respective dwelling unit and shall be due
when the water charges are due.  A service charge of up to 5% may be charged
on each bill by the billing provider to be paid by each respective dwelling
unit.  If a water bill is unpaid, in whole or in part, it shall constitute a
violation of this section.  Upon said violation, any or all services
provided for and collected through the water bill, including but not
necessarily limited to solid waste collection, recycling, water, sewer, and
storm water management, may be terminated by the village or the provider of
the respective service.



   (E)   A dwelling unit shall be exempt from the fee provided for in
this section upon sufficient evidence provided by the property owner, or
other person responsible for paying the fee, to the Village Manager that the
dwelling unit is unoccupied and is not generating any solid waste, garbage,
refuse, or recycling.  Said exemption shall be effective for six months but
may be renewed upon a showing that the dwelling unit continues to qualify for
the exemption.



(Ord. 2010-22, passed 12-13-10; Am. Ord. 2013-01, passed 1-14-13; Am. Ord.
2015-20, passed 12-14-15)



CHAPTER 53: PUBLIC IMPROVEMENT CONTRACTS



Section



   53.01   Cost estimates



   53.02   Retainage



§ 53.01  COST ESTIMATES.



   The village shall not be bound by any of the provisions of the Ohio
Revised Code presently in effect, or as hereafter enacted or amended from
time to time, which require municipalities to make public at any time before
advertising for bids and awarding a contract the cost estimates on public
improvement projects.



(Ord. C-655, passed 5-8-89)



§ 53.02  RETAINAGE.



   (A) The village may, in the specifications on each project, establish
its payment procedure including the amount to be retained until completion of
the project.  The village need not deposit the retained amount in an escrow
account to accrue interest as may be required at any time by the Ohio Revised
Code.  The retainer shall be released upon compliance with all requirements
of the contract, except as otherwise provided in division (B) below.



   (B) The village may, in the specifications on each project, provide for
the retention of a specified percentage of the entire cost of the contract
during any specified guarantee period.  The village need not deposit the
retained sum in an escrow account to accrue interest as may be required at
any time by the Ohio Revised Code.  The retainer shall be released at the
end of the guarantee period upon compliance with all requirements of the
contract.



(Ord. C-655, passed 5-8-89)



CHAPTER 54:  STORMWATER UTILITY



Section



General



   54.01   Purpose



   54.02   Definitions



Organization and Operation



   54.10   Organization of the utility



   54.11   Stormwater facilities



   54.12   Erosion, siltation and sedimentation



   54.13   Multiple fund projects



   54.14   Private facilities



   54.15   Public facilities



   54.16   Ancillary improvements



   54.17   Routine and remedial maintenance



   54.18   Land and facilities affected by lands outside the village



   54.19   Rules and regulations



   54.20   Right of entry for survey, examination and maintenance



Finance Provisions



   54.30   Funding



   54.31   Stormwater utility fund



   54.32   Stormwater management service charge



   54.33   Classification of property



   54.34   Stormwater discharge (Q)



   54.35   Rates



   54.36   Collection of stormwater management service charge



   54.37   Adjustment of charge, appeal



   54.38   Delinquent charges



Abatement Procedures



   54.50   Notice to correct improper drainage



   54.51   Abatement costs



Appeals and Amendments



   54.60   Appeals Board



   54.61   Variances and appeals



   54.62   Contents of petition



   54.63   Amendments



Legal Issues



   54.70   Flooding, liability



 



   54.98   Severability



   54.99   Penalty



GENERAL



§ 54.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of the stormwater management provision contained in this
chapter and other related provisions contained elsewhere in the code is to
provide for effective management and financing of a stormwater system within
the village.



   (A)   In order to accomplish the purpose of effective financing of a
stormwater system within the village, this chapter shall:



      (1)   Establish and maintain fair and reasonable stormwater
management service charges for each lot or parcel in the village which bear a
substantial relationship to the cost of providing stormwater management
services and facilities.  Such service charges shall be charged because each
property contributes to stormwater runoff and benefits from effective
management of stormwater by Amberley Village.



      (2)   (a)   Ensure that similar properties pay similar
stormwater management service charges which reflect the area of each property
and its intensity of development, since these factors bear directly on the
peak rate of stormwater runoff;



         (b)   Charges for residential properties of two or less
dwelling units shall reflect the relatively uniform effect that such
development has on runoff. Charges for all other properties shall be in
proportion to residential properties of two or less dwelling units, utilizing
both relative area and intensity of development in setting rates;



      (3)   Provide a mechanism for consideration of specific or
unusual stormwater service requirements of some properties, and special and
general benefits accruing to or from properties as a result of providing
their own stormwater management facilities;



      (4)   Provide for a service charge adjustment process to
review stormwater charges when unusual circumstances exist which alter runoff
characteristics, when either service or benefit varies from a normal
condition or is of greater significance than contribution to runoff or to
periodically ensure that rates reflect the current costs of effective
stormwater management; and



      (5)   Utilize stormwater management funds throughout the
village, except where activities or facilities are clearly unusual and in
excess of the normal level of service village wide and where developers are
responsible for providing any new stormwater facilities required for their
project.



   (B)   In order to maintain its effectiveness this chapter shall:



      (1)   Establish a mechanism for appeals and amendments to its
provisions;



      (2)   Provide a procedure for abatement of conditions or
activities which are not in the interest of public health, safety or welfare;



      (3)   Provide for its continuous validity through severability
of its various portions; and



      (4)   Provide penalties for violations of its provisions.



(Ord. 2002-11, passed 3-10-03)



§ 54.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ABATEMENT.  Any action taken to remedy, correct, or eliminate a
condition within, associated with or impacting a drainage system, pursuant to
§§ 54.50 or 54.51 of this chapter.



   APPEALS BOARD. The Stormwater Management Utility Appeals Board whose
duties shall be pursuant to § 54.60 of this chapter.  Council shall serve
as the Appeals Board unless it shall by resolution designate another board.
The Village Manager or his or her designee shall serve as the executive
secretary of the Appeals Board.



   COMMITTEE.  The Stormwater Management Utility Advisory Committee
consisting of a member of Council and four persons appointed by Council whose
duties are specified in § 54.10 of this chapter.



   COUNCIL.  The Village Council of the Village of Amberley Village, Ohio.



   COUNTY. The County of Hamilton, Ohio.



   DETENTION BASINS.  Dry surface stormwater storage areas created by
natural contours or by constructing a basin by excavation or embankment or by
installing underground structures such as concrete pipes or chambers.



   DEVELOPER. A person, firm, partnership or corporation, which otherwise
improves a specific parcel or tract of land, performs construction work of
any kind in the "project area" as defined in this section or holds or is
required to obtain a "permit" as defined in this section.



   DIRECTOR.  The Director of the Stormwater Management Utility which
shall be appointed by the



Council, and may be the Village Manager or another employee of the Village.



   EMBANKMENT.  Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other
material is placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported or moved to a new
location above the natural surface of the ground or on top of the stripped
surface or cut and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.  The
difference in elevation between a point on the original ground and a
designated point of higher elevation on the final grade; a fill or the
material used to make an embankment.



   ENGINEER, PROFESSIONAL. A person holding a certificate of registration
under R.C. §§ 4733.14 or 4733.19.



   EROSION.  The wearing away of the land surface by the action of wind,
water or gravity.



   EXCAVATION.  Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock or any other
similar material is dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced,
relocated, or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.
The difference between a point on the original ground and designated point of
lower elevation on the final grade; cut or the material removed in excavation.



   EXISTING. Present or in effect as of the time of the adoption of this
chapter.



   FACILITIES. Various drainage works that may include inlets, conduits,
manholes, energy dissipation structures, channels, outlets,
retention/detention basins, and other structural components.



   GRADING.  Any stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling, or any
combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition.



   MUNICIPAL. Property or facilities owned by the village of Amberley
Village, Ohio.



   NOTICE.  A written or printed communication conveying information or
warning.



   ORDER.  The whole or any part of the final disposition (whether
affirmative, negative, injunctive, or declaratory in form) or any matter
issued by the Director or Village Manager or person designated by them
pursuant to any provisions of this chapter.



   OWNER.  Any person, business or organization that possesses real
property.



   PERMIT.  The "stormwater management permit" required by this chapter.



   PERSON.  Any person, firm or corporation (public or private), the
State of Ohio and its agencies or political subdivisions and the United
States of America, its agencies and instrumentalities, and any agent,
servant, officer, or employee of any of the foregoing.



   PLANNING COMMISSION.  The Planning Commission provided for in Article
VI of the Charter of the Village of Amberley Village, Ohio.



   PREMISES.  A lot or parcel and the buildings and improvements situated
thereon.



   PRIVATE.  Property or facilities owned by individuals, corporations,
and other organizations and not by local, state, or federal government.



   PROJECT AREA. The land lying within the geographical limits of the
tract(s) or parcel(s) under consideration and on which the work is to be
performed.



   PUBLIC.  Property or facilities owned by local, state, or federal
governments.



   RETENTION BASINS.  Permanent ponds where additional stormwater storage
capacity is provided above the normal water level.



   SEDIMENT.  Solid material both mineral and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its original site or
origin by air, water, or gravity as a product of erosion.



   SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN. A plan required by an ordinance, rule, or
regulation for controlling the movement of soils due to storm runoff created
by construction activities.



   STORM, STORMWATER. Storm and stormwater as used in this chapter are
interchangeable terms.



   STORM SEWER, STORM DRAIN.  A sewer or drain which carries stormwaters,
surface runoff, street wash waters, and drainage, but which excludes sanitary
sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.  Storm
sewers begin at the grating or opening where water enters the structure,
through the sewer and conduits to the outlet structure where water enters a
channel or natural watercourse.



   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT CODE.  Chapter 54 of the Village of Amberley
Village Code of Ordinances.



   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT DESIGN MANUAL. A handbook of design methods,
standards, and requirements for the design, construction, maintenance, and
use of stormwater facilities written by and available from the village.



   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM.  All man-made facilities, structures,
and natural watercourses used for collecting, transporting, detaining,
storing or disposing of stormwater to, through, and from drainage areas to
the points of final outlet including, but not limited to any and all of the
following: inlets, conduits and appurtenant features, canals, creeks,
channels, catch basins, ditches, streams, gulches, gullies, flumes, culverts,
siphons, retention or detention basins, dams, floodwalls, levees, and pumping
stations.



   TOTAL AREA.  The square footage of a lot or parcel measured or
estimated by using the outside boundary dimensions, in feet, converted to
acres (one acre equals 43,600 square feet), to obtain the total enclosed
area, without regard for topographic features of the enclosed surface, as
used in § 54.33 for the purpose of determining the rate class for lot(s) or
parcel(s) of real property.  The boundary dimensions in feet of the enclosed
surface area may be established by any of the following methods selected by
the Utility for each lot or parcel: (1)  On site or photo-grammetric
measurements of the apparent outside boundary dimensions of the lot or parcel
of real property made by the village or on its behalf; or (2) Computation of
the area using dimensions of lot or parcel of real property and/or existing
area measurements which are set forth and contained in the records of the
office of the County Recorder or Auditor.



   UTILITY.  The Stormwater Management Utility provided for by this
chapter, which may be operated or organized as a department of the Village of
Amberley Village, Ohio.



   VILLAGE.  The Village of Amberley Village, Ohio and its authorized
agents.



   VILLAGE ENGINEER. A professional engineer designated by and
representing the Village of Amberley Village, Ohio or his authorized agent.



   VILLAGE MANAGER.  The Village Manager as provided for in Article V of
the Charter of the Village of Amberley Village, Ohio.



   WATERCOURSE.  A permanent or intermittent stream, river, brook, creek,
channel, swale or ditch for water whether natural or manmade.



ORGANIZATION AND OPERATION



§ 54.10  ORGANIZATION OF THE UTILITY.



   (A)   The stormwater management utility created pursuant to this
chapter shall be, and hereby is designated to be, a department of the village.



   (B)   The Village Manager shall be, and hereby is appointed as,
Director of the stormwater management utility.



   (C)   The utility shall be administered by the Director and shall
have the responsibility for planning, developing, and implementing stormwater
management or sediment control plans; financing, constructing, maintaining,
rehabilitating, inspecting, and managing existing and new stormwater
facilities; collecting fees and charges for the utility; implementing and
enforcing the provisions of this code; and other related duties as directed
by the Village Manager.



   (D)   The utility may avail itself of the services of other village
departments necessary for the discharge of its responsibilities. Services of
finance, personnel, law, public works, engineering, and the like, which are
used by the utility shall be provided at cost.



   (E)   A Stormwater Management Advisory Committee consisting of a
member of Council and four persons appointed by Council shall serve as
advisors to the utility. To ensure a balanced committee, at least one
representative of non residential property shall be on the committee.



   (F)   Non-Councilmembers so appointed shall serve at the pleasure of
Council for a term of four years.  The Councilmember shall serve for the
term of his or her office. Four members shall serve in overlapping terms
being appointed every two years to serve for a four-year term. The first
Advisory Committee shall be composed of two members to serve for two years
and two others for a four-year term.  The Council of the Village of Amberley
Village will then appoint two members every two years. It will be the
responsibility of Council to designate one of its members to serve as a
voting member of this committee. The Stormwater Utility Director will serve
as liaison. A majority of all members must be present to constitute a quorum
to do business. Any operating rules contained in bylaws created by this
committee shall be adopted by resolution of Council and shall provide for at
least quarterly meetings.



   (G)   The Advisory Committee will elect, at the first quarterly
meeting of each year, a chairperson to serve for one year. The chairperson
shall, at all times, preserve the order and decorum. The chairperson may
request that any member perform the duties of the chair. The chairperson
shall, with the consent of the Advisory Committee, appoint all committees.



   (H)   The regular quarterly meeting of the Advisory Committee shall
be held at the time and on the dates established by the Advisory Committee
for each calendar year. The committee may, upon motion, dispense with a
previously established regular meeting or change the day or hour of any
meeting whenever the scheduled meeting falls on a holiday or other situations
warrant, providing such action would not conflict with other local or state
ordinances.



   (I)   The duties of the Advisory Committee shall be to review and
promote public awareness of the progress and activities of the utility, to
provide input as to needed projects and assist in prioritizing of those
projects, and to make recommendations regarding proposals for amendments to
this chapter or other provisions of the code which deal with stormwater or
related matters including, but not limited to master plans, rules and
regulations, service charges and appointments or reappointments of any member
of this Committee.



   (J)   The Advisory Committee shall have no authority to bind the
Village or the utility with respect to any matter including easements,
expenditures or contracts.



(Ord. 2002-11, passed 3-10-03; Am. Res. 2004-05, passed 5-10-04)



§ 54.11  STORMWATER FACILITIES.



   (A)   The Utility shall monitor the design, operation, maintenance,
inspection, construction and use of all storm sewers, storm drains, and
stormwater facilities in the village. The utility shall be responsible for
the design and construction of public stormwater facilities in the village
and shall inspect, operate, and maintain them as prescribed in § 54.17.



   (B)   The utility may accept overriding responsibility for permanent
maintenance of stormwater facilities designed to control erosion when the
benefiting area involves two or more property owners. The utility may require
facilities to be designed to reduce maintenance cost and will require
adequate easements.



(Ord. 2002-11, passed 3-10-03)



§ 54.12  EROSION, SILTATION AND SEDIMENTATION.



   The utility shall be responsible for controlling erosion, siltation and
sedimentation that will adversely affect storm sewers, drainage ditches,
watercourses, and other drainage facilities.



(Ord. 2002-11, passed 3-10-03)



§ 54.13  MULTIPLE FUND PROJECTS.



   Where a public improvement is funded by the village and other agencies
or organizations, and storm drainage is not a primary part of that project,
the utility's responsibility for the storm drainage costs shall be in
proportion to the village's share of the total cost of the project unless
otherwise determined by Council.



(Ord. 2002-11, passed 3-10-03)



§ 54.14  PRIVATE FACILITIES.



   (A)   Any owner or possessor of private property upon which
stormwater drainage facilities exist for the purpose of collecting,
conveying, retaining or detaining stormwater within that property and which
are not public facilities pursuant to § 54.15 of this chapter, shall be
responsible for the maintenance of these facilities as required to ensure
proper operation and in accordance with §§ 54.50 and 95.31; maintaining
property in litter-free manner in accordance with §§ 95.26 and 95.42; and
maintaining grass and weeds in accordance with § 95.40.



   (B)   When the utility accepts responsibility for design,
construction, inspection, operation or maintenance of private facilities in
accordance with § 54.11 of this chapter, all expenses incurred therewith
shall be the responsibility of the utility.



   (C)   The village reserves the right to cooperatively work with
property owners in an area to fix a common problem related to stormwater. 
This means that financial arrangements may be agreed to between the village
and property owners which result in an equitable arrangement that benefits
all parties.



(Ord. 2002-11, passed 3-10-03)



§ 54.15  PUBLIC FACILITIES.



   (A)   The utility shall be responsible for stormwater drainage
facilities and watercourses on all streets, boulevards, sidewalks, curbing,
street and other municipal property and public easements, and highway
structures and appurtenances belonging to the village.



   (B)   Where public facilities and watercourses are located in
easements on private property, the owner of the property is responsible for
aesthetic maintenance such as lawn mowing, litter pick-up, and the like. 
The owner shall neither place nor allow structures or plantings that
interfere with the operation and maintenance of such drainage facilities and
watercourses.



(Ord. 2002-11, passed 3-10-03)



§ 54.16  ANCILLARY IMPROVEMENTS.



   The utility may authorize the construction of curbs, pavements,
channels, watercourses, conduits, culverts, or other structures on municipal
property or public easements necessary to properly operate and maintain new
and existing stormwater facilities.



(Ord. 2002-11, passed 3-10-03)



§ 54.17  ROUTINE AND REMEDIAL MAINTENANCE.



   The utility shall provide for inspection and routine maintenance of
facilities that have been accepted for maintenance by the utility. 
Maintenance may include catch basin cleaning, grating and casting repair,
bridge surface drainage systems cleaning, channel clearing, erosion repair,
and other incidentals.



The utility shall provide for remedial maintenance of facilities based upon
the severity of stormwater problems and potential hazard to the public. 
Remedial maintenance of bridge surface drainage systems shall remain the
responsibility of agencies other than the utility.



(Ord. 2002-11, passed 3-10-03)



§ 54.18  LAND AND FACILITIES AFFECTED BY LANDS OUTSIDE THE VILLAGE.



   Where stormwater drains from lands outside the village, facilities
within the village shall be designed in accordance with this chapter as if
the entire drainage area was within the village, as determined by the Village
Engineer.



(Ord. 2002-11, passed 3-10-03)



§ 54.19  RULES AND REGULATIONS.



   (A)   In order to accomplish the purpose of this chapter to protect
the drainage facilities, improvements, and properties owned and maintained by
the village, to secure the best results from the construction, operation, and
maintenance thereof, and to prevent damage and misuse of any of the drainage
facilities, improvements, or properties within the village, the utility shall
utilize existing rules, regulations or codes and may make and enforce
additional rules and regulations that are approved by Council, and are
necessary and reasonable:



      (1)   To prescribe the manner in which storm sewers,
watercourses, channels, and other stormwater facilities are to be designed,
installed, adjusted, used, altered or otherwise changed;



      (2)   To recommend inspection and certain other fees permitted
by this chapter;



      (3)   To prescribe the manner in which such facilities are
operated;



      (4)   To facilitate the enforcement of this chapter;



      (5)   To prescribe the collection procedures and timing of
service charge bills;



      (6)   To protect the municipal stormwater management system,
improvements, and properties controlled by the utility, and to prescribe the
manner of their use by any public or private person; and



      (7)   To protect the public health, safety, and welfare.



   (B)   Stormwater Management Design Manual.  A manual incorporating
all design criteria, procedures, policy statements, sample calculations,
Stormwater Management Code interpretations, and the like, shall be provided
by the Village Engineer and shall be the basis for design, construction and
implementation of all stormwater management systems.  The Village Engineer
shall interpret the requirements of the manual.



(Ord. 2002-11, passed 3-10-03)



§ 54.20  RIGHT OF ENTRY FOR SURVEY, EXAMINATION AND MAINTENANCE.



   After presenting proper credentials and securing permission, the
Director or his or her designees, including contractors and their employees
or consultants and their employees, may enter upon lands within the village
to make surveys and examinations to accomplish the necessary findings to
establish a master plan, for detailed analysis to prepare final plans and
specifications for proposed improvements or for inspection or maintenance of
stormwater facilities.



(Ord. 2002-11, passed 3-10-03)



FINANCE PROVISIONS



§ 54.30  FUNDING.



   Funding for the utility shall include, but not be limited to:



   (A)   Stormwater management service charges;



   (B)   Direct charges.  This charge will be collected from owners,
developers and others for the cost of designing and constructing stormwater
facilities, and for administrative costs and related expenses where the
utility designs and/or constructs or contracts for the construction of such
facilities, including costs associated with abatement procedures undertaken
by the utility;



   (C)   Direct assessment.  This charge will be collected from owners
in localized areas that desire stormwater drainage facilities not considered
a part of the regional development or where an improvement is desired ahead
of the priority status; and



   (D)   Other income obtained from federal, state, local, and private
grants, or revolving funds.



(Ord. 2002-11, passed 3-10-03)



§ 54.31  STORMWATER UTILITY FUND.



   All revenues generated by or on behalf of the utility including
stormwater management service charges and direct charges and interest
earnings on those revenues shall be deposited in the Stormwater Utility Fund
and used exclusively for utility purposes.



(Ord. 2002-11, passed 3-10-03)



§ 54.32  STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SERVICE CHARGE.



   (A)   A stormwater management service charge is imposed on each lot
and/or parcel of land within the village, and the owner thereof, excepting
only streets, boulevards, sidewalks, curbing, street crossings, grade
separations, and other public ways and easements, and highway structures
belonging to the village, state and federal government.  If individual
adjacent lot(s) or parcel(s) are all owned by the same owner, they shall be
considered to be a single parcel for determination of service charges.



   (B)   Public road and freeway rights-of-way shall be exempt from the
stormwater management service charge because they function as part of the
stormwater collection and conveyance system. Private rights-of-way will be
charged as described herein.



   (C)   Properties that have existing stormwater detention facilities,
or those planning such facilities, may have their stormwater management
service charges reduced as determined by the utility, in accordance with
generally accepted engineering standards and practices to more accurately
reflect the contribution to runoff from the property and the level of service
provided to such property.  The detention facilities must be in accord with
the hydrologic, hydraulic, and structural design requirements of the rules
and regulations.  Facilities of a temporary nature will not be allowed a
decrease in their charges.



   (D)   The utility may reduce or waive requirements for an individual
detention basin if a common or regional basin of adequate design is available
or if the utility is reasonably certain one will be constructed and if the
major drainage system from the project area to such common or regional basin
is such that the public health, safety and welfare will not be in jeopardy.



(Ord. 2002-11, passed 3-10-03)



§ 54.33  CLASSIFICATION OF PROPERTY.



   There shall be two classifications of property for determination of the
stormwater management service charge:



   (A)   Class R. One- and two-family residential properties. 
Residential properties shall be categorized by lot or parcel size based on
ownership per § 54.32:




R-1   Under 0.5 acres





R-2   0.5 acres to under 1 acre





R-3   1 acre to under 1.75 acres





R-4   1.75 acres to under 2.5 acres




   (B)   Class C.  All non-residential property and residential
property not included in Class R.  The total area (acres to the nearest
0.01) of each Class C property will be determined as defined in § 54.02.



(Ord. 2002-11, passed 3-10-03)



§ 54.34  STORMWATER DISCHARGE (Q).



   For all Class C properties, the Village Engineer shall determine the
peak rate of stormwater discharge (Q) rounded to the nearest 0.1 cfs
generated by the lot(s) and/or parcel(s) based on § 156.04.  The peak rate
of stormwater discharge will be based on an intensity (i) for a 10-year
rainfall frequency.  The intensity is determined by the formula i = 170/(tc
+ 23).  Time of concentration (tc) shall be defined in § 156.04 (B)(2).



(Ord. 2002-11, passed 3-10-03)



§ 54.35  RATES.



   The utility is directed to prepare a list of all lots and parcels
within the village and assign a classification as set forth in § 54.33 to
each.  The utility shall report, to the Village Manager, any applications of
the provisions of §§ 54.32 through 54.34, which the utility considers
unjust or inequitable, and the matter shall be resolved in accordance with
the provisions of § 54.37.  The rates for the two classes of property shall
be as follows:



   (A)   Class R. The annual stormwater management service charge for
Class R lot(s) and parcel(s) shall be in accordance with the following
schedule:




   R-1   $53





   R-2   $105





   R-3   $166





   R-4   $230




   (B)   Class C. The annual stormwater management service charge for
Class C lots and parcels shall be calculated as follows, but shall not be
less than the annual stormwater management service charge for Class R-4
lot(s) and parcel(s):



      (Q) X ($69) =   $ Annual Stormwater Management Service Charge



(Ord. 2002-11, passed 3-10-03; Am. Ord. 2015-5, passed 7-6-15)



§ 54.36  COLLECTION OF STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SERVICE CHARGE.



   The stormwater management service charge shall be paid, by the owner of
each lot or parcel which is subject to this charge, on a periodic basis in
accordance with regulations established herein.



(Ord. 2002-11, passed 3-10-03)



§ 54.37  ADJUSTMENT OF CHARGE, APPEAL.



   (A)   Anytime the runoff situation on a Class C parcel of property
changes, the stormwater utility reserves the right to correspondingly adjust
the stormwater management service charge.



   (B)   Persons who consider the adjusted charges applicable to their
lot or parcel to be unjust or inequitable may apply, within 30 days after
receipt of the charge, to the Council for adjustment thereof, stating in
writing the grounds for the proposed adjustment according to procedures and
requirements established by the Village Manager.



   (C)   The Council shall, within 30 days, cause appropriate
investigation thereof and determine whether an adjustment of the charges for
any such lot or parcel is necessary to provide for the just and equitable
application of the stormwater management service charge, and adjust such
charge if appropriate.



(Ord. 2002-11, passed 3-10-03)



§ 54.38  DELINQUENT CHARGES.



   (A)   All delinquent fees shall be assessed as provided by the
utility, or as provided by the utility's contract billing agent, if any.



   (B)   Unpaid charges shall constitute a lien upon the real property
affected from the date charges are incurred.



   (C)   Charges which remain unpaid for a period of two quarters are
subject to the filing of a suit by the village to collect the unpaid charges.



   (D)   For delinquent charges, a special assessment may be filed with
the Auditor of Hamilton County, Ohio as a lien upon the real property.



   (E)   In addition to other remedies provided for in this section, if
charges remain unpaid the Greater Cincinnati Water Works may utilize any
remedies it may have for the failure to pay for water, sewage or stormwater
services, including the termination of water service.



(Ord. 2002-11, passed 3-10-03)  Penalty, see § 54.99



ABATEMENT PROCEDURES



§ 54.50  NOTICE TO CORRECT IMPROPER DRAINAGE.



   (A)   Whenever the utility shall find that a tract of land is
inadequately drained, or that there is an obstruction to a culvert, or water
course that interferes with water naturally flowing therein or that such
culvert, storm sewer or watercourse is of insufficient capacity to reasonably
accommodate the flow of water, as required by this chapter, the utility shall
notify the owner or person having possession, charge, or management of such
land to remove the obstruction or provide adequate drainage.  Such notice
shall be served on such persons by personal delivery, by registered mail at
the last known place of residence, or by posting on the premises.



   (B)   The owner must comply with the utility's orders within the
time specified and not to exceed 30 days.  Failure to comply with such order
shall constitute an unlawful act.  Each additional day thereafter during
which the owner fails to carry out the order of the utility shall constitute
a separate offense.



      (1)   In any case where a condition described in division (A)
exists for more than 30 days after service of notice, the Village Manager may
direct the owner to fill or drain such land, remove any obstruction and, if
necessary, enlarge the culverts, drains, or watercourses to meet the
requirements of this chapter.



      (2)   In the event an owner fails or refuses to comply with
the Village Manager's directive, the utility may provide for the performance
of the required work and charge the owner the abatement costs.



   (C)   Failure of the village to observe or recognize hazardous or
unsightly conditions or to recommend denial of a permit under other
provisions of the code shall not relieve the developer from the
responsibility for the condition or damage resulting therefrom, and shall not
result in the village, its officers or agents being responsible for any
condition or damage resulting therefrom.



   (D)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as authorizing any
person to maintain a private or public nuisance on his property, and
compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall not be a defense in any
action to abate such nuisance.



   (E)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to prevent
immediate action by the utility in emergency situations.  In case of an
emergency, the utility may direct that action be taken immediately to correct
the condition or abate the activity to protect the public health, safety, and
welfare. The utility may perform the required work and charge the owner the
abatement costs.



(Ord. 2002-11, passed 3-10-03)  Penalty, see § 54.99



§ 54.51  ABATEMENT COSTS.



   (A)   The utility shall account for all costs associated with an
emergency or abatement including, but not limited to, administration,
notification, inspection, serving of papers or documents, legal counsel,
force account labor, enforcement, operational services, and outside
contracted services.  These costs shall be billed at the discretion of the
Village Manager.



   (B)   This section shall not be construed to relieve the owner of
any penalties prescribed by other sections of this chapter.



(Ord. 2002-11, passed 3-10-03)  Penalty, see § 54.99



APPEALS AND AMENDMENTS



§ 54.60  APPEALS BOARD.



   (A)   Council shall serve as the Appeals Board to hear and determine
any appeal filed under § 54.62 of this chapter.



   (B)   The Appeals Board shall, in harmony with the general purpose
of this chapter and to secure the public health, safety and welfare, have the
power to affirm, modify, or revoke any notice or order and may grant an
extension of time for the performance of any act required by this chapter, or
may grant a variance, except as otherwise excluded herein, where there is
practical difficulty or undue hardship connected with the performance of such
notice or order, and its decision shall be final.



(Ord. 2002-11, passed 3-10-03)



§ 54.61  VARIANCES AND APPEALS.



   (A)   Any person may appeal decisions or interpretations of the
Village Manager, or his or her designee, issued in connection with the
enforcement of any provisions of this chapter or request variances therefrom,
provided that such person shall file in the office of the Village Manager,
along with the fees established by Council for appeals and variances, a
written petition to the Appeals Board as provided below.



   (B)   The Appeals Board.



      (1)   The Appeals Board shall hear and determine appeals from
or variances to this chapter and, upon receipt of a petition setting forth
the requirements of § 54.62 and the required fee(s), the Appeals Board shall
set a time and place for a public hearing and shall give the petitioner
written notice thereof. At the hearing, the petitioner shall be given an
opportunity to be heard and show cause why any decision, interpretation or
any item appearing on a notice or order should be modified or denied or a
variance granted.



      (2)   After a hearing, the Appeals Board shall sustain, modify
or deny any item appealed or grant a variance by majority vote, depending on
its findings as to whether the provisions of this chapter have been complied
with, and the petitioner and the Village Manager shall be notified in writing
of such findings.



The proceedings at such hearings, including the findings and decision of the
Appeals Board and reasons therefor, shall be summarized and reduced to
writing and entered as a matter of public record in the office of the Village
Manager.  The record shall also include a copy of every notice, order or
variance issued in connection with the matter.



      (3)   The failure of the petitioner or his representative to
appear and state his case at any hearing shall have the same effect as if no
petition had been filed.



      (4)   Filing fees required by this section shall be in
addition to the payment of the permits and inspection fees and any other fee
which thereafter may occur, and no portion of such filing fee shall be
refunded whatever the outcome of the appeal unless such petition shall have
been withdrawn prior to the date set for such hearing.



(Ord. 2002-11, passed 3-10-03)



§ 54.62  CONTENTS OF PETITION.



   (A)   The complainant shall set forth in the petition for appeal,
the interpretation, ruling or order appealed from, and the related provisions
of this chapter or related laws or ordinances, and shall state wherein the
interpretation, ruling, or order is erroneous.  If the appeal is a request
for variance, the petition shall point out the provision or provisions from
which the variance is sought and how the request satisfies the requirements
of this section.



   (B)   Petitions to the Appeals Board, in appeals filed in accordance
with § 54.61(A), may only be based on one of the following grounds:



      (1)   The interpretation, ruling, or order is erroneous or
constitutes an erroneous application of the particular provisions of this
chapter or other related laws or ordinances pertaining to stormwater
management and finance, or is otherwise contrary to law; or



      (2)   A variance is necessary and feasible and meets all of
the following conditions:



         (a)   Good and sufficient cause based on an unreasonable
burden or hardship has been proven;



         (b)   The degree of variance is the minimum necessary to
afford relief from the unreasonable burden or hardship imposed by this
chapter or standards, specifications, requirements, regulations, and
procedures adopted pursuant to this chapter;



         (c)   The variance may be granted without defeating the
public health, safety, and welfare purposes and intent of this chapter or
related laws or ordinances pertaining to stormwater management and finance.



(Ord. 2002-11, passed 3-10-03)



§ 54.63  AMENDMENTS.



   (A)   Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or
good stormwater management practice requires, an amendment, supplement, or
change may be considered by Council.  Amendments may be initiated by
resolution of Council, by motion of the Planning Commission or by the filing
of an application in the office of the Village Manager by one or more of the
owners or lessees of property within the village affected by the proposed
amendment or supplement.



   (B)   Applications for any change, amendment, or supplement shall be
submitted and shall be accompanied by such data and information, as to assure
the fullest practicable presentation of facts for the permanent record. 
Each such application shall be verified by at least one of the owners or
lessees of property within the village, attesting to the truth and
correctness of all facts and information presented with the applications. 
Applications for amendments initiated by the Planning Commission shall be
accompanied by its motion pertaining to such proposed amendment.  An
application initiated by Council shall be accompanied by its resolution
pertaining thereto.



      (1)   Planning Commission action.



         (a)   The Planning Commission shall within 30 days after
receipt of application and the proposal, recommend the approval or denial of
the proposed amendment or approval of some modification thereof and shall
submit such recommendation together with such application and text pertaining
thereto to Council;



         (b)   Council may, on its own resolution, extend the
time limitation for specific periods of time when it considers the extension
is warranted.



      (2)   Council action.  Within two regular Council meeting
dates after receipt of the application or, when required, receipt of the
Planning Commission recommendations, Council shall either adopt or deny the
proposed amendment or adopt some modification thereof.



   (C)   Appeal to Council decision. Any person adversely affected by
an order of Council adopting, amending, or rescinding any portion of this
chapter may appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Hamilton County on the
ground that Council failed to comply with the law in adopting, amending,
rescinding or publishing such regulation, or that the regulation, as adopted
or amended by Council is unreasonable or unlawful, or that the revision of
the regulation was unreasonable or unlawful.



   (D)   Fee.  Each application for amendment to this chapter, except
those initiated by the Planning Commission or Council, shall be accompanied
by a fee as established by Council.



(Ord. 2002-11, passed 3-10-03)



LEGAL ISSUES



§ 54.70  FLOODING, LIABILITY.



   Floods from stormwater runoff may occasionally occur which exceed the
capacity of storm drainage facilities constructed, operated, or maintained by
funds made available under this chapter.  This chapter does not imply that
property subject to the fees and charges established herein will always be
free from stormwater flooding or flood damage, or that stormwater systems
capable of handling all storm events can be cost effectively constructed,
operated, or maintained.  Nor shall this chapter create a liability on the
part of, or cause of action against, the village or any officer or employee
thereof for any flood damage that may result from such storms or the runoff
thereof.  Nor does this chapter purport to reduce the need or the necessity
for obtaining flood insurance.



(Ord. 2002-11, passed 3-10-03)



§ 54.98  SEVERABILITY.



   If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter
is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional by the decision of
any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions of this chapter.  Council declares that
it would have passed this chapter and each section, subsection, sentence,
clause and phrase hereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more of the
sections, subsections, sentences, clauses or phrases hereof be declared
invalid or unconstitutional.



(Ord. 2002-11, passed 3-10-03)



§ 54.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a minor misdemeanor and subject to a
fine of $150. Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.



(Ord. 2002-11, passed 3-10-03; Am. Ord. 2004-17, passed 7-12-04)



TITLE VII: TRAFFIC CODE



      Chapter




         70.   GENERAL PROVISIONS





         71.   LICENSING PROVISIONS





         72.   TRAFFIC RULES





         73.   MOTOR VEHICLE CRIMES





         74.   EQUIPMENT AND LOADS





         75.   BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES AND OFF-ROAD VEHICLES





         76.   PARKING REGULATIONS





         77.   TRAFFIC SCHEDULES




CHAPTER 70: GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



General



   70.01   Scope of title



   70.02   Definitions



   70.03   Compliance with order of police officer



   70.04   Public employees to comply with traffic rules



   70.05   Exceptions; workmen



   70.051   Emergency, public safety and coroner vehicles exempt



   70.06   Excavating highway



   70.07   Emergency vehicles to proceed cautiously



   70.08   Animals, pushcarts upon roadways



   70.09   Use of freeways



   70.10   Use of private property for vehicular travel



   70.11   Authority of Village Manager



   70.12   Names of persons damaging real property by operation of
vehicle to be provided to owner



   70.13   Removal of vehicles after accidents



Traffic-Control Devices



   70.20   Standards for traffic-control devices



   70.21   Obeying traffic-control devices



   70.22   Signal lights



   70.221   Signals that do not clearly assign right-of-way



   70.23   Pedestrian signals



   70.24   Signals over reversible lanes



   70.25   Unauthorized signs, signals prohibited



   70.26   Alteration, removal of signals prohibited



   70.27   Signal preemption devices; prohibitions



 



   70.99   Penalty



GENERAL



§ 70.01  SCOPE OF TITLE.



   (A)   Chapters 70 through 77 of this code shall be known as the
"Traffic Code."  Where a section of the Traffic Code is followed by a
reference to the Revised Code, such reference indicates that the section is
analogous or similar to such Revised Code section.



   (B)   The provisions of the Traffic Code are intended to apply to
all traffic and to all operators not specifically excepted.



   (C)   All provisions relative to the operation, parking or movement
of vehicles or animals, and to the movement of pedestrians, shall apply on
all the public ways of the village except as specifically limited.



('69 Code, § 70.01)



§ 70.02  DEFINITIONS.



   Except as otherwise provided, the definitions set forth in R.C. §
4501.01 shall apply to this Title and the penal laws of the municipality. For
the purpose of this Title, the following definitions shall apply unless the
context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR. Every self- propelled vehicle designed or used
for drawing other vehicles or wheeled machinery, but having no provision for
carrying loads independently of such other vehicles, and used principally for
agricultural purposes.



   ALLEY. A street or highway intended to provide access to the rear or
side of lots or buildings in urban districts, and not intended for the
purpose of through vehicular traffic, and any street or highway that has been
declared an “alley” by the Legislative Authority of the municipality in
which the street or highway is located.



   ARTERIAL STREET. Any United States or state numbered route,
controlled-access highway, or other major radial or circumferential street or
highway designated by local authorities within their respective jurisdictions
as part of a major arterial system of streets or highways.



   BEACON. A highway traffic signal with one or more signal sections that
operate in a flashing mode.



   BICYCLE. Every device, other than a device that is designed solely for
use as a play vehicle by a child, that is propelled solely by human power
upon which a person may ride, and that has two or more wheels, any of which
is more than 14 inches in diameter.



   BUS. Every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than nine
passengers, and used for the transportation of persons other than in a
ridesharing arrangement, and every motor vehicle, automobile for hire, or
funeral car, other than a taxicab or motor vehicle used in a ridesharing
arrangement, designed and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation.



   BUSINESS DISTRICT. The territory fronting upon a street or highway,
including the street or highway, between successive intersections within the
municipality, where 50% or more of the frontage between successive
intersections is occupied by buildings in use for business, or within or
outside the municipality where 50% or more of the frontage for a distance of
300 feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business, and the
character of the territory is indicated by official traffic-control devices.



   CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE. A motor vehicle that is designed to carry nine
or fewer passengers and is operated for hire pursuant to a prearranged
contract for the transportation of passengers on public roads and highways
along a route under the control of the person hiring the vehicle and not over
a defined and regular route. “Prearranged contract” means an agreement,
made in advance of boarding, to provide transportation from a specific
location in an chauffeured limousine. The term does not include any vehicle
that is used exclusively in the business of funeral directing.



(R.C. § 4501.01(LL))



   CHILD DAY-CARE CENTER. Has the same meaning as set forth in R.C. §
5104.01.



   COMMERCIAL TRACTOR. Every motor vehicle having motive power designed or
used for drawing other vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry any load
thereon, or designed or used for drawing other vehicles while carrying a
portion of the other vehicles, or the load thereon, or both.



   CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY. Every street or highway in respect to which
owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right
or access to or from the same except at certain points only and in a manner
as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over the
street or highway.



   CROSSWALK.



      (1)   That part of a roadway at intersections ordinarily
included within the real or projected prolongation of property lines and curb
lines or, in the absence of curbs, the edges of the traversable roadway;



      (2)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or
elsewhere, distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other
markings on the surface;



      (3)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this
definition, there shall not be a crosswalk where the Legislative Authority
has placed signs indicating no crossing.



   DRIVER. Any person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.



   EMERGENCY VEHICLE. Emergency vehicles of municipal, township or county
departments or public utility corporations, when identified as such as
required by law, the Director of Public Safety, or local authorities, and
motor vehicles when commandeered by a police officer.



   EXPLOSIVES. Any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is
intended for the purpose of producing an explosion that contains any
oxidizing and combustible units or other ingredients in such proportions,
quantities, or packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion,
by percussion, or by a detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may
cause a sudden generation of highly heated gases, such that the resultant
gaseous pressures are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous
objects, or of destroying life or limb. Manufactured articles shall not be
held to be explosives when the individual units contain explosives in limited
quantities of such nature or in such packing that it is impossible to procure
a simultaneous or a destructive explosion of the units, to the injury of
life, limb, or property by fire, friction, concussion, percussion, or by a
detonator, such as fixed ammunition for small arms, firecrackers, or safety
fuse matches.



   EXPRESSWAY. A divided arterial highway for through traffic with full or
partial control of access with an excess of 50% of all crossroads separated
in grade.



   FLAMMABLE LIQUID. Any liquid which has a flash point of 70°F or less,
as determined by a tagliabue or equivalent closed cup test device.



   FREEWAY. A divided multi-lane highway for through traffic with
crossroads separated in grade and with full control of access.



   FUNERAL ESCORT VEHICLE. Any motor vehicle, including a funeral hearse,
while used to facilitate the movement of a funeral procession.



   GROSS WEIGHT. The weight of a vehicle plus the weight of any load
thereon.



   HIGHWAY. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way open
to the use of the public as a thoroughfare for purposes of vehicular travel.



   HIGHWAY MAINTENANCE VEHICLE. A vehicle used in snow and ice removal or
road surface maintenance, including a snow plow, traffic line striper, road
sweeper, mowing machine, asphalt distributing vehicle, or other such vehicle
designed for use in specific highway maintenance activities.



   HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SIGNAL. A power-operated traffic control device by
which traffic is warned or directed to take some specific action. The term
does not include a power-operated sign, steadily illuminated pavement marker,
warning light, or steady burning electric lamp.



   HYBRID BEACON. A type of beacon that is intentionally placed in a dark
mode between periods of operation where no indications are displayed and,
when in operation, displays both steady and flashing traffic control signal
indications.



   INTERSECTION.



      (1)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection
of the lateral curb lines, or, if none, the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two highways that join one another at, or approximately at, right
angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways
that join at any other angle might come into conflict. The junction of an
alley or driveway with a roadway or highway does not constitute an
intersection unless the roadway or highway at the junction is controlled by a
traffic control device.



      (2)   If a highway includes two roadways that are 30 feet or
more apart, then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an
intersecting highway constitutes a separate intersection. If both
intersecting highways include two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every
crossing of any two roadways of such highways constitutes a separate
intersection.



      (3)   At a location controlled by a traffic control signal,
regardless of the distance between the separate intersections as described in
division (2) of this definition:



         (a)   If a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk has not
been designated on the roadway within the median between the separate
intersections, the two intersections and the roadway and median constitute
one intersection.



         (b)   Where a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk line
is designated on the roadway on the intersection approach, the area within
the crosswalk and any area beyond the designated stop line or yield line
constitute part of the intersection.



         (c)   Where a crosswalk is designated on a roadway on
the departure from the intersection, the intersection includes the area that
extends to the far side of the crosswalk.



   LANED HIGHWAY. A highway the roadway of which is divided into two or
more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.



   LOCAL AUTHORITIES. Every county, municipal, and other local board or
body having authority to adopt police regulations under the Constitution and
laws of this state.



   MEDIAN. The area between two roadways of a divided highway, measured
from edge of traveled way to edge of traveled way, but excluding turn lanes.
The width of a median may be different between intersections, between
interchanges, and at opposite approaches of the same intersection.



   MOTOR VEHICLE. Every vehicle propelled or drawn by power other than
muscular power or power collected from overhead electric trolley wires,
except motorized bicycles, road rollers, traction engines, power shovels,
power cranes and other equipment used in construction work, and not designed
for or employed in general highway transportation, hole-digging machinery,
well- drilling machinery, ditch-digging machinery, farm machinery, and
trailers designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of
storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a
street or highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of
25 miles per hour or less.



   MOTORCYCLE. Every motor vehicle, other than a tractor, having a seat or
saddle for the use of the operator and designed to travel on not more than
three wheels in contact with the ground, including but not limited to motor
vehicles known as “motor-driven cycle”, “motor scooter”,
“autocycle”, “cab-enclosed motorcycle”, or “motorcycle” without
regard to weight or brake horsepower.



   MOTORIZED BICYCLE or MOPED. Any vehicle having either two tandem wheels
or one wheel in the front and two wheels in the rear, that may be pedaled,
and that is equipped with a helper motor of not more than 50 cubic
centimeters piston displacement that produces not more than one brake
horsepower, and is capable of propelling the vehicle at a speed of not
greater than 20 miles per hour on a level surface.



   MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR. Any self- propelled vehicle designed for, and
used by, a person with a disability and that is incapable of a speed in
excess of eight miles per hour.



   MULTI-WHEEL AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR. A type of agricultural tractor that
has two or more wheels or tires on each side of one axle at the rear of the
tractor, is designed or used for drawing other vehicles or wheeled machinery,
has no provision for carrying loads independently of the drawn vehicles or
machinery, and is used principally for agricultural purposes.



   OPERATE. To cause or have caused movement of a vehicle.



   OPERATOR. Any person who drives or is in actual physical control of a
vehicle.



   PARKED or PARKING. The standing of a vehicle upon a street, road,
alley, highway or public ground, whether accompanied or unaccompanied by a
driver, but does not include the temporary standing of a vehicle for the
purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or loading merchandise or
passengers.



   PEDESTRIAN. Any natural person afoot.  The term includes a personal
delivery device as defined in R.C. § 4511.513 unless the context clearly
suggests otherwise.



   PERSON. Every natural person, firm, partnership, association or
corporation.



   POLE TRAILER. Every trailer or semitrailer attached to the towing
vehicle by means of a reach, pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to
the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregular
shaped loads such as poles, pipes, or structural members capable, generally,
of sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections.



   POLICE OFFICER. Every officer authorized to direct or regulate traffic,
or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.



   PREDICATE MOTOR VEHICLE OR TRAFFIC OFFENSE. Any of the following:



      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.03, 4511.051, 4511.12,
4511.132, 4511.16, 4511.20, 4511.201, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.213, 4511.214,
4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30,
4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38,
4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41, 4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44,
4511.441, 4511.451, 4511.452, 4511.46, 4511.47, 4511.48, 4511.481, 4511.49,
4511.50, 4511.511, 4511.53, 4511.54, 4511.55, 4511.56, 4511.57, 4511.58,
4511.59, 4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.64, 4511.66, 4511.661, 4511.68, 4511.70,
4511.701, 4511.71, 4511.711, 4511.712, 4511.713, 4511.72, 4511.73, 4511.763,
4511.771, 4511.78, or 4511.84;



      (2)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.17(A)(2), 4511.51(A) through
(D), or 4511.74(A);



      (3)   A violation of any provision of R.C. §§ 4511.01
through 4511.76 for which no penalty otherwise is provided in the section
that contains the provision violated;



      (4)   A violation of a municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to any section or provision set forth or described
in division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.



   PRIVATE ROAD OPEN TO PUBLIC TRAVEL. A private toll road or road,
including any adjacent sidewalks that generally run parallel to the road,
within a shopping center, airport, sports arena, or other similar business or
recreation facility that is privately owned but where the public is allowed
to travel without access restrictions. The term includes a gated toll road
but does not include a road within a private gated property where access is
restricted at all times, a parking area, a driving aisle within a parking
area, or a private grade crossing.



   PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY. Every way or place in private ownership used
for vehicular travel by the owner, and those having express or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons.



   PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. Any of the following:



      (1)   Ambulances, including private ambulance companies under
contract to a municipality, township, or county, and private ambulances and
nontransport vehicles bearing license plates issued under R.C. § 4503.49;



      (2)   Motor vehicles used by public law enforcement officers
or other persons sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state;



      (3)   Any motor vehicle when properly identified as required
by the Director of Public Safety, when used in response to fire emergency
calls or to provide emergency medical service to ill or injured persons, and
when operated by a duly qualified person who is a member of a volunteer
rescue service or a volunteer fire department, and who is on duty pursuant to
the rules or directives of that service. The State Fire Marshal shall be
designated by the Director of Public Safety as the certifying agency for all
public safety vehicles described herein;



      (4)   Vehicles used by fire departments, including motor
vehicles when used by volunteer firefighters responding to emergency calls in
the fire department service when identified as required by the Director of
Public Safety;



      (5)   Any vehicle used to transport or provide emergency
medical service to an ill or injured person, when certified as a public
safety vehicle, shall be considered such a vehicle when transporting an ill
or injured person to a hospital, regardless of whether such vehicle has
already passed a hospital;



      (6)   Vehicles used by the Motor Carrier Enforcement Unit for
the enforcement of orders and rules of the Public Utilities Commission as
specified in R.C. § 5503.34.



   RAILROAD. A carrier of persons or property operating upon rails placed
principally on a private right-of-way.



   RAILROAD SIGN OR SIGNAL. Any sign, signal, or device erected by
authority of a public body or official or by a railroad, and intended to give
notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train.



   RAILROAD TRAIN. A steam engine or an electric or other motor, with or
without cars coupled thereto, operated by a railroad.



   RESIDENCE DISTRICT. The territory, not comprising a business district,
fronting on a street or highway, including the street or highway, where, for
a distance of 300 feet or more, the frontage is improved with residences or
residences and buildings in use for business.



   RIDESHARING ARRANGEMENT. Includes the transportation of persons in a
motor vehicle where the transportation is incidental to another purpose of a
volunteer driver, and includes arrangements known as carpools, vanpools, and
buspools.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY. Either of the following, as the context requires:



      (1)   The right of a vehicle or pedestrian to proceed
uninterruptedly in a lawful manner in the direction in which it, he or she is
moving, in preference to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching from a
different direction into its, his or her path;



      (2)   A general term denoting land, property, or the interest
therein, usually in the configuration of a strip, acquired for or devoted to
transportation purposes. When used in this context, “right-of-way”
includes the roadway, shoulders or berm, ditch, and slopes extending to the
right-of- way limits under the control of the state or local authority.



   ROAD SERVICE VEHICLE. Means wreckers, utility repair vehicles, and
state, county, and municipal service vehicles equipped with visual signals by
means of flashing, rotating, or oscillating lights.



   ROADWAY. That portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel, except the berm or shoulder. If a highway includes
two or more separate roadways, the term means any roadway separately, but not
all the roadways collectively.



   RURAL MAIL DELIVERY VEHICLE. Every vehicle used to deliver United
States mail on a rural mail delivery route.



   SAFETY ZONE. The area or space officially set apart within a roadway
for the exclusive use of pedestrians, and protected or marked or indicated by
adequate signs so as to be plainly visible at all times.



   SCHOOL BUS. Every bus designed for carrying more than nine passengers
which is owned by a public, private, or governmental agency or institution of
learning, and operated for the transportation of children to or from a school
session or a school function, or owned by a private person and operated for
compensation for the transportation of children to or from a school session
or a school function; provided the term does not include a bus operated by a
municipally owned transportation system, a mass transit company operating
exclusively within the territorial limits of a municipality, or within such
limits and the territorial limits of municipalities immediately contiguous to
the municipality, nor a common passenger carrier certified by the Public
Utilities Commission unless the bus is devoted exclusively to the
transportation of children to and from a school session or a school function,
and the term does not include a van or bus used by a licensed child day-care
center or Type A Family Day-Care Home to transport children from the child
day-care center or Type A Family Day-Care Home to a school if the van or bus
does not have more than 15 children in the van or bus at any time.



   SEMITRAILER. Every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or
property with another and separate motor vehicle so that in operation a part
of its own weight or that of its load, or both, rests upon and is carried by
another vehicle.



   SHARED-USE PATH. A bikeway outside the traveled way and physically
separated from motorized vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier and
either within the highway right-of-way or within an independent alignment. A
shared-use path also may be used by pedestrians, including skaters, joggers,
users of manual and motorized wheelchairs, and other authorized motorized and
non-motorized users.



   SIDEWALK. That portion of a street between the curb lines, or the
lateral line of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for the
use of pedestrians.



   STANDING. When prohibited, means any halting of a vehicle, even
momentarily, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device.



   STATE HIGHWAY. A highway under the jurisdiction of the Department of
Transportation, outside the limits of municipalities, provided that the
authority conferred upon the Director of Transportation in R.C. § 5511.01 to
erect state highway route markers and signs directing traffic shall not be
modified by R.C. §§ 4511.01 through 4511.79 and 4511.99.



   STATE ROUTE. Every highway which is designated with an official state
route number and so marked.



   STOP. When required, means a complete cessation of movement.



   STOP INTERSECTION. Any intersection at one or more entrances of which
stop signs are erected.



   STOPPING. When prohibited, means any halting of a vehicle, even
momentarily, except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic or in
compliance with the directions of a police officer or traffic control device.



   STREET. The entire width between the boundary lines of every way open
to the use of the public as a thoroughfare for purposes of vehicular travel.



   THROUGH HIGHWAY. Every street or highway as provided in R.C. §
4511.65, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   THRUWAY. A through highway whose entire roadway is reserved for through
traffic and on which roadway parking is prohibited.



   TRAFFIC. Pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars,
and other devices, either singly or together, while using for purposes of
travel any highway or private road open to public travel.



   TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE. A flagger, sign, signal, marking, or other
device used to regulate, warn, or guide traffic, placed on, over, or adjacent
to a street, highway, private road open to public travel, pedestrian
facility, or shared-use path by authority of a public agency or official
having jurisdiction, or, in the case of a private road open to public travel,
by authority of the private owner or private official having jurisdiction.



   TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL. Any highway traffic signal by which traffic is
alternately directed to stop and permitted to proceed.



   TRAILER. Every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or
property wholly on its own structure, and for being drawn by a motor vehicle,
including any vehicle when formed by or operated as a combination of a
semitrailer and a vehicle of the dolly type, such as that commonly known as a
trailer dolly, a vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or
agricultural production materials between a local place of storage or supply
and the farm when drawn or towed on a street or highway at a speed greater
than 25 miles per hour and a vehicle designed and used exclusively to
transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina, or in and around a
marina, when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a distance of more
than ten miles or at a speed of more than 25 miles per hour.



   TRUCK. Every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers, designed
and used to carry property.



   TYPE A FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME. Has the same meaning as set forth in R.C.
§ 5104.01.



   URBAN DISTRICT. The territory contiguous to and including any street or
highway which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry, or
dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for a distance of
one-quarter of a mile or more, and the character of the territory is
indicated by official traffic-control devices.



   VEHICLE. Every device, including a motorized bicycle, in, upon, or by
which any person or property may be transported or drawn upon a highway,
except that the term does not include any motorized wheelchair, any electric
personal assistive mobility device, any personal delivery device as defined
in R.C. § 4511.513, any device that is moved by power collected from
overhead electric trolley wires or that is used exclusively upon stationary
rails or tracks, or any device, other than a bicycle, that is moved by human
power.



   WASTE COLLECTION VEHICLE.  A vehicle used in the collection of
garbage, refuse, trash, or recyclable materials.



(R.C. § 4511.01)  ('69 Code, §§ 70.02, 72.02)



§ 70.03  COMPLIANCE WITH ORDER OF POLICE OFFICER.



   (A)   No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or
direction of any police officer invested with authority to direct, control,
or regulate traffic.



   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle so as willfully to
elude or flee a police officer after receiving a visible or audible signal
from a police officer to bring the person's motor vehicle to a stop.



   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to
comply with an order or signal of a police officer.



      (2)   A violation of division (A) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (3)   Except as provided in divisions (C)(4) and (5) of this
section, a violation of division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.



      (4)   Except as provided in division (C)(5) of this section, a
violation of division (B) of this section is a felony and shall be prosecuted
under appropriate state law if the jury or judge as trier of fact finds by
proof beyond a reasonable doubt that in committing the offense, the offender
was fleeing immediately after the commission of a felony.



      (5)   (a)   A violation of division (B) of this section is
a felony and shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the jury or
judge as trier of fact finds any of the following by proof beyond a
reasonable doubt:



            1.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the
offender was a proximate cause of serious physical harm to persons or
property.



            2.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the
offender caused a substantial risk of serious physical harm to persons or
property.



         (b)   If a police officer pursues an offender who is
violating division (B) of this section and division (C)(5)(a) of this section
applies, the sentencing court, in determining the seriousness of an
offender's conduct for purposes of sentencing the offender for a violation of
division (B) of this section, shall consider, along with the factors set
forth in R.C. §§ 2929.12 and 2929.13 that are required to be considered,
all of the following:



            1.   The duration of the pursuit;



            2.   The distance of the pursuit;



            3.   The rate of speed at which the offender
operated the motor vehicle during the pursuit;



            4.   Whether the offender failed to stop for
traffic lights or stop signs during the pursuit;



            5.   The number of traffic lights or stop signs
for which the offender failed to stop during the pursuit;



            6.   Whether the offender operated the motor
vehicle during the pursuit without lighted lights during a time when lighted
lights are required;



            7.   Whether the offender committed a moving
violation during the pursuit;



            8.   The number of moving violations the offender
committed during the pursuit;



            9.   Any other relevant factors indicating that
the offender's conduct is more serious than conduct normally constituting the
offense.



   (D)   In addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of
division (A) of this section or a misdemeanor violation of division (B) of
this section, the court shall impose a class five suspension from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). If the offender previously has been found
guilty of an offense under this section or under R.C. § 2921.331 or any
other substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, in addition to any other
sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall impose a class one
suspension as described in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(1). The court may grant limited
driving privileges to the offender on a suspension imposed for a misdemeanor
violation of this section as set forth in R.C. § 4510.021. No judge shall
suspend any portion of the suspension under a class one suspension of an
offender’s license, permit, or privilege required by this division.



   (E)   As used in this section:



      MOVING VIOLATION has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2743.70.



      POLICE OFFICER has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.



(R.C. § 2921.331(A) - (C), (E), (F))



Cross-reference:



   Resisting arrest, see § 136.08



§ 70.04  PUBLIC EMPLOYEES TO COMPLY WITH TRAFFIC RULES.



   The provisions of this Traffic Code shall apply to the driver of any
vehicle owner by or used in the service of the federal government, this
state, county, or municipality, and it shall be unlawful for any such driver
to violate any of the provisions of this traffic code, except as otherwise
permitted in this traffic code or by state statute.



('69 Code, § 70.05)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.05  EXCEPTIONS; WORKMEN.



   (A)   The provisions of this traffic code, except for §§ 73.01 and
73.02, do not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles, and other equipment
while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a highway within an area
designated by traffic-control devices, but apply to those persons and
vehicles when traveling to or from such work.



('69 Code, § 70.04)



   (B)   The driver of a highway maintenance vehicle owned by this
state or any political subdivision of this state, while the driver is engaged
in the performance of official duties upon a street or highway, provided the
highway maintenance vehicle is equipped with flashing lights and such other
markings as are required by law and such lights are in operation when the
driver and vehicle are so engaged, shall be exempt from criminal prosecution
for violations of R.C. §§ 4511.22, 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28,
4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.66, 4513.02, and 5577.01 to 5577.09,
and any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (C)   (1)   This section does not exempt a driver of a highway
maintenance vehicle from civil liability arising from a violation of R.C.
§§ 4511.22, 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.33,
4511.35, 4511.66, or 4513.02 or R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



      (2)   This section does not exempt a driver of a vehicle who
is not a state employee and who is engaged in the transport of highway
maintenance equipment from criminal liability for a violation of R.C. §§
5577.01 through 5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (D)   As used in this section, ENGAGED IN THE PERFORMANCE OF
OFFICIAL DUTIES includes driving a highway maintenance vehicle to and from
the manufacturer or vehicle maintenance provider and transporting a highway
maintenance vehicle, equipment, or materials to and from a work location.



(R.C. § 4511.04)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.051  EMERGENCY, PUBLIC SAFETY AND CORONER VEHICLES EXEMPT.



   (A)   The provisions of R.C. §§ 4511.12, 4511.13, 4511.131,
4511.132, 4511.14, 4511.202, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25,
4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33,
4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41,
4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.57, 4511.58,
4511.59, 4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.62, 4511.66, 4511.68, 4511.681, and 4511.69,
and any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, do not apply to the
driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle if the emergency
vehicle or public safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is
equipped with and displaying at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating
light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet
to the front of the vehicle and if the driver of the vehicles is giving an
audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle, or bell.  This section does not
relieve the driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the
duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon
the highway.



(R.C. § 4511.041)



   (B)   The provisions of R.C. §§ 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27,
4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.36,
4511.37, 4511.38, and 4511.66, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinances, do not apply to a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner's
investigator operating a motor vehicle in accordance with R.C. § 4513.171 or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.  This division does not
relieve a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner's investigator operating a motor
vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons
and property upon the highway.



(R.C. § 4511.042) 



§ 70.06  EXCAVATING HIGHWAY.



   No person shall dig up, remove, excavate or place any earth or mud upon
any portion of any public highway, or build a fence upon the same without
authority to do so.  Each day that such person continues to dig up, remove
or excavate any portion of the public highway shall constitute a separate
offense.



('69 Code, § 70.07)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.07  EMERGENCY VEHICLES TO PROCEED CAUTIOUSLY.



   (A)   The driver of any emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle,
when responding to an emergency call, upon approaching a red or stop signal
or any stop sign, shall slow down as necessary for safety to traffic, but may
proceed cautiously past the red or stop sign or signal with due regard for
the safety of all persons using the street or highway.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.03)  ('69 Code, § 73.41)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.08  ANIMALS, PUSHCARTS UPON ROADWAYS.



   Every person riding, driving, or leading an animal upon a roadway is
subject to the provisions of this traffic code, applicable to the driver of a
vehicle, except those provisions of this traffic code which by their nature
are inapplicable.



(R.C. § 4511.05)  ('69 Code, § 70.03)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.09  USE OF FREEWAYS.



   (A)   No person, unless otherwise directed by a police officer,
shall:



      (1)   As a pedestrian, occupy any space within the limits of
the right-of-way of a freeway, except: in a rest area; on a facility that is
separated from the roadway and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and
appropriately marked for pedestrian use; in the performance of public works
or official duties; as a result of an emergency caused by an accident or
breakdown of a motor vehicle; or to obtain assistance;



      (2)   Occupy any space within the limits of the right-of-way
of a freeway, with an animal-drawn vehicle, a ridden or led animal, herded
animals, a pushcart, a bicycle, except on a facility that is separated from
the roadway and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately
marked for bicycle use, a bicycle with motor attached, a motor-driven cycle
with a motor which produces not to exceed five brake horsepower, an
agricultural tractor, or farm machinery, except in the performance of public
works or official duties.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.051)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Designation of a freeway, see R.C. § 4511.011



§ 70.10  USE OF PRIVATE PROPERTY FOR VEHICULAR TRAVEL.



   The provisions of this traffic code do not prevent the owner of real
property, used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel by permission
of the owner and not as a matter of right, from prohibiting such use or from
requiring additional conditions to those specified in this traffic code, or
otherwise regulating such use as may seem best to the owner.



(R.C. § 4511.08)



§ 70.11  AUTHORITY OF VILLAGE MANAGER.



   The Village Manager is empowered to make and enforce regulations
necessary to make effective the provisions of the Traffic Code, and to make
and enforce temporary regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions.



('69 Code, § 70.11)



§ 70.12  NAMES OF PERSONS DAMAGING REAL PROPERTY BY OPERATION OF VEHICLE TO
BE PROVIDED TO OWNER.



   (A)   As used in this section, MOTOR VEHICLE has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 4501.01.



   (B)   If damage is caused to real property by the operation of a
motor vehicle in, or during the, violation of any section of the revised code
or of any municipal ordinance, the law enforcement agency that investigates
the case, upon request of the real property owner, shall provide the owner
with the names of the persons who are charged with the commission of the
offense.  If a request for the names is made, the agency shall provide the
names as soon as possible after the persons are charged with the offense.



   (C)   The personnel of law enforcement agencies who act pursuant to
division (B) of this section in good faith are not liable in damages in a
civil action allegedly arising from their actions taken pursuant to that
division.  Political subdivisions and the state are not liable in damages in
a civil action allegedly arising from the actions of personnel of their law
enforcement agencies if the personnel have immunity under this division.



(R.C. § 2935.28)



§ 70.13  REMOVAL OF VEHICLES AFTER ACCIDENTS.



   (A)   If a motor vehicle accident occurs on any highway, public
street, or other property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel
and if any motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property that has been damaged
or spilled as a result of the motor vehicle accident is blocking the highway,
street, or other property or is otherwise endangering public safety, a public
safety official may do either of the following without the consent of the
owner but with the approval of the law enforcement agency conducting any
investigation of the accident:



      (1)   Remove, or order the removal of, the motor vehicle if
the motor vehicle is unoccupied, cargo, or personal property from the portion
of the highway, public street, or property ordinarily used for vehicular
travel on the highway, public street, or other property open to the public
for purposes of vehicular travel.



      (2)   If the motor vehicle is a commercial motor vehicle,
allow the owner or operator of the vehicle the opportunity to arrange for the
removal of the motor vehicle within a period of time specified by the public
safety official. If the public safety official determines that the motor
vehicle cannot be removed within the specified period of time, the public
safety official shall remove or order the removal of the motor vehicle.



   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this
section, the Department of Transportation, any employee of the Department of
Transportation, or a public safety official who authorizes or participates in
the removal of any unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property as
authorized by division (A) of this section, regardless of whether the removal
is executed by a private towing service, is not liable for civil damages for
any injury, death, or loss to person or property that results from the
removal of that unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property.
Further, except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, if a public
safety official authorizes, employs, or arranges to have a private towing
service remove any unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property as
authorized by division (A) of this section, that private towing service is
not liable for civil damages for any injury, death, or loss to person or
property that results from the removal of that unoccupied motor vehicle,
cargo, or personal property.



      (2)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to any of
the following:



         (a)   Any person or entity involved in the removal of an
unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property pursuant to division
(A) of this section if that removal causes or contributes to the release of a
hazardous material or to structural damage to the roadway;



         (b)   A private towing service that was not authorized,
employed, or arranged by a public safety official to remove an unoccupied
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property under this section;



         (c)   Except as provided in division (B)(2)(d) of this
section, a private towing service that was authorized, employed, or arranged
by a public safety official to perform the removal of the unoccupied motor
vehicle, cargo, or personal property but the private towing service performed
the removal in a negligent manner;



         (d)   A private towing service that was authorized,
employed, or arranged by a public safety official to perform the removal of
the unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property that was
endangering public safety but the private towing service performed the
removal in a reckless manner.



   (C)   As used in divisions (A) and (B) of this section:



      HAZARDOUS MATERIAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.232.



      PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICIAL. Means any of the following:



         (a)   The sheriff of the county, or the chief of police
in the municipal corporation, township, or township or joint police district,
in which the accident occurred;



         (b)   A state highway patrol trooper;



         (c)   The chief of the fire department having
jurisdiction where the accident occurred;



         (d)   A duly authorized subordinate acting on behalf of
an official specified in divisions (a) to (c) of this definition.



(R.C. § 4513.66)



   (D)   If a towing service is removing a motor vehicle, and the
removal was not authorized under R.C. § 4513.60, 4513.601, 4513.61, or
4513.66, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, prior to
removing the motor vehicle, the towing service shall provide a written
estimate of the price for the removal to the operator of the motor vehicle,
if requested.



   (E)   The towing service shall ensure that any estimate provided
under division (D) of this section includes the fees, services to be
rendered, and destination of the vehicle.



   (F)   If a towing service fails to provide a written estimate as
required by this section, the towing service shall not charge fees for the
towing and storage of the motor vehicle that exceed 25% of any applicable
fees established by the public utilities commission in rules adopted under
R.C. § 4921.25(B)(4) or, if the vehicle was towed within a municipal
corporation that has established vehicle removal and storage fees, 25% of the
fees established by the municipal corporation.



   (G)   Any storage facility that accepts towed vehicles shall
conspicuously post a notice at the entrance to the storage facility that
states the limitation on fees established under division (F) of this section.



(R.C. § 4513.68)



TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES



§ 70.20  STANDARDS FOR TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   All signs, traffic-control devices and other devices shall be in
accordance with uniform prescribed standards as provided by R.C. §§
4511.09, 4511.10 and 4511.11.



('69 Code, § 70.12)



§ 70.21  OBEYING TRAFFIC-CONTROL DEVICES.



   (A)   (1)   No pedestrian or driver of a vehicle shall disobey
the instructions of any traffic-control device placed in accordance with the
provisions of this traffic code, unless at the time otherwise directed by a
police officer.



(69 Code, § 70.13) (Ord. C-146, passed 9-14-59)



      (2)   No provision of this traffic code for which signs are
required shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and
place of the alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position
and sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.
Whenever a particular section of this traffic code does not state that signs
are required, that section shall be effective even though no signs are
erected or in place.



(R.C. § 4511.12(A))



   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (C) of this section,
any operator of a commercial motor vehicle, upon approaching a scale location
established for the purpose of determining the weight of the vehicle and its
load, shall comply with any traffic control device or the order of a peace
officer directing the vehicle to proceed to be weighed or otherwise inspected.



      (2)   Any operator of a commercial motor vehicle, upon
bypassing a scale location in accordance with division (C) of this section,
shall comply with an order of a peace officer to stop the vehicle to verify
the use and operation of an electronic clearance device.



   (C)   Any operator of a commercial motor vehicle that is equipped
with an electronic clearance device authorized by the Superintendent of the
State Highway Patrol under R.C. § 4549.081 may bypass a scale location,
regardless of the instruction of a traffic control device to enter the scale
facility, if either of the following apply:



      (1)   The in-cab transponder displays a green light or other
affirmative visual signal and also sounds an affirmative audible signal;



      (2)   Any other criterion established by the Superintendent of
the State Highway Patrol is met.



   (D)   Any peace officer may order the operator of a commercial motor
vehicle that bypasses a scale location to stop the vehicle to verify the use
and operation of an electronic clearance device.



   (E)   As used in this section, COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE means any
combination of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating or an actual gross
vehicle weight of more than 10,000 pounds if the vehicle is used in
interstate or intrastate commerce to transport property and also means any
vehicle that is transporting hazardous materials for which placarding is
required pursuant to 49 C.F.R. Parts 100 to 180.



(R.C. § 4511.121(A)-(C), (E))



   (F)   No person shall use an electronic clearance device if the
device or its use is not in compliance with rules of the Superintendent of
the State Highway Patrol.



(R.C. § 4549.081(B))



   (G)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division,
whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the
offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle
or traffic offenses, whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the third degree.  If the offender commits the offense
while distracted and the distracting activity is a contributing factor to the
commission of the offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine
established under § 70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.12(B))



      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty
of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(B) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more
violations of division (B) of this section or any substantially equivalent
state law or municipal ordinance, whoever violates division (B) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.  If the offender
commits the offense while distracted and the distracting activity is a
contributing factor to the commission of the offense, the offender is subject
to the additional fine established under § 70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.121(D)) 



      (3)   Whoever violates division (F) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of
the third degree on each subsequent offense.



(R.C. § 4549.081(C))



Statutory reference:



   Traffic-control devices to conform to the state manual and
specifications, see R.C. § 4511.11



   Placing traffic-control devices on state highways, permission required,
see R.C. § 4511.10



   Uniform system of traffic-control devices, see R.C. § 4511.09



§ 70.22  SIGNAL LIGHTS.



   Highway traffic signal indications for vehicles and pedestrians shall
have the following meanings:



   (A)   Steady green signal indication.



      (1)   (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a circular green
signal indication is permitted to proceed straight through or turn right or
left or make a u-turn movement except as such movement is modified by a
lane-use sign, turn prohibition sign, lane marking, roadway design, separate
turn signal indication, or other traffic control device. Such vehicular
traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn
movement, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the following:



            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated
crosswalk;



            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the
intersection.



         (b)   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or
making a u-turn movement to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other
vehicles approaching from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute
an immediate hazard during the time when such turning vehicle is moving
across or within the intersection.



      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal
indication, displayed alone or in combination with another signal indication,
is permitted to cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement
indicated by such arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other
indications displayed at the same time. Such vehicular traffic, including
vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn movement, shall yield the
right-of-way to both of the following:



         (a)   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated
crosswalk;



         (b)   Other traffic lawfully using the intersection.



      (3)   (a)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian
signal indication, as provided in R.C. § 4511.14, pedestrians facing a
circular green signal indication are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. The pedestrian shall
yield the right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection or so
close as to create an immediate hazard at the time that the green signal
indication is first displayed.



         (b)   Pedestrians facing a green arrow signal
indication, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or
other traffic control device, shall not cross the roadway.



   (B)   Steady yellow signal indication.



      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow signal
indication is thereby warned that the related green movement or the related
flashing arrow movement is being terminated or that a steady red signal
indication will be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic
shall not enter the intersection. The provisions governing vehicular
operation under the movement being terminated shall continue to apply while
the steady circular yellow signal indication is displayed.



      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow arrow signal
indication is thereby warned that the related green arrow movement or the
related flashing arrow movement is being terminated. The provisions governing
vehicular operation under the movement being terminated shall continue to
apply while the steady yellow arrow signal indication is displayed.



      (3)   Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow
arrow signal indication, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal
indication as provided in R.C. § 4511.14 or other traffic control device,
shall not start to cross the roadway.



   (C)   Steady red signal indication.



      (1)   (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red
signal indication, unless entering the intersection to make another movement
permitted by another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line; but if there is no stop line, traffic shall stop before entering the
crosswalk on the near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk,
then before entering the intersection; and shall remain stopped until a
signal indication to proceed is displayed except as provided in divisions
(C)(1), (C)(2), and (C)(3) of this section.



         (b)   Except when a traffic control device is in place
prohibiting a turn on red or a steady red arrow signal indication is
displayed, vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal indication
is permitted, after stopping, to enter the intersection to turn right, or to
turn left from a one- way street into a one-way street. The right to proceed
with the turn shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after
making a stop at a stop sign.



      (2)   (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow
signal indication shall not enter the intersection to make the movement
indicated by the arrow and, unless entering the intersection to make another
movement permitted by another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly
marked stop line; but if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk
on the near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then
before entering the intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal
indication or other traffic control device permitting the movement indicated
by such red arrow is displayed.



         (b)   When a traffic control device is in place
permitting a turn on a steady red arrow signal indication, vehicular traffic
facing a steady red arrow indication is permitted, after stopping, to enter
the intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a one-way street into a
one-way street. The right to proceed with the turn shall be limited to the
direction indicated by the arrow and shall be subject to the provisions that
are applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.



      (3)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal
indication as provided in R.C. § 4511.14 or other traffic control device,
pedestrians facing a steady circular red or steady red arrow signal
indication shall not enter the roadway.



      (4)   Local authorities by ordinance, or the Director of
Transportation on state highways, may prohibit a right or a left turn against
a steady red signal at any intersection, which shall be effective when signs
giving notice thereof are posted at the intersection.



   (D)   Flashing green signal indication. A flashing green signal
indication has no meaning and shall not be used.



   (E)   Flashing yellow signal indication.



      (1)   (a)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an
intersection, facing a flashing circular yellow signal indication, is
permitted to cautiously enter the intersection to proceed straight through or
turn right or left or make a u-turn movement except as such movement is
modified by lane-use signs, turn prohibition signs, lane markings, roadway
design, separate turn signal indications, or other traffic control devices.
Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or making a
u-turn movement, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the following:



            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated
crosswalk;



            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the
intersection.



         (b)   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or
making a u-turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles
approaching from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time when such turning vehicle is moving across
or within the intersection.



      (2)   (a)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an
intersection, facing a flashing yellow arrow signal indication, displayed
alone or in combination with another signal indication, is permitted to
cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such
arrow, or other such movement as is permitted by other signal indications
displayed at the same time. Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles
turning right or left or making a u-turn, shall yield the right-of-way to
both of the following:



            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated
crosswalk;



            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the
intersection.



         (b)   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or
making a u-turn to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles
approaching from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time when such turning vehicle is moving across
or within the intersection.



      (3)   Pedestrians facing any flashing yellow signal indication
at an intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal
indication or other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across
the roadway within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians
shall yield the right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at
the time that the flashing yellow signal indication is first displayed.



      (4)   When a flashing circular yellow signal indication is
displayed as a beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road
users are notified that there is a need to pay additional attention to the
message contained thereon or that the regulatory or warning requirements of
the other traffic control device, which might not be applicable at all times,
are currently applicable.



   (F)   Flashing red signal indication.



      (1)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection,
facing a flashing circular red signal indication, shall stop at a clearly
marked stop line; but if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk
on the near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, at the
point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering the
intersection. The right to proceed shall be subject to the provisions that
are applicable after making a stop at a stop sign.



      (2)   Pedestrians facing any flashing red signal indication at
an intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication
or other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield
the right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time
that the flashing red signal indication is first displayed.



      (3)   When a flashing circular red signal indication is
displayed as a beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road
users are notified that there is a need to pay additional attention to the
message contained thereon or that the regulatory requirements of the other
traffic control device, which might not be applicable at all times, are
currently applicable. Use of this signal indication shall be limited to
supplementing stop, do not enter, or wrong way signs, and to applications
where compliance with the supplemented traffic control device requires a stop
at a designated point.



   (G)   In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their
nature can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or
marking on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the
absence of any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal.



   (H)   This section does not apply at railroad grade crossings.
Conduct of drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be
governed by R.C. §§ 4511.61 and 4511.62 or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.



(R.C. § 4511.13) ('69 Code, § 70.14) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.221  SIGNALS THAT DO NOT CLEARLY ASSIGN RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle who approaches an intersection where
traffic is controlled by traffic control signals shall do all of the
following if the signal facing the driver exhibits no colored lights or
colored lighted arrows, exhibits a combination of such lights or arrows that
fails to clearly indicate the assignment of right-of-way, or, if the vehicle
is a bicycle, the signals are otherwise malfunctioning due to the failure of
a vehicle detector to detect the presence of the bicycle:



      (1)   Stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, stop
before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if
none, stop before entering the intersection;



      (2)   Yield the right-of-way to all vehicles in the
intersection or approaching on an intersecting road, if the vehicles will
constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or
within the intersection or junction of roadways;



      (3)   Exercise ordinary care while proceeding through the
intersection.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.132)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.23  PEDESTRIAN SIGNALS.



   (A)   A steady walking person signal indication, which symbolizes
“walk”, means that a pedestrian facing the signal indication is permitted
to start to cross the roadway in the direction of the signal indication,
possibly in conflict with turning vehicles. The pedestrian shall yield the
right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that
the walking person signal indication is first shown.



   (B)   A flashing upraised hand signal indication, which symbolizes
“don't walk”, means that a pedestrian shall not start to cross the
roadway in the direction of the signal indication, but that any pedestrian
who has already started to cross on a steady walking person signal indication
shall proceed to the far side of the traveled way of the street or highway,
unless otherwise directed by a traffic control device to proceed only to the
median of a divided highway or only to some other island or pedestrian refuge
area.



   (C)   A steady upraised hand signal indication means that a
pedestrian shall not enter the roadway in the direction of the signal
indication.



   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the
continued use of pedestrian control signals utilizing the word “wait” if
those signals were installed prior to March 28, 1985.



   (E)   A flashing walking person signal indication has no meaning and
shall not be used.



(R.C. § 4511.14) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.24  SIGNALS OVER REVERSIBLE LANES.



   The meanings of lane-use control signal indications are as follows:



   (A)   A steady downward green arrow. A road user is permitted to
drive in the lane over which the arrow signal indication is located.



   (B)   A steady yellow “X”. A road user is to prepare to vacate
the lane over which the signal indication is located because a lane control
change is being made to a steady red “X” signal indication.



   (C)   A steady white two-way left-turn arrow. A road user is
permitted to use a lane over which the signal indication is located for a
left turn, but not for through travel, with the understanding that common use
of the lane by oncoming road users for left turns also is permitted.



   (D)   A steady white one-way left-turn arrow. A road user is
permitted to use a lane over which the signal indication is located for a
left turn, without opposing turns in the same lane, but not for through
travel.



   (E)   A steady red “X”. A road user is not permitted to use the
lane over which the signal indication is located and that this signal
indication shall modify accordingly the meaning of other traffic controls
present.



(R.C. § 4511.131) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.25  UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS, SIGNALS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or
in view of any highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device
which purports to be, is an imitation of, or resembles a traffic-control
device or railroad sign or signal, or which attempts to direct the movement
of traffic, or hides from view or interferes with the effectiveness of any
traffic-control device or any railroad sign or signal, and no person shall
place or maintain, nor shall any public authority permit, upon any highway
any traffic sign or signal bearing thereon any commercial advertising. This
section does not prohibit either the erection upon private property adjacent
to highways of signs giving useful directional information and of a type that
cannot be mistaken for traffic-control devices, or the erection upon private
property of traffic-control devices by the owner of real property in
accordance with R.C. §§ 4511.211 and 4511.432.



      (2)   Every prohibited sign, signal, marking, or device is a
public nuisance, and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway may
remove the same or cause it to be removed.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.16) ('69 Code, § 70.16) Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.26  ALTERATION, REMOVAL OF SIGNS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person, without lawful authority, shall do any of the
following:



      (1)   Knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy, or otherwise
improperly tamper with any traffic-control device, any railroad sign or
signal, or any inscription, shield, or insignia on the device, sign, or
signal, or any part of the device, sign, or signal;



      (2)   Knowingly drive upon or over any freshly applied
pavement marking material on the surface of a roadway while the marking
material is in an undried condition, and is marked by flags, markers, signs,
or other devices intended to protect it;



      (3)   Knowingly move, damage, destroy, or otherwise improperly
tamper with a manhole cover.



   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division,
whoever violates division (A)(1) or (3) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. If a violation of division (A)(1) or (3) of
this section creates a risk of physical harm to any person, the offender is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If a violation of division
(A)(1) or (3) of this section causes serious physical harm to property that
is owned, leased, or controlled by a state or local authority, the offender
is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates division (A)(2) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the
offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle
or traffic offenses, whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



('69 Code, § 70.17)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 70.27  SIGNAL PREEMPTION DEVICES; PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall possess a portable signal preemption
device.



      (2)   No person shall use a portable signal preemption device
to affect the operation of a traffic-control device.



   (B)   Division (A)(1) of this section does not apply to any of the
following persons and division (A)(2) of this section does not apply to any
of the following persons when responding to an emergency call:



      (1)   A peace officer, as defined in R.C. § 109.17(A)(1),
(A)(12), (A)(14), or (A)(19);



      (2)   A state highway patrol officer;



      (3)   A person while occupying a public safety vehicle as
defined in R.C. § 4511.01(E)(1), (E)(3), or (E)(4).



   (C)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) of this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Whoever violates division (A)(2) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



   (D)   As used in this section, PORTABLE SIGNAL PREEMPTION DEVICE
means a device that, if activated by a person, is capable of changing a
traffic-control signal to green out of sequence.



(R.C. § 4511.031)



§ 70.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this traffic code for which
no penalty otherwise is provided in the section violated is guilty of one of
the following:



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(2) or
(A)(3) of this section, a minor misdemeanor;



      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor
vehicle or traffic offense, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree;



      (3)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.99)



   (B)   Violations committed while distracted.



      (1)   As used in this section and each section referenced in
division (B)(2) of this section, all of the following apply:



         (a)   “Distracted” means doing either of the
following while operating a vehicle:



            1.   Using a handheld electronic wireless
communications device, as defined in R.C. § 4511.204, except when utilizing
any of the following:



               a.   The device’s speakerphone function;



               b.   A wireless technology standard for
exchanging data over short distances;



               c.   A “voice-operated or hands-free”
device that allows the person to use the electronic wireless communications
device without the use of either hand except to activate, deactivate, or
initiate a feature or function;



               d.   Any device that is physically or
electronically integrated into the motor vehicle.



            2.   Engaging in any activity that is not
necessary to the operation of a vehicle and impairs, or reasonably would be
expected to impair, the ability of the operator to drive the vehicle safely.



         (b)   “Distracted” does not include operating a
motor vehicle while wearing an earphone or earplug over or in both ears at
the same time. A person who so wears earphones or earplugs may be charged
with a violation of R.C. § 4511.84, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.



         (c)   “Distracted” does not include conducting any
activity while operating a utility service vehicle or a vehicle for or on
behalf of a utility, provided that the driver of the vehicle is acting in
response to an emergency, power outage, or a circumstance affecting the
health or safety of individuals. As used in this division (B)(1)(c):



            UTILITY means an entity specified in R.C. §
4905.03(A), (C), (D), (E), or (G).



            UTILITY SERVICE VEHICLE means a vehicle owned or
operated by a utility.



      (2)   If an offender violates R.C. § 4511.03, 4511.051,
4511.12, 4511.121, 4511.132, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.213, 4511.22, 4511.23,
4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32,
4511.33, 4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40,
4511.41, 4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.451, 4511.46,
4511.47, 4511.54, 4511.55, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59, 4511.60, 4511.61,
4511.64, 4511.71, 4511.711, 4511.712, 4511.713, 4511.72, or 4511.73, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
violation, the offender is subject to the applicable penalty for the
violation and, notwithstanding R.C. § 2929.28, is subject to an additional
fine of not more than $100 as follows:



         (a)   1.   Subject to Traffic Rule 13, if a law
enforcement officer issues an offender a ticket, citation, or summons for a
violation of any of the aforementioned sections of the Ohio Revised Code, or
any substantially similar municipal ordinance, that indicates that the
offender was distracted while committing the violation and that the
distracting activity was a contributing factor to the commission of the
violation, the offender may enter a written plea of guilty and waive the
offender’s right to contest the ticket, citation, or summons in a trial
provided that the offender pays the total amount of the fine established for
the violation and pays the additional fine of $100.



            2.   In lieu of payment of the additional fine of
$100, the offender instead may elect to attend a distracted driving safety
course, the duration and contents of which shall be established by the Ohio
Director of Public Safety. If the offender attends and successfully completes
the course, the offender shall be issued written evidence that the offender
successfully completed the course. The offender shall be required to pay the
total amount of the fine established for the violation, but shall not be
required to pay the additional fine of $100, so long as the offender submits
to the court both the offender’s payment in full and such written evidence.



         (b)   1.   If the offender appears in person to
contest the ticket, citation, or summons in a trial and the offender pleads
guilty to or is convicted of the violation, the court, in addition to all
other penalties provided by law, may impose the applicable penalty for the
violation and may impose the additional fine of not more than $100.



            2.   If the court imposes upon the offender the
applicable penalty for the violation and an additional fine of not more than
$100, the court shall inform the offender that, in lieu of payment of the
additional fine of not more than $100, the offender instead may elect to
attend the distracted driving safety course described in division (B)(2)(a)
of this section. If the offender elects the course option and attends and
successfully completes the course, the offender shall be issued written
evidence that the offender successfully completed the course. The offender
shall be required to pay the total amount of the fine established for the
violation, but shall not be required to pay the additional fine of not more
than $100, so long as the offender submits to the court the offender’s
payment and such written evidence.



(R.C. § 4511.991)



   (C)   Whoever is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor or
minor misdemeanor shall be sentenced in accordance with § 130.99.



   (D)   The Council adopts and approves the fee schedule and pay-out
information for violations of the Amberley Village Traffic Code. The fee
schedule and pay-out information, as may be amended from time to time, is
hereby adopted by reference and shall be treated as if set forth in full
herein.



(Ord. 2011-17, passed 12-12-11)



Statutory reference:



   Electronically monitored house arrest, detention, and early release,
see R.C. § 2929.23



   Reimbursement for costs of confinement, see R.C. §§ 2929.35 et seq.



   Where imprisoned related to offense, see R.C. § 2929.221



CHAPTER 71: LICENSING PROVISIONS



Section



License Plates; Registration



   71.01   Display of license plates or validation stickers



   71.02   (Reserved)



   71.03   Use of unauthorized plates prohibited



   71.04   Operating without license plates



   71.05   Operating with number of former owner



   71.06   Resident operating with number issued by foreign state



   71.07   Failure to file registration application



   71.08   False statement in registration application



   71.09   Transfer of ownership and registration



   71.10   Operation, sale of motor vehicle without certificate of title



   71.11   Annual license tax upon operation of motor vehicles



Operator's License



   71.20   License required as driver or commercial driver; prohibition
against unlicensed operation on private property



   71.21   Exemptions from license requirement



   71.22   Permitting minor to operate vehicle prohibited; temporary
instruction permit; probationary license



   71.23   Prohibited acts



   71.24   (Reserved)



   71.25   (Reserved)



   71.26   Employment of a minor to operate a taxicab prohibited



   71.27   Restriction against owner lending vehicle for use of another



   71.28   Driving under suspension or in violation of license
restriction



   71.29   Operating motor vehicle or motorcycle without valid license



   71.30   Display of license



   71.31   Prohibition against false statement



   71.32   Driving under OVI suspension



   71.33   Driving under financial responsibility law suspension or
cancellation; driving under a nonpayment of judgment suspension



   71.34   Failure to reinstate license



   71.35   Suspension of driver's license; license suspended by court
of record



 



   71.99   Penalty



LICENSE PLATES; REGISTRATION



§ 71.01  DISPLAY OF LICENSE PLATES OR VALIDATION STICKERS.



   (A)   (1)   No person who is the owner or operator of a motor
vehicle shall fail to display in plain view on the front and rear of the
motor vehicle a license plate that bears the distinctive number and
registration mark assigned to the motor vehicle by the Ohio Director of
Public Safety, including any county identification sticker and any validation
sticker issued under R.C. §§ 4503.19 and 4503.191, except as follows:



         (a)   A manufacturer of motor vehicles or dealer
therein, the holder of an in transit permit, and the owner or operator of a
motorcycle, motorized bicycle or moped, motor- driven cycle or motor scooter,
autocycle, cab-enclosed motorcycle, manufactured home, mobile home, trailer,
or semitrailer shall display a license plate on the rear only.



         (b)   A motor vehicle that is issued two license plates
shall display the validation sticker only on the rear license plate, except
that a commercial tractor that does not receive an apportioned license plate
under the international registration plan shall display the validation
sticker on the front of the commercial tractor.



         (c)   An apportioned vehicle receiving an apportioned
license plate under the international registration plan shall display the
license plate only on the front of a commercial tractor and on the rear of
all other vehicles.



      (2)   All license plates shall be securely fastened so as not
to swing, and shall not be covered by any material that obstructs their
visibility.



      (3)   No person to whom a temporary license placard or
windshield sticker has been issued for the use of a motor vehicle under R.C.
§ 4503.182, and no operator of that motor vehicle, shall fail to display the
temporary license placard in plain view from the rear of the vehicle either
in the rear window or on an external rear surface of the motor vehicle, or
fail to display the windshield sticker in plain view on the rear window of
the motor vehicle. No temporary license placard or windshield sticker shall
be covered by any material that obstructs its visibility.



      (4)   A law enforcement officer shall only issue a ticket,
citation, or summons, or cause the arrest or commence a prosecution, for the
failure to display a license plate in plain view on the front of a parked
motor vehicle if the officer first determines that another offense has
occurred and either places the operator or vehicle owner under arrest or
issues a ticket, citation, or summons to the operator or vehicle owner for
the other offense.



(R.C. § 4503.21(A), (B)) ('69 Code, § 72.23) (Ord. C-164, passed 9-12-60;
Am. Ord. C-172, passed 3-3-61)



   (B)   (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division
(B)(1)(b), whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.



         (b)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section by
failing to display a license plate in plain view on the front of a motor
vehicle as required under division (A) of this section while the motor
vehicle is otherwise legally parked is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and may
be fined not more than $100. A person who is subject to the penalty
prescribed in this division (B)(1)(b) is not subject to the charging of
points under R.C. § 4510.036.



         (c)   The offense established under division (A) of this
section is a strict liability offense and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The
designation of this offense as a strict liability offense shall not be
construed to imply that any other offense, for which there is no specified
degree of culpability, is not a strict liability offense.



(R.C. § 4503.21(C))



§ 71.02  (RESERVED).



§ 71.03  USE OF UNAUTHORIZED PLATES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle upon the
public roads and highways in this municipality if it displays a license plate
or a distinctive number or identification mark that meets any of the
following criteria:



      (1)   It is fictitious;



      (2)   It is a counterfeit or an unlawfully made copy of any
distinctive number or identification mark;



      (3)   It belongs to another motor vehicle, provided that this
section does not apply to a motor vehicle that is operated on the public
roads and highways in this municipality when the motor vehicle displays
license plates that originally were issued for a motor vehicle that
previously was owned by the same person who owns the motor vehicle that is
operated on the public roads and highways in this municipality during the
30-day period described in R.C. § 4503.12(A)(4).



   (B)   A person who fails to comply with the transfer of registration
provisions of R.C. § 4503.12 and is charged with a violation of that section
shall not be charged with a violation of this section.



('69 Code, § 72.25)



   (C)   Whoever violates division (A)(1), (2), or (3) of this section
is guilty of operating a motor vehicle bearing an invalid license plate or
identification mark, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense
and a misdemeanor of the third degree on each subsequent offense.



(R.C. § 4549.08)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.04  OPERATING WITHOUT LICENSE PLATES.



   (A)   No person shall operate or cause to be operated upon a public
road or highway a motor vehicle of a manufacturer or dealer unless the
vehicle carries and displays two placards, except as provided ln R.C. §
4503.21, issued by the Director of Public Safety that bear the registration
number of its manufacturer or dealer.



('69 Code, § 72.26)



   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
illegal operation of a manufacturer's or dealer's motor vehicle, a minor
misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4549.10)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.05  OPERATING WITH NUMBER OF FORMER OWNER.



   (A)   No person shall operate or drive upon the highways of this
municipality a motor vehicle acquired from a former owner who has registered
the motor vehicle, while the motor vehicle displays the distinctive number or
identification mark assigned to it upon its original registration.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operation of a
motor vehicle bearing license plates or an identification mark issued to
another, a minor misdemeanor on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree on each subsequent offense.



(R.C. § 4549.11) ('69 Code, § 72.27) (Ord. C-164, passed 9-12-60) Penalty,
see § 70.99



§  71.06  RESIDENT OPERATING WITH NUMBER ISSUED BY FOREIGN STATE.



   (A)   No person who is the owner of a motor vehicle and a resident
of this state shall operate or drive the motor vehicle upon the highways of
this municipality while it displays a distinctive number or identification
mark issued by or under the authority of another state, without complying
with the laws of this state relating to the registration and identification
of motor vehicles.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal operation
by a resident of this state of a motor vehicle bearing the distinctive number
or identification mark issued by a foreign jurisdiction, a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4549.12) ('69 Code, § 72.28)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 71.07  FAILURE TO FILE REGISTRATION APPLICATION.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided by R.C. §§ 4503.103, 4503.173,
4503.41, 4503.43, and 4503.46, no person who is the owner or chauffeur of a
motor vehicle operated or driven upon the public roads or highways shall fail
to file annually the application for registration or to pay the tax therefor.



(R.C. § 4503.11(A))



   (B)   (1)   Within 30 days of becoming a resident of this state,
any person who owns a motor vehicle operated or driven upon the public roads
or highways shall register the vehicle in this state. If such a person fails
to register a vehicle owned by the person, the person shall not operate any
motor vehicle in this state under a license issued by another state.



      (2)   For purposes of division (B)(1) of this section,
RESIDENT means any person to whom any of the following applies:



         (a)   The person maintains their principal residence in
this state and does not reside in this state as a result of the person’s
active service in the United States armed forces.



         (b)   The person is determined by the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles to be a resident in accordance with standards adopted by the
Registrar under R.C. § 4507.01.



(R.C. § 4503.111(A), (C))



   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4503.11(D))



      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section
is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



         (b)   The offense established under division (C)(2)(a)
of this section is a strict liability offense and strict liability is a
culpable mental state for purposes of R.C. § 2901.20. The designation of
this offense as a strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply
that any other offense, for which there is no specified degree of
culpability, is not a strict liability offense.



(R.C. § 4503.111(B)) ('69 Code, § 72.29) (Ord. C-164, passed 9-12-60)
Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.08 FALSE STATEMENT IN REGISTRATION APPLICATION.



   No person who is the owner of a motor vehicle, or a manufacturer of or
dealer in motor vehicles, shall knowingly make a false statement in an
application for the registration of such vehicle or vehicles.



('69 Code, § 72.30) (Ord. C-164, 9-12-60)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.09  TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP AND REGISTRATION.



   Upon the transfer of ownership of a motor vehicle, the original owner
shall immediately remove the number plates from such motor vehicle as
provided by R.C. § 4503.12.



('69 Code, § 72.31)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.10  OPERATION, SALE OF MOTOR VEHICLE WITHOUT CERTIFICATE OF TITLE.



   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Operate in this municipality a motor vehicle for which a
certificate of title is required without having that certificate in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 4505 or, if a physical certificate of title has
not been issued for a motor vehicle, operate the motor vehicle in this state
knowing that the ownership information relating to the vehicle has not been
entered into the automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas;



      (2)   Display or display for sale or sell as a dealer or
acting on behalf of a dealer, a motor vehicle without having obtained a
manufacturer's or importer's certificate, a certificate of title, or an
assignment of a certificate of title for it as provided in R.C. Chapter 4505;



      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title or any
certificate of registration or license plates upon cancellation of the same
by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as
prescribed in R.C. Chapter 4505;



      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of
a Court of Common Pleas as provided in R.C. Chapter 4505 in case of the
destruction or dismantling or change of a motor vehicle in such respect that
it is not the motor vehicle described in the certificate of title;



      (5)   Violate any rules adopted pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4505;



      (6)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. Chapters 4505 and
4517, sell at wholesale a motor vehicle ownership of which is not evidenced
by an Ohio certificate of title, or the current certificate of title issued
for the motor vehicle, or the manufacturer's certificate of origin, and all
title assignments that evidence the seller's ownership of the motor vehicle,
and an odometer disclosure statement that complies with R.C. § 4505.06 and
subchapter IV of the "Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act," 86
Stat. 961 (1972), 15 U.S.C. 1981;



      (7)   Operate in this state a motor vehicle knowing that the
certificate of title to the vehicle or ownership of the vehicle as otherwise
reflected in the automated title processing system has been canceled.



   (B)   This section does not apply to persons engaged in the business
of warehousing or transporting motor vehicles for the purpose of salvage
disposition.



('69 Code, § 72.32) 



   (C)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than
$200, imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both.



(R.C. § 4505.18)



Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.11  ANNUAL LICENSE TAX UPON OPERATION OF MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   There is hereby levied an annual license tax upon the
operation of motor vehicles on the public roads or highways pursuant to R.C.
§ 4504.172 for the purpose of paying the costs and expenses of enforcing and
administering the tax provided for in this section; and to provide additional
revenue for the purposes set forth in R.C. § 4504.06; and to supplement
revenue already available for such purposes.



   (B)   Such tax shall be at the rate of $5 per motor vehicle on each
and every motor vehicle the district registration of which, as defined in
R.C. § 4503.10, is in the village.



   (C)   As used in this section, the term MOTOR VEHICLE means any and
all vehicles included within the definition of motor vehicle in R.C. §
4501.01.



   (D)   The tax imposed by this section shall apply to and be in
effect for the registration year commencing January 1, 1989 and shall
continue in effect and application during each registration year thereafter.



   (E)   The tax imposed by this section shall be paid to the State
Registrar of Motor Vehicles or to a Deputy Registrar at the time application
for registration of a motor vehicle is made as provided in R.C. § 4503.10.



   (F)   All the monies derived from the tax hereinbefore levied shall
be used by the village for the purposes specified in this section.



(Ord. C-687, passed 6-28-88)



OPERATOR'S LICENSE



§ 71.20  LICENSE REQUIRED AS DRIVER OR COMMERCIAL DRIVER; PROHIBITION
AGAINST UNLICENSED OPERATION ON PRIVATE PROPERTY.



   (A)   (1)   (a)   No person shall permit the operation of a
motor vehicle upon any public or private property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking, knowing the operator does not have a
valid driver's license issued to the operator by the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles under R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid commercial driver's license
issued under R.C. Chapter 4506. Whoever violates this division is guilty of
an unclassified misdemeanor.  When the offense is an unclassified
misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to § 130.13, § 130.99
or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to § 130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26;
notwithstanding § 130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the
offender may be fined up to $1,000; and, notwithstanding § 130.99(F)(1)(c)
and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up
to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community
service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt
under R.C. § 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.



         (b)   If, within three years of the offense, the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more
violations of this section or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
the offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (2)   No person shall receive a driver's license, or a
motorcycle operator's endorsement of a driver's or commercial driver's
license, unless and until the person surrenders to the Registrar all valid
licenses issued to the person by another jurisdiction recognized by this
state. The Registrar shall report the surrender of a license to the issuing
authority, together with information that a license is now issued in this
state. The Registrar shall destroy any such license that is not returned to
the issuing authority. No person shall be permitted to have more than one
valid license at any time.



(R.C. § 4507.02(A)) 



   (B)   (1)   No person shall be required to obtain a driver's or
commercial driver's license for the purpose of temporarily driving,
operating, drawing, moving, or propelling a road roller or road machinery
upon a street or highway.



      (2)   No person shall be required to obtain a driver's or
commercial driver's license for the purpose of temporarily driving,
operating, drawing, moving, or propelling any agricultural tractor or
implement of husbandry upon a street or highway at a speed of 25 miles per
hour or less.



      (3)   No person shall drive, operate, draw, move, or propel
any agricultural tractor or implement of husbandry upon a street or highway
at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless the person has a current,
valid driver's or commercial driver's license.



      (4)   No person having a valid driver's or commercial driver's
license shall be required to have a motorcycle operator's endorsement to
operate a motorcycle having three wheels with a motor of not more than 50
cubic centimeters piston displacement.



      (5)   No person having a valid driver’s or commercial
driver’s license shall be required to have a motorcycle operator’s
endorsement to operate an autocycle or a cab-enclosed motorcycle.



      (6)   Every person on active duty in the military or naval
forces of the United States, when furnished with a driver’s permit and when
operating an official motor vehicle in connection with such duty, is exempt
from the license requirements of R.C. Chapters 4506 and 4507. Every person on
active duty in the military or naval forces of the United States or in
service with the peace corps, volunteers in service to America, or the
foreign service of the United States, is exempt from the license requirements
of such sections for the period of the person’s active duty or service and
for six months thereafter, provided such person was a licensee under such
sections at the time the person commenced the person's active duty or
service. This section does not prevent such a person or the person's spouse
or dependent from making an application, as provided in R.C. § 4507.10(C),
for the renewal of a driver’s license or motorcycle operator’s
endorsement or as provided in R.C. § 4506.14 for the renewal of a commercial
driver’s license during the period of the person’s active duty or service.



      (7)   Whoever violates division (B)(3) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 4507.03)



   (C)   Nonresidents, permitted to drive upon the highways of their
own state, may operate any motor vehicle upon any highway in this state
without examination or license under R.C. §§ 4507.01 to 4507.39, inclusive,
upon condition that such nonresident may be required at any time or place to
prove lawful possession or their right to operate such motor vehicle, and to
establish proper identity.



(R.C. § 4507.04)



§ 71.21  EXEMPTIONS FROM LICENSE REQUIREMENT.



   (A)   No person shall be required to obtain a driver's or commercial
driver's license for the purpose of driving or operating a road roller, road
machinery or any farm tractor or implement of husbandry, temporarily drawn,
moved or propelled upon the highway.



   (B)   Every person on active duty in the armed forces of the United
States, when furnished with a driver's permit and when operating an official
motor vehicle in connection with such duty is exempt from the license
requirements of R.C. Chs. 4506 and 4507.



   (C)   Every person on active duty in the armed forces of the United
States or in service with the peace corps, volunteers in service to America,
or the foreign service of the United States is exempt from the license
requirements of those chapters for the period of his active duty or service
for six months thereafter, provided the person was a licensee under those
chapters at the time he commenced his active duty or service.  The spouse or
a dependent of any such person on active duty or in service also is exempt
from the license requirements of those chapters for the period of the
person's active duty or service and for six months thereafter, provided the
spouse or dependent was a licensee under those chapters at the time the
person commenced the active duty or service, and provided further that the
person's active duty or service causes the spouse or dependent to relocate
outside of this state during the period of the active duty or service.



   (D)   This section does not prevent such a person or his spouse or
dependent from making an application, as provided in R.C. § 4507.10(C), for
the renewal of a driver's license or motorcycle operator's endorsement or as
provided in R.C. § 4506.14 for the renewal of a commercial driver's license
during the period of his active duty or service.



(R.C. § 4507.03)  ('69 Code, § 72.10)



   (E)   Nonresidents, permitted to drive upon the highways of their
own state, may operate any motor vehicle upon any highway in this state
without examination or license under R.C. §§ 4507.01 to 4507.39, inclusive,
upon condition that such nonresident may be required at any time or place to
prove lawful possession or their right to operate such motor vehicle, and to
establish proper identity.



(R.C. § 4507.04)  ('69 Code, § 72.11)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.22  PERMITTING MINOR TO OPERATE VEHICLE PROHIBITED; TEMPORARY
INSTRUCTION PERMIT; PROBATIONARY LICENSE.



   (A)   No person shall cause or knowingly permit any minor to drive a
motor vehicle upon a highway as an operator, unless the minor has first
obtained a license or permit to drive a motor vehicle under R.C. Chapter 4507.



(R.C. § 4507.31(A))



   (B)   (1)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit issued
under R.C. § 4507.05(A) shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking in violation of the conditions established under R.C. §
4507.05(A).



      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (B)(3)(b) of
this section, no holder of a temporary instruction permit that is issued
under R.C. § 4507.05(A) and that is issued on or after July 1,1998, and who
has not attained the age of 18 years, shall operate a motor vehicle upon a
highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m.



         (b)   The holder of a temporary instruction permit
issued under R.C. § 4507.05(A) on or after July 1, 1998, who has not
attained the age of 18 years, may operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposed of vehicular
travel or parking between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. if, at the time
of such operation, the holder is accompanied by the holder's parent,
guardian, or custodian, and the parent, guardian, or custodian holds a
current valid driver's or commercial driver's license issued by this state,
is actually occupying a seat beside the permit holder, and does not have a
prohibited concentration of alcohol in the whole blood, blood serum or
plasma, breath, or urine as provided in R.C. § 4511.19(A).



(R.C. § 4507.05(F))



   (C)   (1)   (a)   No holder of a probationary driver’s
license who has held the license for less than 12 months shall operate a
motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the
public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking between the hours of
midnight and 6:00 a.m. unless the holder is accompanied by the holder’s
parent or guardian.



         (b)   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who
has held the license for 12 months or longer shall operate a motor vehicle
upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and
5:00 a.m. unless the holder is accompanied by the holder’s parent or
guardian.



      (2)   (a)   Subject to division (E)(1) of this section,
division (C)(1)(a) of this section does not apply to the holder of a
probationary driver’s license who is doing either of the following:



            1.   Traveling to or from work between the hours
of midnight and 6:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s
immediate possession written documentation from the holder’s employer.



            2.   Traveling to or from an official function
sponsored by the school the holder attends between the hours of midnight and
6:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate
possession written documentation from an appropriate official of the school;



            3.   Traveling to or from an official religious
event between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., provided that the holder
has in the holder’s immediate possession written documentation from an
appropriate official affiliated with the event.



         (b)   Division (C)(1)(b) of this section does not apply
to the holder of a probationary driver’s license who is doing either of the
following:



            1.   Traveling to or from work between the hours
of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s
immediate possession written documentation from the holder’s employer.



            2.   Traveling to or from an official function
sponsored by the school the holder attends between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and
5:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate
possession written documentation from an appropriate official of the school;



            3.   Traveling to or from an official religious
event between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., provided that the holder
has in the holder’s immediate possession written documentation from an
appropriate official affiliated with the event.



      (3)   An employer, school official, or official affiliated
with a religious event is not liable in damages in a civil action for any
injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly arises from, or
is related to, the fact that the employer, school official, or official
affiliated with a religious event provided the holder of a probationary
driver’s license with the written documentation described in division
(C)(2) of this section. The Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall make available
at no cost a form to serve as the written documentation described in division
(C)(2) of this section, and employers, school officials, officials affiliated
with religious events, and holders of probationary driver’s licenses may
utilize that form or may choose to utilize any other written documentation to
meet the requirements of that division.



      (4)   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has
held the license for less than 12 months shall operate a motor vehicle upon a
highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking with more than one person who is not a family
member occupying the vehicle unless the probationary license holder is
accompanied by the probationary license holder’s parent, guardian, or
custodian.



   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a violation of division
(C)(1)(a) or (C)(1)(b) of this section if, at the time of the violation, an
emergency existed that required the holder of the probationary driver’s
license to operate a motor vehicle in violation of division (C)(1)(a) or
(C)(1)(b) of this section or the holder was an emancipated minor.



   (E)   (1)   If a person is issued a probationary driver’s
license prior to attaining the age of 17 years and the person pleads guilty
to, is convicted of, or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed
a moving violation during the six- month period commencing on the date on
which the person is issued the probationary driver’s license, the court
with jurisdiction over the violation may order that the holder must be
accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian whenever the holder is
operating a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property
used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking for a period
not to exceed six months or the date the holder attains the age of 17 years,
whichever occurs first.



      (2)   Any person who is subject to the operating restrictions
established under division (E)(1) of this section as a result of a first
moving violation may petition the court for driving privileges without being
accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian during the period of time
determined by the court under that division. In granting the driving
privileges, the court shall specify the purposes of the privileges and shall
issue the person appropriate forms setting forth the privileges granted. If a
person is convicted of, pleads guilty to, or is adjudicated in juvenile court
of having committed a second or subsequent moving violation, the court with
jurisdiction over the violation may terminate any driving privileges
previously granted under this division.



      (3)   No person shall violate any operating restriction
imposed under division (E)(1) or (E)(2) of this section.



   (F)   No holder of a probationary license shall operate a motor
vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property used by the public
for purposes of vehicular travel or parking unless the total number of
occupants of the vehicle does not exceed the total number of occupant
restraining devices originally installed in the motor vehicle by its
manufacturer, and each occupant of the vehicle is wearing all of the
available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device.



   (G)   A restricted license may be issued to a person who is 14 or 15
years of age under proof of hardship satisfactory to the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles.



   (H)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary,
no law enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being
operated on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole
purpose of determining whether each occupant of the motor vehicle is wearing
all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining
device as required by division (F) of this section, or for the sole purpose
of issuing a ticket, citation or summons if that requirement has been or is
being violated, or for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a
person for a violation of that requirement.



   (I)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no
law enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being
operated on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole
purpose of determining whether a violation of division (C)(1)(a) or (C)(1)(b)
of this section has been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of
issuing a ticket, citation or summons for such a violation or for causing the
arrest or commencing a prosecution of a person for such a violation.



   (J)   As used in this section:



      FAMILY MEMBER of a probationary license holder includes any of
the following:



         (a)   A spouse;



         (b)   A child or stepchild;



         (c)   A parent, stepparent, grandparent, or
parent-in-law;



         (d)   An aunt or uncle;



         (e)   A sibling, whether of the whole or half blood or
by adoption, a brother-in-law, or a sister-in-law;



         (f)   A son or daughter of the probationary license
holder's stepparent if the stepparent has not adopted the probationary
license holder;



         (g)   An eligible adult, as defined in R.C. § 4507.05.



      MOVING VIOLATION means any violation of any statute or ordinance
that regulates the operation of vehicles on the highways or streets. MOVING
VIOLATION does not include a violation of R.C. § 4513.263 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or a violation of any statute or ordinance
regulating pedestrians or the parking of vehicles, vehicle size or load
limitations, vehicle fitness requirements, or vehicle registration.



      OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICE has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4513.263.



(R.C. § 4507.071(B) - (I))



   (K)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 4507.31(B))



      (2)   Whoever violates divisions (B), (C)(1), (C)(4), (E)(3),
or (F) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. §§ 4507.05(I), 4507.071(J)) ('69 Code, § 72.12)  Penalty, see §
71.99



§ 71.23  PROHIBITED ACTS.



   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Display or cause or permit to be displayed, or possess
any identification card, driver's or commercial driver's license, temporary
instruction permit, or commercial driver's license temporary instruction
permit knowing the same to be fictitious, or to have been canceled,
suspended, or altered;



(69 Code, § 72.13);



      (2)   Lend to a person not entitled thereto, or knowingly
permit a person not entitled thereto to use any identification card, driver's
or commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit or commercial
driver's license temporary instruction permit issued to the person so lending
or permitting the use thereof;



(69 Code, § 72.14);



      (3)   Display, or represent as one's own, any identification
card, driver's or commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit,
or commercial driver's license temporary instruction permit not issued to the
person so displaying the same;



(69 Code, § 72.15);



      (4)   Fail to surrender to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles,
upon the Registrar's demand, any identification card, driver's or commercial
driver's license, temporary instruction permit, or commercial driver's
license temporary instruction permit that has been suspended or canceled;



(69 Code, § 72.16);



      (5)   In any application for an identification card, driver's
or commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, or commercial
driver's license temporary instruction permit or any renewal or duplicate
thereof, knowingly conceal a material fact or present any physician's
statement required under R.C. §§ 4507.08 or 4507.081 when knowing the same
to be false or fictitious.



(69 Code, § 72.17)



   (B)   Whoever violates any division of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 4507.30)



Statutory reference:



   Use of license to violate liquor laws; suspension; procedures, see R.C.
§ 4510.33



§ 71.24  (RESERVED).



§ 71.25  (RESERVED).



§ 71.26  EMPLOYMENT OF A MINOR TO OPERATE A TAXICAB PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Notwithstanding the definition of CHAUFFEUR in R.C. §
4501.01, no person shall employ any minor for the purpose of operating a
taxicab.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C. § 4507.321)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.27  RESTRICTION AGAINST OWNER LENDING VEHICLE FOR USE OF ANOTHER.



   (A)   No person shall permit a motor vehicle owned by the person or
under the person's control to be driven by another if any of the following
apply:



      (1)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe
that the other person does not have a valid driver's or commercial driver's
license or permit or valid nonresident driving privileges;



      (2)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe
that the other person's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or
nonresident operating privileges have been suspended or canceled under R.C.
Chapter 4510 or any other provision of the Revised Code.



      (3)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe
that the other person's act of driving the motor vehicle would violate any
prohibition contained in R.C. Chapter 4509.



      (4)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe
that the other person's act of driving would violate R.C. § 4511.19 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



      (5)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe
that the vehicle is the subject of an immobilization waiver order issued
under R.C. § 4503.235 and the other person is prohibited from operating the
vehicle under that order.



   (B)   Without limiting or precluding the consideration of any other
evidence in determining whether a violation of division (A)(1), (2), (3),
(4), or (5) of this section has occurred, it shall be prima-facie evidence
that the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the operator
of the motor vehicle owned by the offender or under the offender's control is
in a category described in division (A)(1), (2), (3), (4), or (5) of this
section if any of the following applies:



      (1)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category
described in division (A)(1), (3), or (5) of this section, the offender and
the operator of the motor vehicle reside in the same household and are
related by consanguinity or affinity.



      (2)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category
described in division (A)(2) of this section, the offender and the operator
of the motor vehicle reside in the same household, and the offender knows or
has reasonable cause to believe that the operator has been charged with or
convicted of any violation of law or ordinance, or has committed any other
act or omission, that would or could result in the suspension or cancellation
of the operator's license, permit, or privilege.



      (3)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category
described in division (A)(4) of this section, the offender and the operator
of the motor vehicle occupied the motor vehicle together at the time of the
offense.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of wrongful
entrustment of a motor vehicle, and shall be punished as provided in
divisions (C) to (H) of this section.



      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this section,
whoever violates division (A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)(3) of this section is guilty
of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified
misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to § 130.13, § 130.99
or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to § 130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26;
notwithstanding § 130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the
offender may be fined up to $1,000; and, notwithstanding § 130.99(F)(1)(c)
and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up
to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community
service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt
under R.C. § 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.



      (2)   (a)   If, within three years of a violation of
division (A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)(3) of this section, the offender previously
has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of two or more violations of division
(A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)(3) of this section, R.C. § 4511.203(A)(1), (A)(2), or
(A)(3), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



         (b)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) or (A)(5) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (3)   For any violation of this section, in addition to the
penalties imposed under this Code or R.C. Chapter 2929, the court may impose
a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial
driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or
nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. §
4510.02(A)(7), and, if the vehicle involved in the offense is registered in
the name of the offender, the court may order one of the following:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3)(b)
or (C)(3)(c) of this section, the court may order, for 30 days, the
immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of
that vehicle's license plates. If issued, the order shall be issued and
enforced under R.C. § 4503.233.



         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section, R.C. § 4511.203, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order, for 60
days, the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense and the
impoundment of that vehicle's license plates. If issued, the order shall be
issued and enforced under R.C. § 4503.233.



         (c)   If the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section, R.C. §
4511.203, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may
order the criminal forfeiture to the state of the vehicle involved in the
offense. If issued, the order shall be issued and enforced under R.C. §
4503.234.



      (4)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order
for criminal forfeiture under division (C)(3)(c) of this section is assigned
or transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, in addition to
or independent of any other penalty established by law, the court may fine
the offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the
National Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds from any fine imposed
under this division shall be distributed in accordance with R.C. §
4503.234(C)(2).



   (D)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under
division (C)(3)(a) or (C)(3)(b) of this section, the court shall not release
the vehicle from the immobilization before the termination of the period of
immobilization ordered unless the court is presented with current proof of
financial responsibility with respect to that vehicle.



   (E)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under
division (C)(3)(c) of this section, upon receipt of the order from the court,
neither the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor any deputy registrar shall accept
any application for the registration or transfer of registration of any motor
vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the order. The period of
denial shall be five years after the date the order is issued, unless, during
that five-year period, the court with jurisdiction of the offense that
resulted in the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar of
the termination. If the court terminates the forfeiture and notifies the
Registrar, the Registrar shall take all necessary measures to permit the
person to register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to transfer the
registration of the vehicle.



   (F)   This section does not apply to motor vehicle rental dealers or
motor vehicle leasing dealers, as defined in R.C. § 4549.65.



   (G)   Evidence of a conviction of, plea of guilty to, or
adjudication as a delinquent child for a violation of this section shall not
be admissible as evidence in any civil action that involves the offender or
delinquent child who is the subject of the conviction, plea, or adjudication
and that arises from the wrongful entrustment of a motor vehicle.



   (H)   For purposes of this section, a vehicle is owned by a person
if, at the time of a violation of this section, the vehicle is registered in
the person's name.



(R.C. § 4511.203)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.28  DRIVING UNDER SUSPENSION OR IN VIOLATION OF LICENSE RESTRICTION.



   (A)   Driving under suspension or in violation of license
restriction.



      (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(2) of this section,
division (B) of this section, § 71.33 and in R.C. §§ 4510.111 and 4510.16,
no person whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege has been suspended under any provision of the
Ohio Revised Code, other than R.C. Chapter 4509, or under any applicable law
in any other jurisdiction in which the person’s license or permit was
issued shall operate any motor vehicle upon the public roads and highways or
upon any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking within this municipality during the period of
suspension unless the person is granted limited driving privileges and is
operating the vehicle in accordance with the terms of the limited driving
privileges.



      (2)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway
or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking in this municipality in violation of any
restriction of the person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit imposed under R.C. § 4506.10(D) or 4507.14.



      (3)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority,
a noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows
the name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with
a violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under
suspension at the time of the alleged violation of division (A)(1) of this
section or the person operated a motor vehicle in violation of a restriction
at the time of the alleged violation of division (A)(2) of this section. The
person charged with a violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section
may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.



      (4)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court may
impose upon the offender a class seven suspension of the offender’s
driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the
range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).



         (b)   1.   Except as provided in division (A)(4)(b)2.
or (A)(4)(b)3. of this section, the court, in addition to any other penalty
that it imposes on the offender and if the vehicle is registered in the
offender’s name and if, within three years of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this
section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to or independent of any other
sentence that it imposes upon the offender, may order the immobilization of
the vehicle involved in the offense for 30 days and the impoundment of that
vehicle’s license plates for 30 days in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.



            2.   If the vehicle is registered in the
offender’s name and if, within three years of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of this
section, or any combination of two violations of this section, R.C. §
4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a substantially similar municipal
ordinance, the court, in addition to any other sentence that it imposes on
the offender, may order the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the
offense for 60 days and the impoundment of that vehicle’s license plates
for 60 days in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.



            3.   If the vehicle is registered in the
offender’s name and if, within three years of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more
violations of this section, or any combination of three or more violations of
this section or R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a substantially
similar municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to any other sentence
that it imposes on the offender, may order the criminal forfeiture of the
vehicle involved in the offense to the state.



      (5)   Any order for immobilization and impoundment under this
section shall be issued and enforced under R.C. §§ 4503.233 and 4507.02, as
applicable. The court shall not release a vehicle from immobilization ordered
under this section unless the court is presented with current proof of
financial responsibility with respect to that vehicle.



      (6)   Any order of criminal forfeiture under this section
shall be issued and enforced under R.C. § 4503.234. Upon receipt of the copy
of the order from the court, neither the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor a
deputy registrar shall accept any application for the registration or
transfer of registration of any motor vehicle owned or leased by the person
named in the declaration of forfeiture. The period of registration denial
shall be five years after the date of the order, unless, during that period,
the court having jurisdiction of the offense that led to the order terminates
the forfeiture and notifies the registrar of the termination. The registrar
then shall take necessary measures to permit the person to register a vehicle
owned or leased by the person or to transfer registration of the vehicle.



      (7)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of
financial responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails
to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any
other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to
§ 130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any
economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and
proximate result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during,
or after committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under
this section.



(R.C. § 4510.11)



   (B)   Driving under suspension in violation of other provisions.



      (1)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway
or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking in this municipality whose driver’s or
commercial driver’s license has been suspended pursuant to R.C. §
2151.354, 2151.87, 2935.27, 3123.58, 4301.99, 4510.032, 4510.22, or 4510.33,
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



      (2)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority,
a noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows
the name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with
a violation of division (B)(1) of this section may be admitted into evidence
as prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under suspension
at the time of the alleged violation of division (B)(1) of this section. The
person charged with a violation of division (B)(1) of this section may offer
evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.



      (3)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) of this section is
guilty of driving under suspension and shall be punished as provided in
division (B)(3)(a) or division (B)(3)(b) of this section.



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(3)(b)
of this section, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. The offender
shall be sentenced pursuant to § 130.13, § 130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to
2929.28, except that the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the
offender shall not be sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant
to § 130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding § 130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and
R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to $1,000; and,
notwithstanding § 130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender
may be ordered pursuant to § 130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a
term of community service of up to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to
complete a term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as
indirect criminal contempt under R.C. § 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the
underlying case.



         (b)   If, within three years of the offense, the
offender previously was convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more
violations of division (B)(1) of this section, or any combination of two or
more violations of division (B)(1) of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111
or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is
a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, and the offender shall provide the court
with proof of financial responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the
offender fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then in
addition to any other penalties provided by law, the court may order
restitution pursuant to R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for
any economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct
and proximate result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before,
during, or after committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced
under this section.



(R.C. § 4510.111)



   (C)   Repeat traffic offender; point system suspension. Any person
whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privileges are suspended as a repeat traffic offender under R.C. §
4510.037 and who, during the suspension, operates any motor vehicle upon any
public roads and highways is guilty of driving under a twelve-point
suspension, a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the
offender to a minimum term of three days in jail. No court shall suspend the
first three days of jail time imposed pursuant to this division.



(R.C. § 4510.037(J))



   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under
division (A) of this section that the alleged offender drove under
suspension, without a valid permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s
license, or in violation of a restriction because of a substantial emergency,
and because no other person was reasonably available to drive in response to
the emergency.



(R.C. § 4510.04)



§ 71.29  OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE OR MOTORCYCLE WITHOUT VALID LICENSE.



   (A)   (1)   No person, except those expressly exempted under R.C.
§§ 4507.03, 4507.04, and 4507.05, shall operate any motor vehicle upon a
public road or highway or any public or private property used by the public
for purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this municipality unless the
person has a valid driver's license issued under R.C. Chapter 4507 or a
commercial driver's license issued under R.C. Chapter 4506.



      (2)   No person, except a person expressly exempted under R.C.
§§ 4507.03, 4507.04, and 4507.05, shall operate any motorcycle upon a
public road or highway or any public or private property used by the public
for purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this municipality unless the
person has a valid license as a motorcycle operator that was issued upon
application by the registrar of motor vehicles under R.C. Chapter 4507. The
license shall be in the form of an endorsement, as determined by the
registrar, upon a driver's or commercial driver's license, if the person has
a valid license to operate a motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle, or in
the form of a restricted license as provided in R.C. § 4507.14, if the
person does not have a valid license to operate a motor vehicle or commercial
motor vehicle.



   (B)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows
the name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with
a violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima facie evidence that the person did not have either a valid
driver's or commercial driver's license at the time of the alleged violation
of division (A)(1) of this section or a valid license as a motorcycle
operator either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver's or commercial
driver's license or a restricted license at the time of the alleged violation
of division (A)(2) of this section. The person charged with a violation of
division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section may offer evidence to rebut this
prima facie evidence.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor
vehicle or motorcycle without a valid license and shall be punished as
follows:



      (1)   If the trier of fact finds that the offender never has
held a valid driver's or commercial driver's license issued by this state or
any other jurisdiction, or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle
by the offender, if the offender has never held a valid license as a
motorcycle operator, either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver's or
commercial driver's license or in the form of a restricted license, except as
otherwise provided in this division, the offense is an unclassified
misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender
shall be sentenced pursuant to § 130.13, § 130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to
2929.28, except that the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the
offender shall not be sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant
to § 130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding § 130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and
R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to $1,000; and,
notwithstanding § 130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender
may be ordered pursuant to § 130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a
term of community service of up to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to
complete a term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as
indirect criminal contempt under R.C. § 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the
underlying case. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to any violation of this section or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (2)   If the offender's driver's or commercial driver's
license or permit or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by
the offender, the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license bearing
the motorcycle endorsement or the offender's restricted license was expired
at the time of the offense, except as otherwise provided in this division,
the offense is a minor misdemeanor. If within three years of the offense, the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more
violations of this section or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
the offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



   (D)   The court shall not impose a license suspension for a first
violation of this section or if more than three years have passed since the
offender's last violation of R.C. § 4510.12, this section, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (E)   If the offender is sentenced under division (C)(2) of this
section, if within three years of the offense the offender previously was
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of R.C. § 4510.12,
this section, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and if the
offender's license was expired for more than six months at the time of the
offense, the court may impose a class seven suspension of the offender's
driver's license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).



(R.C. § 4510.12)



§ 71.30  DISPLAY OF LICENSE.



   (A)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall display the operator's
driver's license, or furnish satisfactory proof that the operator has a
driver's license, upon demand of any peace officer or of any person damaged
or injured in any collision in which the licensee may be involved. When a
demand is properly made, and the operator has the operator's driver's license
on or about the operator's person, the operator shall not refuse to display
the license. A person's failure to furnish satisfactory evidence that the
person is licensed under R.C. Chapter 4507 when the person does not have the
person's license on or about the person's person shall be prima facie
evidence of the person's not having obtained a driver's license.



   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this
section, whoever violates this section is guilty of an unclassified
misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender
shall be sentenced pursuant to § 130.13, § 130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to
2929.28, except that the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the
offender shall not be sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant
to § 130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding § 130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and
R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to $1,000; and
notwithstanding § 130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender
may be ordered pursuant to § 130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a
term of community service of up to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to
complete a term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as
indirect criminal contempt under R.C. § 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the
underlying case.



      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations
of this section, R.C. § 4507.35, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 4507.35)  ('69 Code, § 72.21)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.31  PROHIBITION AGAINST FALSE STATEMENTS.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly make a false statement to any matter
or thing required by the provisions of this traffic code.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C. § 4507.36)  Penalty, see § 71.99



§ 71.32  DRIVING UNDER OVI SUSPENSION.



   (A)   No person whose driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege has been suspended under R.C. §
4511.19, 4511.191, or 4511.196 or under R.C. § 4510.07 for a conviction of a
violation of a municipal OVI ordinance shall operate any motor vehicle upon
the public roads or highways within this municipality during the period of
the suspension.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of driving under OVI
suspension. The court shall sentence the offender under R.C. Chapter 2929,
subject to the differences authorized or required by this section.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2) or (3)
of this section, driving under OVI suspension is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:



         (a)   A mandatory jail term of three consecutive days.
The three-day term shall be imposed, unless, subject to division (C) of this
section, the court instead imposes a sentence of not less than 30 consecutive
days of house arrest with electronic monitoring. A period of house arrest
with electronic monitoring imposed under this division shall not exceed six
months. If the court imposes a mandatory three-day jail term under this
division, the court may impose a jail term in addition to that term, provided
that in no case shall the cumulative jail term imposed for the offense exceed
six months;



         (b)   A fine of not less than $250 and not more than
$1,000;



         (c)   A license suspension under division (E) of this
section;



         (d)   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the
time of the offense is registered in the offender's name, immobilization for
30 days of the offender's vehicle and impoundment for 30 days of the
identification license plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization
and impoundment shall be issued and enforced in accordance with R.C. §
4503.233.



      (2)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this
section or one equivalent offense, driving under OVI suspension is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all
of the following:



         (a)   A mandatory jail term of 10 consecutive days.
Notwithstanding the jail terms provided in R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, the
court may sentence the offender to a longer jail term of not more than one
year. The 10-day mandatory jail term shall be imposed unless, subject to
division (C) of this section, the court instead imposes a sentence of not
less than 90 consecutive days of house arrest with electronic monitoring. The
period of house arrest with electronic monitoring shall not exceed one year;



         (b)   Notwithstanding the fines provided for in R.C.
Chapter 2929, a fine of not less than $500 and not more than $2,500;



         (c)   A license suspension under division (E) of this
section;



         (d)   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the
time of the offense is registered in the offender's name, immobilization of
the offender's vehicle for 60 days and the impoundment for 60 days of the
identification license plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization
and impoundment shall be issued and enforced in accordance with R.C. §
4503.233.



      (3)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations
of this section or two or more equivalent offenses, driving under OVI
suspension is a misdemeanor. The court shall sentence the offender to all of
the following:



         (a)   A mandatory jail term of 30 consecutive days.
Notwithstanding the jail terms provided in R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, the
court may sentence the offender to a longer jail term of not more than one
year. The court shall not sentence the offender to a term of house arrest
with electronic monitoring in lieu of the mandatory portion of the jail term;



         (b)   Notwithstanding the fines set forth in R.C.
Chapter 2929, a fine of not less than $500 and not more than $2,500;



         (c)   A license suspension under division (E) of this
section;



         (d)   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the
time of the offense is registered in the offender's name, criminal forfeiture
to the state of the offender's vehicle. The order of criminal forfeiture
shall be issued and enforced in accordance with R.C. § 4503.234. If title to
a motor vehicle that is subject to an order for criminal forfeiture under
this division is assigned or transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (3)
applies, the court may fine the offender the value of the vehicle as
determined by publications of the National Automobile Dealers Association.
The proceeds from any fine so imposed shall be distributed in accordance with
division R.C. § 4503.234(C)(2).



   (C)   (1)   No court shall impose an alternative sentence of
house arrest with electronic monitoring under division (B)(1) or (2) of this
section unless, within 60 days of the date of sentencing, the court issues a
written finding on the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the
jail where the offender is required to serve the jail term imposed, the
offender will not be able to begin serving that term within the 60-day period
following the date of sentencing.



      (2)   An offender sentenced under this section to a period of
house arrest with electronic monitoring shall be permitted work release
during that period.



   (D)   Fifty percent of any fine imposed by a court under division
(B)(1), (2), or (3) of this section shall be deposited into the municipal
indigent drivers alcohol treatment fund under the control of that court, as
created by the municipality pursuant to R.C. § 4511.191(H).



   (E)   In addition to or independent of all other penalties provided
by law or ordinance, the trial judge of any court of record or the mayor of a
mayor's court shall impose on an offender who is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a violation of this section a class seven suspension of the
offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02 (A)(7).



      (1)   When permitted as specified in R.C. § 4510.021, if the
court grants limited driving privileges during a suspension imposed under
this section, the privileges shall be granted on the additional condition
that the offender must display restricted license plates, issued under R.C.
§ 4503.231, on the vehicle driven subject to the privileges, except as
provided in R.C. § 4503.231(B).



      (2)   A suspension of a commercial driver's license under this
section shall be concurrent with any period of suspension or disqualification
under R.C. § 3123.58 or 4506.16. No person who is disqualified for life from
holding a commercial driver's license under R.C. § 4506.16 shall be issued a
driver's license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period for which the
commercial driver's license was suspended under this section, and no person
whose commercial driver's license is suspended under this section shall be
issued a driver's license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period of the
suspension.



   (F)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to
provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any
other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to
§ 130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any
economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and
proximate result of the offender's operation of the vehicle before, during,
or after committing the offense that is a misdemeanor of the first degree
under this section for which the offender is sentenced.



   (G)   As used in this section:



      ELECTRONIC MONITORING has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.



      EQUIVALENT OFFENSE means any of the following:



      (1)   A violation of a municipal ordinance, law of another
state, or law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to
division (A) of this section;



      (2)   A violation of a former law of this state that was
substantially equivalent to division (A) of this section.



      JAIL has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.



      MANDATORY JAIL TERM means the mandatory term in jail of 3, 10, or
30 consecutive days that must be imposed under division (B)(1), (2), or (3)
of this section upon an offender convicted of a violation of division (A) of
this section and in relation to which all of the following apply:



      (1)   Except as specifically authorized under this section,
the term must be served in a jail.



      (2)   Except as specifically authorized under this section,
the term cannot be suspended, reduced, or otherwise modified pursuant to any
provision of the Ohio Revised Code.



(R.C. § 4510.14)



   (H)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under
this section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a
valid permit or driver's or commercial driver's license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person
was reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.



(R.C. § 4510.04)



Statutory reference:



   Immobilization of vehicle; impoundment of license plates; criminal
forfeiture of vehicle, see R.C. § 4510.161



§ 71.33  DRIVING UNDER FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY LAW SUSPENSION OR
CANCELLATION; DRIVING UNDER A NONPAYMENT OF JUDGMENT SUSPENSION.



   (A)   No person, whose driver's or commercial driver's license or
temporary instruction permit or nonresident's operating privilege has been
suspended or canceled pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4509, shall operate any motor
vehicle within this municipality, or knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned
by the person to be operated by another person in the municipality, during
the period of the suspension or cancellation, except as specifically
authorized by R.C. Chapter 4509. No person shall operate a motor vehicle
within this municipality, or knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned by the
person to be operated by another person in the municipality, during the
period in which the person is required by R.C. § 4509.45 to file and
maintain proof of financial responsibility for a violation of R.C. §
4509.101, unless proof of financial responsibility is maintained with respect
to that vehicle.



   (B)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking in this municipality if the person's driver's or commercial
driver's license or temporary instruction permit or nonresident operating
privilege has been suspended pursuant to R.C. § 4509.37 or 4509.40 for
nonpayment of a judgment.



   (C)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows
the name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with
a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under
either a financial responsibility law suspension at the time of the alleged
violation of division (A) of this section or a nonpayment of judgment
suspension at the time of the alleged violation of division (B) of this
section. The person charged with a violation of division (A) or (B) of this
section may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.



   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
driving under financial responsibility law suspension or cancellation and
shall be punished as provided in this division (D). Whoever violates division
(B) of this section is guilty of driving under a nonpayment of judgment
suspension and shall be punished as provided in this division (D).



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (D)(2) of
this section, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is
an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §
130.13, § 130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender
shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to
a community residential sanction pursuant to § 130.99(E) or R.C. § 2929.26;
notwithstanding § 130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the
offender may be fined up to $1,000; and, notwithstanding § 130.99(F)(1)(c)
and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant to §
130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up
to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community
service imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt
under R.C. § 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.



      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender
previously was convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of
this section, or any combination of two violations of this section, R.C. §
4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (3)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of
financial responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails
to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then in addition to any
other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to
R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under this section.



(R.C. § 4510.16)



   (E)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution
brought under this section that the alleged offender drove under suspension,
without a valid permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in
violation of a restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no
other person was reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.



      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought
under this section that the order of suspension resulted from the failure of
the alleged offender to respond to a financial responsibility random
verification request under R.C. § 4509.101(A)(3)(c) and that, at the time of
the initial financial responsibility random verification request, the alleged
offender was in compliance with R.C. § 4509.101(A)(1) as shown by proof of
financial responsibility that was in effect at the time of that request.



(R.C. § 4510.04)



Statutory reference:



   Immobilization of vehicle; impoundment of license plates; criminal
forfeiture of vehicle see R.C. § 4510.161



§ 71.34  FAILURE TO REINSTATE LICENSE.



   (A)   No person whose driver's license, commercial driver's license,
temporary instruction permit, or nonresident's operating privilege has been
suspended shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public road or highway or
any public or private property after the suspension has expired unless the
person has complied with all license reinstatement requirements imposed by
the court, the bureau of motor vehicles, or another provision of the Ohio
Revised Code.



   (B)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows
the name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with
a violation of division (A) of this section may be admitted into evidence as
prima facie evidence that the license of the person had not been reinstated
by the person at the time of the alleged violation of division (A) of this
section. The person charged with a violation of division (A) of this section
may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to
reinstate a license, and shall be punished as follows:



      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this section,
whoever violates this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When
the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to § 130.13, § 130.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that
the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be
sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant to § 130.99(E) or
R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding § 130.99(G)(1)(b)1. and R.C. §
2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to $1,000; and,
notwithstanding § 130.99(F)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender
may be ordered pursuant to § 130.99(F)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a
term of community service of up to 500 hours. The failure of an offender to
complete a term of community service imposed by the court may be punished as
indirect criminal contempt under R.C. § 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the
underlying case.



      (2)   If, within three years of a violation of division (A) of
this section, the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted
of two or more violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.21 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



      (3)   In all cases, the court may impose upon the offender a
class seven suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial
driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary driver's
license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C.
§ 4510.02(A)(7).



(R.C. § 4510.21)



   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under
this section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a
valid permit or driver's or commercial driver's license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person
was reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.



(R.C. § 4510.04)



§ 71.35  SUSPENSION OF DRIVER'S LICENSE; LICENSE SUSPENDED BY COURT OF
RECORD.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4510.07 or in any
other provision of the Revised Code, whenever an offender is convicted of or
pleads guilty to a violation of any provision of this code that is
substantially equivalent to a provision of the Revised Code, and a court is
permitted or required to suspend a person's driver's or commercial driver's
license or permit for a violation of that provision, a court, in addition to
any other penalties authorized by law, may suspend the offender's driver's or
commercial driver's license or permit or non resident operating privileges
for the period of time the court determines appropriate, but the period of
suspension imposed for the violation of the provision of this code shall not
exceed the period of suspension that is permitted or required to be imposed
for the violation of the provision of the Revised Code to which the provision
of this code is substantially equivalent.



(R.C. § 4510.05)



   (B)   Whenever a person is found guilty under the laws of this state
or any ordinance of any political subdivision of this state, of operating a
motor vehicle in violation of any such law or ordinance relating to reckless
operation, the trial court of any court of record, in addition to or
independent of all other penalties provided by law, may impose a class five
suspension of the offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. §
4510.02(A)(5).



   (C)   Suspension of a commercial driver's license under this section
shall be concurrent with any period of suspension disqualification under R.C.
§§ 3123.58 or 4506.16. No person who is disqualified for life from holding
a commercial driver's license under R.C. § 4506.16 shall be issued a
driver's license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period for which the
commercial driver's license was suspended under this section, and no person
whose commercial driver's license is suspended under this section shall be
issued a driver's license under R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period of the
suspension.



(R.C. § 4510.15)



§ 71.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which another
penalty is not provided shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



CHAPTER 72: TRAFFIC RULES



Section



General Provisions



   72.01   Lanes of travel upon roadways



   72.02   Vehicles traveling in opposite directions



   72.03   Rules governing overtaking and passing of vehicles



   72.04   Permission to overtake and pass on the right



   72.05   Driving to left of center line



   72.06   Prohibition against driving upon left side of roadway



   72.07   Hazardous zones



   72.08   One-way highways and rotary traffic islands



   72.09   Rules for driving in marked lanes



   72.10   Space between moving vehicles



   72.11   Divided roadways



   72.12   Rules for turns at intersections



   72.13   Turning in roadway prohibited



   72.14   Rules for starting and backing vehicles



   72.15   Turn and stop signals



   72.16   Hand and arm signals



Right-of-Way



   72.20   Right-of-way at intersections



   72.21   Right-of-way at converging lanes



   72.22   Right-of-way when turning left



   72.23   Right-of-way at through highways; stop signs; yield signs



   72.24   Stop at sidewalk area



   72.25   Right-of-way on public highway



   72.26   Pedestrian on sidewalk has right-of-way



   72.27   Right-of-way of public safety vehicles



   72.28   Funeral procession has right-of-way



   72.29   Pedestrians yield right-of-way to public safety vehicle



   72.30   Pedestrian on crosswalk has right-of-way



   72.31   Right-of-way yielded to blind person



   72.32   Right-of-way yielded by pedestrian



   72.33   Intoxicated or drugged pedestrian hazard on highway



Pedestrians



   72.40   Pedestrians



   72.41   Pedestrian walking along highway



   72.42   Prohibition against soliciting rides; riding on outside of
vehicle



   72.43   Pedestrian on bridge or railroad crossing



   72.44   Operation of electric personal assistive mobility devices



   72.45   Operation of personal delivery device on sidewalks and
crosswalks



Grade Crossings



   72.50   Stop signs at grade crossings



   72.51   Driving vehicle across railroad grade crossing



   72.52   Vehicles required to stop at grade crossings



   72.53   Slow-moving vehicles or equipment crossing railroad tracks



Through Highways



   72.60   Through highways



Prohibitions



   72.65   Obstruction and interference affecting view and control of
driver



   72.66   Occupying travel trailer while in motion



   72.67   Prohibition against driving upon closed highway



   72.68   Driving upon sidewalk area



   72.69   Obstructing passage of other vehicles



   72.70   Following an emergency or public vehicle prohibited



   72.71   Driving over unprotected fire hose



   72.72   Prohibition against placing injurious material on highway



   72.73   Transporting child not in child-restraint system prohibited



   72.74   Occupant restraining devices



   72.741   Use of engine brakes prohibited



   72.742   Operating motor vehicle while wearing earphones or earplugs



   72.743   Texting while driving prohibited



   72.744   Use of electronic wireless communication devices by minors
or probationary drivers while driving prohibited



School Buses



   72.75   Regulations concerning school buses



   72.76   Violation of regulations; report; investigation; citation;
warning



   72.77   School bus regulations by Department of Education and
Department of Highway Safety



   72.78   School bus inspection



   72.79   School bus not used for school purposes



   72.80   Licensing by Department of Highway Safety



   72.81   Registration and identification of school buses



   72.82   School bus marking



   72.83   Flashing light signal lamps



   72.84   Occupant restraining device for operator



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 72.01  LANES OF TRAVEL UPON ROADWAYS.



   (A)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be
driven upon the right half of the roadway, except as follows:



      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding
in the same direction, or when making a left turn under the rules governing
such movements;



      (2)   When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive
to the left of the center of the highway; provided, any person so doing shall
yield the right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon
the unobstructed portion of the highway within such distance as to constitute
an immediate hazard;



      (3)   When driving upon a roadway divided into three or more
marked lanes for traffic under the rules applicable thereon;



      (4)   When driving upon a roadway designated and posted with
signs for one-way traffic;



      (5)   When otherwise directed by a police officer or
traffic-control device.



   (B)   (1)   Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than
the prevailing and lawful speed of traffic at the time and place and under
the conditions then existing shall be driven in the right-hand lane then
available for traffic, and far enough to the right to allow passing by faster
vehicles if such passing is safe and reasonable, except under any of the
following circumstances:



         (a)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction;



         (b)   When preparing for a left turn;



         (c)   When the driver must necessarily drive in a lane
other than the right-hand lane to continue on the driver's intended route.



      (2)   Nothing in division (B)(1) of this section requires a
driver of a slower vehicle to compromise the driver's safety to allow
overtaking by a faster vehicle.



   (C)   Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic
and providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to
the left of the center line of the roadway, except when authorized by
official traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left of the
center of the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use the
lanes, or except as permitted under division (A)(2) of this section. This
division shall not be construed as prohibiting the crossing of the center
line in making a left turn into or from an alley, private road, or driveway.



   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (E)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.25)  ('69 Code, § 73.10)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.02  VEHICLES TRAVELING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS.



   (A)   Operators of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall
pass each other to the right, and upon roadways having width for not more
than one line of traffic in each direction, each operator shall give to the
other one-half of the main traveled portion of the roadway or as nearly
one-half as is reasonably possible.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.26)  ('69 Code, § 73.11)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.03  RULES GOVERNING OVERTAKING AND PASSING OF VEHICLES.



   (A)   The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of
vehicles proceeding in the same direction:



      (1)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction shall, except as provided in division (A)(3)
of this section, signal to the vehicle to be overtaken, shall pass to the
left thereof at a safe distance, and shall not again drive to the right side
of the roadway until safely clear of the overtaken vehicle.  When a motor
vehicle overtakes and passes a bicycle, three feet or greater is considered a
safe passing distance.



      (2)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is
permitted, the operator of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right
in favor of the overtaking vehicle at the latter's audible signal, and the
operator shall not increase the speed of the operator's vehicle until
completely passed by the overtaking vehicle.



      (3)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking and passing another
vehicle proceeding in the same direction on a divided highway as defined in
R.C. § 4511.35, a limited access highway as defined in R.C. § 5511.02, or a
highway with four or more traffic lanes is not required to signal audibly to
the vehicle being overtaken and passed.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.27)  ('69 Code, § 73.12)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.04  PERMISSION TO OVERTAKE AND PASS ON THE RIGHT.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass on the right of
another vehicle only under the following conditions:



      (1)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a
left turn; or



      (2)   Upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient
width for two or more lines of vehicles moving lawfully in the direction
being traveled by the overtaking vehicle.



   (B)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle
only under conditions permitting the movement in safety. The movement shall
not be made by driving off the roadway.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.28)  ('69 Code, § 73.13)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.05  DRIVING TO LEFT OF CENTER LINE.



   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven to the left of the center of the
roadway in overtaking and passing traffic proceeding in the same direction,
unless the left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a
sufficient distance ahead to permit the overtaking and passing to be
completely made without interfering with the safe operation of any traffic
approaching from the opposite direction or any traffic overtaken. In every
event, the overtaking vehicle must return to an authorized lane of travel as
soon as practicable, and in the event the passing movement involves the use
of a lane authorized for the traffic approaching from the opposite direction,
before coming within 200 feet of any approaching vehicle.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.29)  ('69 Code, § 73.14)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.06  PROHIBITION AGAINST DRIVING UPON LEFT SIDE OF ROADWAY.



   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven upon the left side of the roadway
under the following conditions:



      (1)   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in
the highway, where the operator's view is obstructed within such a distance
as to create a hazard in the event traffic might approach from the opposite
direction;



      (2)   When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100
feet of any bridge, viaduct, or tunnel; or



      (3)   When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any
intersection or railroad grade crossing.



   (B)   This section does not apply to vehicles upon a one-way
roadway, upon a roadway where traffic is lawfully directed to be driven to
the left side, or under the conditions described in R.C. § 4511.25(A)(2) or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.30)  ('69 Code, § 73.15)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.07  HAZARDOUS ZONES.



   (A)   The Department of Transportation may determine those portions
of any state highway where overtaking and passing other traffic or driving to
the left of the center or center line of the roadway would be especially
hazardous, and may, by appropriate signs or markings on the highway, indicate
the beginning and end of such zones. When signs or markings are in place and
clearly visible, every operator of a vehicle shall obey the directions of the
signs or markings, notwithstanding the distances set out in R.C. §
4511.30.  Division (A) of this section does not apply when all of the
following apply:



      (1)   The slower vehicle is proceeding at less than half the
speed of the speed limit applicable to that location.



      (2)   The faster vehicle is capable of overtaking and passing
the slower vehicle without exceeding the speed limit.



      (3)   There is sufficient clear sight distance to the left of
the center or center line of the roadway to meet the overtaking and passing
provisions of R.C. § 4511.29, considering the speed of the slower vehicle.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.31)  ('69 Code, § 73.16)  (Ord. C-172, passed 3-13-61) 
Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.08  ONE-WAY HIGHWAYS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.



   (A)   (1)   Upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for
one-way traffic, a vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated.



('69 Code, § 73.17)



      (2)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall
be driven only to the right of the rotary traffic island.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.32)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.09  RULES FOR DRIVING IN MARKED LANES.



   (A)   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly
marked lanes for traffic, or wherever within the municipality traffic is
lawfully moving in two or more substantially continuous lines in the same
direction, the following rules apply:



      (1)   A vehicle shall be driven, as nearly as is practicable,
entirely within a single lane or line of traffic and shall not be moved from
the lane or line until the driver has first ascertained that the movement can
be made with safety.



      (2)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes and
provides for the two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven
in the center lane, except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where
the roadway is clearly visible and the center lane is clear of traffic within
a safe distance, or when preparing for a left turn, or where the center lane
is at the time allocated exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the
vehicle is proceeding, and is posted with signs to give notice of such
allocation.



      (3)   Official signs may be erected directing specified
traffic to use a designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by
traffic moving in a particular direction, regardless of the center of the
roadway, or restricting the use of a particular lane to only buses during
certain hours or during all hours, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the
directions of such signs.



      (4)   Official traffic-control devices may be installed
prohibiting the changing of lanes on sections of roadway, and drivers of
vehicles shall obey the directions of every such device.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.33)



   (D)   It shall be unlawful to drive any vehicle so as to straddle
the lines or other marks indicating a traffic lane.



('69 Code, § 73.18)  (Ord. C-123, passed 12-8-58)



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.10  SPACE BETWEEN MOVING VEHICLES.



   (A)   (1)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall not follow
another vehicle more closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due
regard for the speed of the vehicle and the traffic upon and the condition of
the highway.



      (2)   The driver of any truck, or motor vehicle drawing
another vehicle, when traveling upon a roadway outside a business or
residence district, shall maintain a sufficient space, whenever conditions
permit, between the vehicle and another vehicle ahead so an overtaking motor
vehicle may enter and occupy the space without danger. This division does not
prevent overtaking and passing nor does it apply to any lane specially
designated for use by trucks.



      (3)   Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of
a business or residence district in a caravan or motorcade shall maintain a
sufficient space between the vehicles so an overtaking vehicle may enter and
occupy the space without danger. This division shall not apply to funeral
processions.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.34) ('69 Code, § 73.19)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.11  DIVIDED ROADWAYS.



   (A)   Whenever any highway has been divided into two roadways by an
intervening space, or by a physical barrier, or a clearly indicated dividing
section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be
driven only upon the right-hand roadway, and no vehicle shall be driven over,
across, or within any dividing space, barrier, or section, except through an
opening, crossover, or intersection established by public authority. This
section does not prohibit the occupancy of the dividing space, barrier, or
section for the purpose of an emergency stop, or in compliance with an order
of a police officer.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.35)  ('69 Code, § 73.20)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.12  RULES FOR TURNS AT INTERSECTIONS.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection
shall be governed by the following rules:



      (1)   Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made
as close as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.



      (2)   At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move
in both directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for
a left turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway
nearest the center line thereof and by passing to the right of the center
line where it enters the intersection, and, after entering the intersection,
the left turn shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of
the center line of the roadway being entered.  Whenever practicable, the
left turn shall be made in that portion of the intersection to the left of
the center of the intersection.



(Ord. C-123, passed 12-8-58)



      (3)   At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one
direction on one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending
to turn left at any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the
extreme left-hand lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction
of travel of the vehicle, and, after entering the intersection, the left turn
shall be made so as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in
the left hand lane of the roadway being entered lawfully available to traffic
moving in that lane.



   (B)   The Department of Transportation and local authorities may
cause markers, buttons, or signs to be placed within or adjacent to
intersections, and thereby require and direct that a different course from
that specified in this section be traveled by vehicles turning at an
intersection, and when markers, buttons, or signs are so placed, no operator
of a vehicle shall turn the vehicle at an intersection other than as directed
and required by the markers, buttons, or signs.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.36)  ('69 Code, § 73.21)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.13  TURNING IN ROADWAY PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Except as provided in R.C. § 4511.13 and division (B) of this
section, no vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite
direction upon any curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a
grade, if such vehicle cannot be seen within 500 feet by the driver of any
other vehicle approaching from either direction.



   (B)   The driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle,
when responding to an emergency call, may turn the vehicle so as to proceed
in the opposite direction.  This division applies only when the emergency
vehicle or public safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is
equipped with and displaying at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating
light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet
to the front of the vehicle, and when the driver of the vehicle is giving an
audible signal by siren, exhaust whistle, or bell.  This division does not
relieve the driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the
duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon
the highway.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.37) ('69 Code, § 73.22) (Ord. C-123, passed 12-8-58) 
Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.14  RULES FOR STARTING AND BACKING VEHICLES.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped,
standing, or parked until the movement can be made with reasonable safety.



('69 Code, § 73.23)



      (2)   Before backing, operators of vehicles shall give ample
warning, and while backing they shall exercise vigilance not to injure person
or property on the street or highway.



      (3)   No person shall back a motor vehicle on a freeway,
except:



         (a)   In a rest area;



         (b)   In the performance of public works or official
duties;



         (c)   As a result of an emergency caused by an accident
or breakdown of a motor vehicle.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.38)  ('69 Code, §§ 72.04, 73.24)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.15  TURN AND STOP SIGNALS.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall turn a vehicle or move right or left
upon a highway unless and until the person has exercised due care to
ascertain that the movement can be made with reasonable safety, nor without
giving an appropriate signal in the manner hereinafter provided.



      (2)   When required, a signal of intention to turn or move
right or left shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100
feet traveled by the vehicle before turning, except that in the case of a
person operating a bicycle, the signal shall be made not less than one time
but is not required to be continuous. A bicycle operator is not required to
make a signal if the bicycle is in a designated turn lane, and a signal shall
not be given when the operator's hands are needed for the safe operation of
the bicycle.



      (3)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a
vehicle without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided
herein to the driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear, when there is
opportunity to give a signal.



      (4)   Any stop or turn signal required by this section shall
be given either by means of the hand and arm, or by signal lights that
clearly indicate to both approaching and following traffic the intention to
turn or move right or left, except that any motor vehicle in use on a highway
shall be equipped with, and the required signal shall be given by, signal
lights when the distance from the center of the top of the steering post to
the left outside limit of the body, cab or load of such motor vehicle exceeds
24 inches, or when the distance from the center of the top of the steering
post to the rear limit of the body or load thereof exceeds 14 feet, whether a
single vehicle or a combination of vehicles.



      (5)   The signal lights required by this section shall not be
flashed on one side only on a disabled vehicle, flashed as a courtesy or "do
pass" signal to operators of other vehicles approaching from the rear, nor be
flashed on one side only of a parked vehicle except as may be necessary for
compliance with this section.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.39)  ('69 Code, § 73.25)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.16  HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, all
signals required by the provisions of this traffic code, when given by hand
and arm, shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following
manner, and the signals shall indicate as follows:



      (1)   Left turn, hand and arm extended horizontally;



      (2)   Right turn, hand and arm extended upward;



      (3)   Stop or decrease speed, hand and arm extended downward.



   (B)   As an alternative to division (A)(2) of this section, a person
operating a bicycle may give a right turn signal by extending the right hand
and arm horizontally and to the right side of the bicycle.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.40)  ('69 Code, § 73.26)  Penalty, see § 70.99



RIGHT-OF-WAY



§ 72.20  RIGHT-OF-WAY AT INTERSECTIONS.



   (A)   When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection from
different streets or highways at approximately the same time, the driver of
the vehicle on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the
right.



   (B)   The right-of-way rule declared in division (A) of this section
is modified at through highways and otherwise as stated in this traffic code
or R.C. Chapter 4511.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.41)  ('69 Code, § 73.28)  (Ord. C-123, passed 12-8-58) 
Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.21  RIGHT-OF-WAY AT CONVERGING LANES.



   The operator of a vehicle transferring from one traffic lane to
another, so as to continue upon an improved street within this village, shall
not do so until he has ascertained that such movement can be made with
safety, and shall yield the right-of-way to all through traffic.



('69 Code, § 73.27)  (Ord. C-172, passed 3-13-61)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.22  RIGHT-OF-WAY WHEN TURNING LEFT.



   (A)   The operator of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within
an intersection or into an alley, private road, or driveway shall yield the
right-of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is
within the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate
hazard.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.42)  ('69 Code, § 73.29)  (Ord. C-123, passed 12-8-58)
Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.23  RIGHT-OF-WAY AT THROUGH HIGHWAYS; STOP SIGNS; YIELD SIGNS.



   (A)   Except when directed to proceed by a law enforcement officer,
every driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop at a clearly
marked stop line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side
of the intersection, or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting
roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering it. After having stopped, the driver
shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the intersection or
approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an immediate
hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the intersection
or junction of roadways.



   (B)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow
down to a speed reasonable for the existing conditions, and if required for
safety to stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then
at the point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it. After
slowing, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the
intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection or junction of roadways. Whenever a driver is involved in a
collision with a vehicle in the intersection or junction of roadways, after
driving past a yield sign without stopping, the collision shall be prima
facie evidence of the driver's failure to yield the right-of-way.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.43)  ('69 Code, §§ 73.30, 73.31)  (Ord. C-123, passed
12-8-58)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.24  STOP AT SIDEWALK AREA.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building,
private road, or driveway within a business or residence district shall stop
the vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk
area extending across the alley, building entrance, road, or driveway, or in
the event there is no sidewalk area, shall stop at the point nearest the
street to be entered where the driver has a view of approaching traffic
thereon.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.431)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.25  RIGHT-OF-WAY ON PUBLIC HIGHWAY.



   (A)   The operator of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway
from any place other than another roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all
traffic approaching on the roadway to be entered or crossed.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.44)  ('69 Code, § 73.32)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.26  PEDESTRIAN ON SIDEWALK HAS RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any
pedestrian on a sidewalk.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.441)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.27  RIGHT-OF-WAY OF PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLES.



   (A)   Upon the approach of a public safety vehicle or coroner's
vehicle, equipped with at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating light
visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to
the front of the vehicle, and the driver is giving an audible signal by
siren, exhaust whistle, or bell, no driver of any other vehicle shall fail to
yield the right-of-way, immediately drive if practical to a position parallel
to, and as close as possible to, the right edge or curb of the highway clear
of any intersection, and stop and remain in that position until the public
safety vehicle or coroner's vehicle has passed, except when otherwise
directed by a police officer.



   (B)   This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety
vehicle or coroner's vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the
safety of all persons and property upon the highway.



   (C)   This section applies to a coroner’s vehicle only when the
vehicle is operated in accordance with R.C. § 4513.171, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance. As used in this section, CORONER’S VEHICLE
means a vehicle used by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator
that is equipped with a flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light
and a siren, exhaust whistle or bell capable of giving an audible signal.



   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division or division (E),
whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree on a first offense. On a second offense within one year
after the first offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third
degree, and, on each subsequent offense within one year after the first
offense, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.



(R.C. § 4511.45)



   (E)   (1)   When the failure of a motor vehicle operator to yield
the right-of-way to a public safety vehicle as required by division (A) of
this section impedes the ability of the public safety vehicle to respond to
an emergency, any emergency personnel in the public safety vehicle may report
the license plate number and a general description of the vehicle and the
operator of the vehicle to the law enforcement agency exercising jurisdiction
over the area where the alleged violation occurred.



      (2)   (a)   Upon receipt of a report under division (E)(1)
of this section, the law enforcement agency may conduct an investigation to
attempt to determine or confirm the identity of the operator of the vehicle
at the time of the alleged violation.



         (b)   If the identity of the operator at the time of an
alleged violation of division (A) of this section is established, the law
enforcement agency has probable cause to issue either a written warning or a
citation for that violation, and the agency shall issue a written warning or
a citation to the operator.



         (c)   If the identity of the operator of the vehicle at
the time of the alleged violation cannot be established, the law enforcement
agency may issue a written warning to the person who owned the vehicle at the
time of the alleged violation. However, in the case of a leased or rented
vehicle, the law enforcement agency shall issue the written warning to the
person who leased or rented the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation.



      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section
based on a report filed under division (E)(1) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor and shall be fined $150.



         (b)   If a person who is issued a citation for a
violation of division (A) of this section based on a report filed under
division (E)(1) of this section does not enter a written plea of guilty and
does not waive the person’s right to contest the citation but instead
appears in person in the proper court to answer the charge, the trier of fact
cannot find beyond a reasonable doubt that the person committed that
violation unless the emergency personnel who filed the report appears in
person in the court and testifies.



      (4)   As used in this division (E):



         LICENSE PLATE. Includes any temporary license placard
issued under R.C. § 4503.182 or similar law of another jurisdiction.



         PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE. Does not include an unmarked public
safety vehicle or a vehicle used by a public law enforcement officer or other
person sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state or a
vehicle used by the motor carrier enforcement unit for the enforcement of
orders and rules of the public utilities commission.



(R.C. § 4511.454)



§ 72.28  FUNERAL PROCESSION HAS RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   (A)   As used in this section, FUNERAL PROCESSION means two or more
vehicles accompanying the cremated remains or the body of a deceased person
in the daytime when each of the vehicles has its headlights lighted and is
displaying a purple and white or an orange and white pennant attached to each
vehicle in such a manner as to be clearly visible to traffic approaching from
any direction.



   (B)   Excepting public safety vehicles proceeding in accordance with
R.C. § 4511.45 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or when
directed otherwise by a police officer, pedestrians and the operators of all
vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to each vehicle that is a part of a
funeral procession. Whenever the lead vehicle in a funeral procession
lawfully enters an intersection, the remainder of the vehicles in the
procession may continue to follow the lead vehicle through the intersection,
notwithstanding any traffic-control devices or right-of-way provisions of the
Revised Code, provided that the operator of each vehicle exercises due care
to avoid colliding with any other vehicle or pedestrian.



   (C)   No person shall operate any vehicle as a part of a funeral
procession without having the headlights of the vehicle lighted and without
displaying a purple and white or an orange and white pennant in such a manner
as to be clearly visible to traffic approaching from any direction.



   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (E)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.451)  ('69 Code, § 73.47)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.29  PEDESTRIANS YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY TO PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE.



   (A)   Upon the immediate approach of a public safety vehicle, as
stated in R.C. § 4511.45 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
every pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to the public safety vehicle.



   (B)   This section shall not relieve the driver of a public safety
vehicle from the duty to exercise due care to avoid colliding with any
pedestrian.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.452)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.30  PEDESTRIAN ON CROSSWALK HAS RIGHT-OF-WAY.



   (A)   When traffic-control signals are not in place, not in
operation, or are not clearly assigning the right-of-way, the driver of a
vehicle shall yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to
so yield, or if required by R.C. § 4511.132 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk
when the pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is
traveling, or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite
half of the roadway as to be in danger.



   (B)   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of
safety and walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close as to
constitute an immediate hazard.



   (C)   Division (A) of this section does not apply under the
conditions stated in R.C. § 4511.48(B), or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.



   (D)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at
any unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass the stopped vehicle.



   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (F)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.46)  ('69 Code, §§ 73.50, 73.51)  (Ord. C-123, passed
12-8-58)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.31  RIGHT-OF-WAY YIELDED TO BLIND PERSON.



   (A)   (1)   As used in this section BLIND PERSON or BLIND
PEDESTRIAN means a person having not more than 20/200 visual acuity in the
better eye with correcting lenses, or visual acuity greater than 20/200, but
with a limitation in the fields of vision such that the widest diameter of
the visual field subtends an angle no greater than 20°.



      (2)   The driver of every vehicle shall yield the right-of-way
to every blind pedestrian guided by a guide dog, or carrying a cane which is
predominantly white or metallic in color, with or without a red tip.



   (B)   No person, other than a blind person, while on any public
highway, street, alley, or other public thoroughfare, shall carry a white or
metallic cane, with or without a red tip.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.47)  ('69 Code, § 73.52)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.32  RIGHT-OF-WAY YIELDED BY PEDESTRIAN.



   (A)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than
within a marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.



   (B)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a
pedestrian tunnel or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall
yield the right-of-way to all traffic upon the roadway.



   (C)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control
signals are in operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in
a marked crosswalk.



   (D)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally
unless authorized by official traffic-control devices; and when authorized to
cross diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the
official traffic-control devices pertaining to such crossing movements.



   (E)   This section does not relieve the operator of a vehicle from
exercising due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway.



   (F)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.48)  ('69 Code, § 73.53)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.33  INTOXICATED OR DRUGGED PEDESTRIAN HAZARD ON HIGHWAY.



   (A)   A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol, any drug
of abuse, or any combination of them to a degree that renders the pedestrian
a hazard shall not walk or be upon a highway.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.481)  Penalty, see § 70.99



PEDESTRIANS



§ 72.40  PEDESTRIANS.



   (A)   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right
half of crosswalks.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.49)  ('69 Code, § 73.54)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.41  PEDESTRIAN WALKING ALONG HIGHWAY.



   (A)   Where a sidewalk is provided and its use is practicable, it
shall be unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent
roadway.



   (B)   Where a sidewalk is not available, any pedestrian walking
along and upon a highway shall walk only on a shoulder, as far as practicable
from the edge of the roadway.



   (C)   Where neither a sidewalk nor a shoulder is available, any
pedestrian walking along and upon a highway shall walk as near as practicable
to an outside edge of the roadway, and, if on a two-way roadway, shall walk
only on the left side of the roadway.



   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. §§ 4511.13 and 4511.46,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, any pedestrian upon a
roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.



   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.50)  ('69 Code, § 73.56)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.42  PROHIBITION AGAINST SOLICITING RIDES; RIDING ON OUTSIDE OF VEHICLE.



   (A)   No person while on a roadway outside a safety zone shall
solicit a ride from the driver of any vehicle.



   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this
section, no person shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting
employment, business, or contributions from the occupant of any vehicle.



      (2)   The Legislative Authority, by ordinance, may authorize
the issuance of a permit to a charitable organization to allow a person
acting on behalf of the organization to solicit charitable contributions from
the occupant of a vehicle by standing on a highway, other than a freeway as
provided in R.C. § 4511.051(A)(1), that is under the jurisdiction of the
municipality. The permit shall be valid for only one period of time, which
shall be specified in the permit, in any calendar year. The Legislative
Authority also may specify the locations where contributions may be solicited
and may impose any other restrictions on or requirements regarding the manner
in which the solicitations are to be conducted that the Legislative Authority
considers advisable.



      (3)   As used in subsection (2) of this division, CHARITABLE
ORGANIZATION means an organization that has received from the Internal
Revenue Service a currently valid ruling or determination letter recognizing
the tax-exempt status of the organization pursuant to Internal Revenue Code
§ 501(c)(3).



   (C)   No person shall hang onto or ride on the outside of any motor
vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway, except mechanics or test engineers
making repairs or adjustments, or workers performing specialized highway or
street maintenance or construction under authority of a public agency.



   (D)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person to hang onto or
ride on the outside of any motor vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway,
except mechanics or test engineers making repairs or adjustments, or workers
performing specialized highway or street maintenance or construction under
authority of a public agency.



   (E)   No driver of a truck, trailer, or semitrailer shall knowingly
permit any person who has not attained the age of 16 years to ride in the
unenclosed or unroofed cargo storage area of the driver's vehicle if the
vehicle is traveling faster than 25 miles per hour, unless either of the
following applies:



      (1)   The cargo storage area of the vehicle is equipped with a
properly secured seat to which is attached a seat safety belt that is in
compliance with federal standards for an occupant restraining device as
defined in R.C. § 4513.263(A)(2), the seat and seat safety belt were
installed at the time the vehicle was originally assembled, and the person
riding in the cargo storage area is in the seat and is wearing the seat
safety belt; or



      (2)   An emergency exists that threatens the life of the
driver or the person being transported in the cargo storage area of the
truck, trailer, or semitrailer.



   (F)   No driver of a truck, trailer, or semitrailer shall permit any
person, except for those workers performing specialized highway or street
maintenance or construction under authority of a public agency, to ride in
the cargo storage area or on a tailgate of the driver's vehicle while the
tailgate is unlatched.



   (G)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division,
whoever violates any provision of divisions (A) to (D) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates any provision of divisions
(A) to (D) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever
violates any provision of divisions (A) to (D) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (E) or (F) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4511.51)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.43  PEDESTRIAN ON BRIDGE OR RAILROAD CROSSING.



   (A)   No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or
approach thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate, or barrier after a bridge
operation signal indication has been given.



   (B)   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over, or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while the
gate or barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.511)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.44  OPERATION OF ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES.



   (A)   (1)   Electric personal assistive mobility devices may be
operated on the public streets, highways, sidewalks, and paths and portions
of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles in accordance with
this section.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, those
sections of this Traffic Code that by their nature are applicable to an
electric personal assistive mobility device apply to the device and the
person operating it whenever it is operated upon any public street, highway,
sidewalk, or path or upon any portion of a roadway set aside for the
exclusive use of bicycles.



      (3)   The municipality may regulate or prohibit the operation
of electric personal assistive mobility devices on public streets, highways,
sidewalks, and paths, or portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use
of bicycles, under its jurisdiction.



   (B)   No operator of an electric personal assistive mobility device
shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Fail to yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians and
human-powered vehicles at all times;



      (2)   Fail to give an audible signal before overtaking and
passing a pedestrian;



      (3)   Operate the device at night unless the device or its
operator is equipped with or wearing both of the following:



         (a)   A lamp pointing to the front that emits a white
light visible from a distance of not less than 500 feet;



         (b)   A red reflector facing the rear that is visible
from all distances from 100 feet to 600 feet when directly in front of lawful
lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle;



      (4)   Operate the device on any portion of a street or highway
that has an established speed limit of 55 miles per hour or more;



      (5)   Operate the device upon any path set aside for the
exclusive use of pedestrians or other specialized use when an appropriate
sign giving notice of the specialized use is posted on the path;



      (6)   If under 18 years of age, operate the device unless
wearing a protective helmet on the person's head with the chin strap properly
fastened;



      (7)   If under 16 years of age, operate the device unless,
during the operation, the person is under the direct visual and audible
supervision of another person who is 18 years of age or older and is
responsible for the immediate care of the person under 16 years of age.



   (C)   No person who is under 14 years of age shall operate an
electric personal assistive mobility device.



   (D)   No person shall distribute or sell an electric personal
assistive mobility device unless the device is accompanied by a written
statement that is substantially equivalent to the following: "WARNING: TO
REDUCE THE RISK OF SERIOUS INJURY, USE ONLY WHILE WEARING FULL PROTECTIVE
EQUIPMENT – HELMET, WRIST GUARDS, ELBOW PADS, AND KNEE PADS."



   (E)   Nothing in this section affects or shall be construed to
affect any rule of the Director of Natural Resources or a board of park
district commissioners governing the operation of vehicles on lands under the
control of the Director or board, as applicable.



   (F)   Penalty.



      (1)   Whoever violates division (B) or (C) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be punished as follows:



         (a)   The offender shall be fined $10;



         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (B) or (C) of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, the court, in
addition to imposing the fine required under division (F)(1)(a) of this
section, shall do one of the following:



            1.   Order the impoundment for not less than one
day but not more than 30 days of the electric personal assistive mobility
device that was involved in the current violation of that division. The court
shall order the device to be impounded at a safe indoor location designated
by the court and may assess storage fees of not more than $5 per day;
provided the total storage, processing, and release fees assessed against the
offender or the device in connection with the device's impoundment or
subsequent release shall not exceed $50.



            2.    If the court does not issue an impoundment
order pursuant to division (F)(1)(b)1. of this section, issue an order
prohibiting the offender from operating any electric personal assistive
mobility device on the public streets, highways, sidewalks, and paths and
portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles for not less
than one day but not more than 30 days.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty
of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4511.512)



   (G)   As used in this Code, ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY
DEVICE means a self-balancing two non-tandem wheeled device that is designed
to transport only one person, has an electric propulsion system of an average
of 750 watts, and when ridden on a paved level surface by an operator who
weighs 170 pounds has a maximum speed of less than 20 miles per hour.



(R.C. § 4501.01(TT))



§ 72.45  OPERATION OF PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE ON SIDEWALKS AND CROSSWALKS.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      ELIGIBLE ENTITY. Means a corporation, partnership, association,
firm, sole proprietorship, or other entity engaged in business.



      PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE. Means an electrically powered device to
which all of the following apply:



         (a)   The device is intended primarily to transport
property on sidewalks and crosswalks.



         (b)   The device weighs less than 90 pounds excluding
any property being carried in the device.



         (c)   The device has a maximum speed of ten miles per
hour.



         (d)   The device is equipped with technology that
enables the operation of the device with active control or monitoring by a
person, without active control or monitoring by a person, or both with or
without active control or monitoring by a person.



      PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE OPERATOR. Means an agent of an eligible
entity who exercises direct physical control over, or monitoring of, the
navigation and operation of a personal delivery device. The phrase does not
include, with respect to a delivery or other service rendered by a personal
delivery device, the person who requests the delivery or service. The phrase
also does not include a person who only arranges for and dispatches a
personal delivery device for a delivery or other service.



   (B)   An eligible entity may operate a personal delivery device on
sidewalks and crosswalks so long as all of the following requirements are met:



      (1)   The personal delivery device is operated in accordance
with all regulations, if any, established by each local authority within
which the personal delivery device is operated.



      (2)   A personal delivery device operator is actively
controlling or monitoring the navigation and operation of the personal
delivery device.



      (3)   The eligible entity maintains an insurance policy that
includes general liability coverage of not less than $100,000 for damages
arising from the operation of the personal delivery device by the eligible
entity and any agent of the eligible entity.



      (4)   The device is equipped with all of the following:



         (a)   A marker that clearly identifies the name and
contact information of the eligible entity operating the personal delivery
device and a unique identification number;



         (b)   A braking system that enables the personal
delivery device to come to a controlled stop;



         (c)   If the personal delivery device is being operated
between sunset and sunrise, a light on both the front and rear of the
personal delivery device that is visible in clear weather from a distance of
at least 500 feet to the front and rear of the personal delivery device when
directly in front of low beams of headlights on a motor vehicle.



   (C)   No personal delivery device operator shall allow a personal
delivery device to do any of the following:



      (1)   Fail to comply with traffic or pedestrian control
devices and signals;



      (2)   Unreasonably interfere with pedestrians or traffic;



      (3)   Transport any hazardous material that would require a
permit issued by the Public Utilities Commission;



      (4)   Operate on a street or highway, except when crossing the
street or highway within a crosswalk.



   (D)   A personal delivery device has all of the rights and
obligations applicable to a pedestrian under the same circumstances, except
that a personal delivery device shall yield the right-of-way to human
pedestrians on sidewalks and crosswalks.



   (E)   (1)   No person shall operate a personal delivery device
unless the person is authorized to do so under this section and complies with
the requirements of this section.



      (2)   An eligible entity is responsible for both of the
following:



         (a)   Any violation of this section that is committed by
a personal delivery device operator; and



         (b)   Any other circumstance, including a technological
malfunction, in which a personal delivery device operates in a manner
prohibited by divisions (C)(1) to (C)(4) of this section.



(R.C. § 4511.513)  Penalty, see § 70.99



GRADE CROSSINGS



§ 72.50  STOP SIGNS AT GRADE CROSSINGS.



   (A)   As used in this section, ACTIVE GRADE CROSSING WARNING DEVICE
means signs, signals, gates, or other protective devices erected or installed
at a public highway-railway crossing at common grade and activated by an
electrical circuit.



   (B)   The Department of Transportation and local authorities, with
the approval of the Department, may designate dangerous highway crossings
over railroad tracks and erect stop signs thereat.



   (C)   (1)   The Department and local authorities shall erect stop
signs at a railroad highway grade crossing in either of the following
circumstances:



         (a)   New warning devices that are not active grade
crossing warning devices are being installed at the grade crossing, and
railroad crossbucks were the only warning devices at the grade crossing prior
to the installation of the new warning devices.



         (b)   The grade crossing is constructed after July 1,
2013 and only warning devices that are not active grade crossing warning
devices are installed at the grade crossing.



      (2)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to a
railroad highway grade crossing that the Director of Transportation has
exempted from that division because of traffic flow or other considerations
or factors.



   (D)   When stop signs are erected pursuant to division (B) or (C) of
this section, the operator of any vehicle shall stop within 50, but not less
than 15, feet from the nearest rail of the railroad tracks and shall exercise
due care before proceeding across such grade crossing.



   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates division (D) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (F)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.61) ('69 Code, § 73.60)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.51  DRIVING VEHICLE ACROSS RAILROAD GRADE CROSSING.



   (A)   (1)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a
railroad grade crossing, the person shall stop within 50 feet but not less
than 15 feet from the nearest rail of the railroad if any of the following
circumstances exist at the crossing:



         (a)   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal
device gives warning of the immediate approach of a train.



         (b)   A crossing gate is lowered.



         (c)   A flagperson gives or continues to give a signal
of the approach or passage of a train.



         (d)   There is insufficient space on the other side of
the railroad grade crossing to accommodate the vehicle the person is
operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles, pedestrians or
railroad trains, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to
proceed.



         (e)   An approaching train is emitting an audible signal
or is plainly visible, and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing.



('69 Code, § 73.61)



         (f)   There is insufficient undercarriage clearance to
safely negotiate the crossing.



      (2)   A person who is driving a vehicle and who approaches a
railroad grade crossing shall not proceed as long as any of the circumstances
described in divisions (A)(1)(a) through (A)(1)(f) of this section exist at
the crossing.



   (B)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under
any crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while the gate or barrier
is closed, or is being opened or closed unless the person is signaled by a
law enforcement officer or flagperson that it is permissible to do so.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 4511.62)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.52  VEHICLES REQUIRED TO STOP AT GRADE CROSSINGS.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, the
operator of any bus, any school vehicle, or any vehicle transporting material
required to be placarded under 49 C.F.R. Parts 100 through 185, before
crossing at grade any track of a railroad, shall stop the vehicle, and while
so stopped, shall listen through an open door or open window, and look in
both directions along the track for any approaching train and for signals
indicating the approach of a train, and shall proceed only upon exercising
due care after stopping, looking, and listening as required by this section.
Upon proceeding, the operator of such a vehicle shall cross only in a gear
that will ensure there will be no necessity for changing gears while
traversing the crossing, and shall not shift gears while crossing the tracks.



   (B)   This section does not apply at grade crossings when any local
authority has filed an application with the Public Utilities Commission
requesting the approval of an exempt crossing, and the Public Utilities
Commission has authorized and approved an exempt crossing as provided R.C. §
4511.63(B).



   (C)   As used in this section:



      BUS. Means any vehicle originally designed by its manufacturer to
transport 16 or more passengers, including the driver, or carries 16 or more
passengers, including the driver.



      EXEMPT CROSSING. Means a highway rail grade crossing authorized
and approved by the Public Utilities Commission under R.C. § 4511.63(B) at
which vehicles may cross without making the stop otherwise required by this
section.



      SCHOOL VEHICLE. Means any vehicle used for the transportation of
pupils to and from a school or school-related function if the vehicle is
owned or operated by, or operated under contract with, a public or nonpublic
school.



   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations
of this section or R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.764,
4511.77, or 4511.79, or a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any of those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 4511.63)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.53  SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES OR EQUIPMENT CROSSING RAILROAD TRACKS.



   (A)   No person shall operate or move any crawler-type tractor,
steam shovel, derrick, roller, or any equipment or structure having a normal
operating speed of six or less miles per hour or a vertical body or load
clearance of less than nine inches above the level surface of a roadway, upon
or across any tracks at a railroad grade crossing without first complying
with divisions (A)(1) and (2) of this section.



      (1)   Before making any such crossing, the person operating or
moving any such vehicle or equipment shall first stop the same, and while
stopped, the person shall listen and look in both directions along the track
for any approaching train and for signals indicating the approach of a train,
and shall proceed only upon exercising due care.



      (2)   No such crossing shall be made when warning is given by
automatic signal, crossing gates, or a flagperson, or otherwise of the
immediate approach of a railroad train or car.



   (B)   If the normal sustained speed of the vehicle, equipment, or
structure is not more than three miles per hour, the person owning,
operating, or moving the same shall also give notice of the intended crossing
to a station agent or superintendent of the railroad, and a reasonable time
shall be given to the railroad to provide proper protection for the crossing.
Where the vehicles or equipment are being used in constructing or repairing a
section of highway lying on both sides of a railroad grade crossing, and in
this construction or repair it is necessary to repeatedly move the vehicles
or equipment over the crossing, one daily notice specifying when the work
will start and stating the hours during which it will be prosecuted is
sufficient.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.64)  ('69 Code, § 73.63)  Penalty, see § 70.99



THROUGH HIGHWAYS



§ 72.60  THROUGH HIGHWAYS.



   (A)   All state routes are hereby designated as through highways,
provided that stop signs, yield signs, or traffic-control signals shall be
erected at all intersections with such through highways by the Department of
Transportation as to highways under its jurisdiction and by local authorities
as to highways under their jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this
section.  Where two or more state routes that are through highways
intersect, and no traffic-control signal is in operation, stop signs or yield
signs shall be erected at one or more entrances thereto by the Department or
by local authorities having jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in
this section.  Whenever the Director of Transportation determines on the
basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that stop signs are
necessary to stop traffic on a through highway for safe and efficient
operation, nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent such
installations. When circumstances warrant, the Director also may omit stop
signs on roadways intersecting through highways under his or her
jurisdiction.  Before the Director either installs or removes a stop sign
under this division, he or she shall give notice, in writing, of that
proposed action to the affected local authority at least 30 days before
installing or removing the stop sign.



   (B)   Other streets or highways, or portions thereof, are hereby
designated as through highways if they are within the municipality, if they
have a continuous length of more than one mile between the limits of the
street or highway or portion thereof, and if they have stop or yield signs or
traffic-control signals at the entrances of the majority of intersecting
streets or highways.  For purposes of this section, the limits of the street
or highway, or portion thereof, shall be the municipal corporation line, the
physical terminus of the street or highway, or any point on the streets or
highway at which vehicular traffic thereon is required by regulatory signs to
stop or yield to traffic on the intersecting street, provided, that in
residence districts, the municipality may by ordinance designate such street
or highway, or portion thereof, not to be a through highway and thereafter
the affected residence district shall be indicated by official
traffic-control devices.  Where two or more through highways designated
under this division intersect and no traffic-control signal is in operation,
stop signs or yield signs shall be erected at one or more entrances thereto
by the Department or by local authorities having jurisdiction, except as
otherwise provided in this section.



   (C)   The Department or local authorities having jurisdiction need
not erect stop signs at intersections they find to be so constructed as to
permit traffic to safely enter a through highway without coming to a stop. 
Signs shall be erected at such intersections indicating that the operator of
a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to or merge with all traffic
proceeding on the through highway.



   (D)   Local authorities, with reference to highways under their
jurisdiction, may designate additional through highways, and shall erect stop
signs, yield signs, or traffic-control signals at all streets and highways
intersecting such through highways, or may designate any intersection as a
stop or yield intersection, and shall erect like signs at one or more
entrances to the intersection.



(R.C. § 4511.65)  Penalty, see § 70.99



PROHIBITIONS



§ 72.65  OBSTRUCTION AND INTERFERENCE AFFECTING VIEW AND CONTROL OF DRIVER.



   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when
there are in the front seat such number of persons, as to obstruct the view
of the driver to the front or sides of the vehicle, or to interfere with the
driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.



('69 Code, § 72.02)



   (B)   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in a position as to
interfere with the driver's view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with
the driver's control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.



   (C)   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side
available to moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so,
and can be done without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor
shall any person leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to
moving traffic for a period of time longer than necessary to load or unload
passengers.



   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.70)  ('69 Code, § 72.03)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.66  OCCUPYING TRAVEL TRAILER WHILE IN MOTION.



   (A)   No person shall occupy any travel trailer or manufactured or
mobile home while it is being used as a conveyance upon a street or highway.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.701)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.67  PROHIBITION AGAINST DRIVING UPON CLOSED HIGHWAY.



   (A)   No person shall drive upon, along, or across a street or
highway, or any part of a street or highway that has been closed in the
process of its construction, reconstruction, or repair, and posted with
appropriate signs by the authority having jurisdiction to close the highway.



(R.C. § 4511.71(A))



   (B)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle on or onto a public
street or highway that is temporarily covered by a rise in water level,
including groundwater or an overflow of water, and that is clearly marked by
a sign that specifies that the road is closed due to the rise in water level
and that any person who uses the closed portion of the road may be fined up
to $2,000.



      (2)   A person who is issued a citation for a violation of
division (B)(1) of this section is not permitted to enter a written plea of
guilty and waive the person’s right to contest the citation in court, but
instead must appear in person in the proper court to answer the charge.



(R.C. § 4511.714(A), (B))



   (C)   (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this
division, whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the
offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle
or traffic offenses, whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



         (b)   If the offender commits the offense while
distracted and the distracting activity is a contributing factor to the
commission of the offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine
established under § 70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.71(B)) ('69 Code, § 73.34) (Ord. C-172, passed 3-13-61)



      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section
is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



         (b)   In addition to the financial sanctions authorized
or required under R.C. § 2929.28 and to any costs otherwise authorized or
required under any provision of law, the court imposing the sentence upon an
offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (B)
of this section shall order the offender to reimburse one or more rescuers
for the cost any such rescuer incurred in rescuing the person, excluding any
cost of transporting the rescued person to a hospital or other facility for
treatment of injuries, up to a cumulative maximum of $2,000. If more than one
rescuer was involved in the emergency response, the court shall allocate the
reimbursement proportionately, according to the cost each rescuer incurred. A
financial sanction imposed under this section is a judgment in favor of the
rescuer and, subject to a determination of indigency under R.C. §
2929.28(B), a rescuer may collect the financial sanction in the same manner
as provided in R.C. § 2929.28.



(R.C. § 4511.714(C))



   (D)   As used in this section:



      EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICE ORGANIZATION. Has the same meanings as
in R.C. § 9.60.



      FIREFIGHTING AGENCY. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 9.60.



      PRIVATE FIRE COMPANY. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 9.60.



      RESCUER. Means a state agency, political subdivision,
firefighting agency, private fire company, or emergency medical service
organization.



(R.C. § 4511.714(D))  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.68  DRIVING UPON SIDEWALK AREA.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall drive any vehicle, other than a
bicycle, upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area, except upon a permanent or duly
authorized temporary driveway.



      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as
prohibiting local authorities from regulating the operation of bicycles,
except that no local authority may require that bicycles be operated on
sidewalks.



(R.C. § 4511.711(A))



   (B)   (1)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, snowmobile,
or all-purpose vehicle upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles, when an appropriate sign giving notice of such use is posted on the
path.



      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect any
rule of the Director of Natural Resources governing the operation of motor
vehicles, snowmobiles, all-purpose vehicles, and bicycles on lands under the
Director's jurisdiction.



(R.C. § 4511.713(A))



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. §§ 4511.711(B), 4511.713(B))  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.69  OBSTRUCTING PASSAGE OF OTHER VEHICLES.



   (A)   No driver shall enter an intersection or marked crosswalk, or
drive onto any railroad grade crossing, unless there is sufficient space on
the other side of the intersection, crosswalk, or grade crossing to
accommodate the vehicle the driver is operating without obstructing the
passage of other vehicles, pedestrians, or railroad trains, notwithstanding
any traffic-control signal indication to proceed.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.712)  ('69 Code, § 73.33)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.70  FOLLOWING AN EMERGENCY OR PUBLIC VEHICLE PROHIBITED.



   (A)   The driver of any vehicle, other than an emergency vehicle or
public safety vehicle on official business, shall not follow any emergency
vehicle or public safety vehicle traveling in response to an alarm closer
than 500 feet, or drive into or park the vehicle within the block where the
fire apparatus has stopped in answer to a fire alarm, unless directed to do
so by a police officer or a fireman.



(R.C. § 4511.72(A))



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



('69 Code, § 73.43) (Am. Ord. 2011-17, passed 12-12-11)  Penalty, see §
70.99



§ 72.71  DRIVING OVER UNPROTECTED FIRE HOSE.



   (A)   No vehicle shall, without the consent of the fire department
official in command, be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department
that is laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or
alarm of fire.



('69 Code, § 73.46)  (Ord. C-123, passed 12-8-58)



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.73)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.72  PROHIBITION AGAINST PLACING INJURIOUS MATERIAL ON HIGHWAY.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall place or knowingly drop upon any part
of a highway, lane, road, street, or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass,
nails, or other articles which may damage or injure any person, vehicle, or
animal traveling along or upon the highway, except such substances that may
be placed upon the roadway by proper authority for the repair or construction
thereof.



      (2)   Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown
upon any highway any destructive or injurious material shall immediately
remove the same.



      (3)   Any person authorized to remove a wrecked or damaged
vehicle from a highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance
dropped upon the highway from such vehicle.



      (4)   No person shall place any obstruction in or upon a
highway without proper authority.



   (B)   No person, with intent to cause physical harm to a person or a
vehicle, shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a highway, lane,
road, street, or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails, or other
articles which may damage or injure any person, vehicle, or animal traveling
along or upon such highway, except such substances that may be placed upon
the roadway by proper authority for the repair or construction thereof.



(R.C. § 4511.74(A), (B))



   (C)   No operator or occupant of a motor vehicle shall, regardless
of intent, throw, drop, discard, or deposit litter from any motor vehicle in
operation upon any street, road, or highway, except into a litter receptacle
in a manner that prevents its being carried away or deposited by the elements.



   (D)   No operator of a motor vehicle in operation upon any street,
road, or highway shall allow litter to be thrown, dropped, discarded, or
deposited from the motor vehicle, except into a litter receptacle in a manner
that prevents its being carried away or deposited by the elements.



   (E)   As used in this section, LITTER means garbage, trash, waste,
rubbish, ashes, cans, bottles, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts,
furniture, glass, or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature.



(R.C. § 4511.82(A), (B), (D))



   (F)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division,
whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the offense, the
offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle
or traffic offenses, whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 4511.74(C))



      (3)   Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4511.82(C))  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.73  TRANSPORTING CHILD NOT IN CHILD RESTRAINT SYSTEM PROHIBITED.



   (A)   When any child who is in either or both of the following
categories is being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or
public safety vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4511.01, that is required by the
United States Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at
the time of manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall
have the child properly secured in accordance with the manufacturer's
instructions in a child restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle
safety standards.



      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age;



      (2)   A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.



   (B)   When any child who is in either or both of the following
categories is being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab,
that is owned, leased, or otherwise under the control of a nursery school or
day-care center, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child
properly secured in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions in a
child restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards:



      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age;



      (2)   A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.



   (C)   When any child who is less than eight years of age and less
than four feet nine inches in height, who is not required by division (A) or
(B) of this section to be secured in a child restraint system, is being
transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety vehicle
as defined in R.C. § 4511.01 or a vehicle that is regulated under R.C. §
5104.015, that is required by the United States Department of Transportation
to be equipped with seat belts at the time of manufacture or assembly, the
operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly secured in
accordance with the manufacturer's instructions on a booster seat that meets
federal motor vehicle safety standards.



   (D)   When any child who is at least eight years of age but not
older than 15 years of age, and who is not otherwise required by division
(A), (B) or (C) of this section to be secured in a child restraint system or
booster seat, is being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab
or public safety vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4511.01, that is required by
the United States Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts
at the time of manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle
shall have the child properly restrained either in accordance with the
manufacturer's instructions in a child restraint system that meets federal
motor vehicle safety standards or in an occupant restraining device as
defined in R.C. § 4513.263.



   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause an operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section has
been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket,
citation, or summons for a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section
or causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a
violation of division (C) or (D) of this section, and absent another
violation of law, a law enforcement officer's view of the interior or visual
inspection of a motor vehicle being operated on any street or highway may not
be used for the purpose of determining whether a violation of division (C) or
(D) of this section has been or is being committed.



   (F)   The Director of Public Safety shall adopt such rules as are
necessary to carry out this section.



   (G)   The failure of an operator of a motor vehicle to secure a
child in a child restraint system, a booster seat, or an occupant restraining
device as required by this section is not negligence imputable to the child,
is not admissible as evidence in any civil action involving the rights of the
child against any other person allegedly liable for injuries to the child, is
not to be used as a basis for a criminal prosecution of the operator of the
motor vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section, and
is not admissible as evidence in any criminal action involving the operator
of the motor vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section.



   (H)   This section does not apply when an emergency exists that
threatens the life of any person operating or occupying a motor vehicle that
is being used to transport a child who otherwise would be required to be
restrained under this section.  This section does not apply to a person
operating a motor vehicle who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed
to practice in this state under R.C. Chapter 4731 or a chiropractor licensed
to practice in this state under R.C. Chapter 4734 that states that the child
who otherwise would be required to be restrained under this section has a
physical impairment that makes use of a child restraint system, booster seat,
or an occupant restraint device impossible or impractical, provided that the
person operating the vehicle has safely and appropriately restrained the
child in accordance with any recommendations of the physician or chiropractor
as noted on the affidavit.



   (I)   There is hereby created in the stated treasury the child
highway safety fund, consisting of fines imposed pursuant to division (L)(1)
of this section for violations of divisions (A), (B), (C), and (D) of this
section. The money in the fund shall be used by the Department of Health only
to defray the cost of designating hospitals as pediatric trauma centers under
R.C. § 3727.081 and to establish and administer a child highway safety
program.  The purpose of the program shall be to educate the public about
child restraint systems and booster seats and the importance of their proper
use.  The program also shall include a process for providing child restraint
systems and booster seats to persons who meet the eligibility criteria
established by the Department, and a toll-free telephone number the public
may utilize to obtain information about child restraint systems and booster
seats, and their proper use.



   (J)   The Director of Health, in accordance with R.C. Chapter 119,
shall adopt any rules necessary to carry out this section, including rules
establishing the criteria a person must meet in order to receive a child
restraint system or booster seat under the Department's child highway safety
program; provided that rules relating to the verification of pediatric trauma
centers shall not be adopted under this section.



   (K)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any
person to carry with the person the birth certificate of a child to prove the
age of the child, but the production of a valid birth certificate for a child
showing that the child was not of an age to which this section applies is a
defense against any ticket, citation, or summons issued for violating this
section.



   (L)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A), (B), (C), or (D) of
this section shall be punished as follows, provided that the failure of an
operator of a motor vehicle to secure more than one child in a child
restraint system, booster seat, or occupant restraining device as required by
this section that occurred at the same time, on the same day, and at the same
location is deemed to be a single violation of this section:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (L)(1)(b)
of this section, the offender is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be
fined not less than $25 nor more than $75.



         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (A), (B), (C), or (D) of this
section or of a municipal ordinance that is substantially similar to any of
those divisions, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



      (2)   All fines imposed pursuant to division (L)(1) of this
section shall be forwarded to the Treasurer of State for deposit in the child
highway safety fund created by division (I) of this section.



(Ord. 2010-04, passed 1-11-10)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   For similar state law provisions, see R.C. § 4511.81



§ 72.74  OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICES.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   AUTOMOBILE.  Any commercial tractor, passenger car, commercial car, or
truck that is required to be factory-equipped with an occupant restraining
device for the operator or any passenger by regulations adopted by the United
States Secretary of Transportation pursuant to the National Traffic and Motor
Vehicle Safety Act of 1966, 80 Stat. 719, 15 USC 1392.



   COMMERCIAL TRACTOR, PASSENGER CAR, and COMMERCIAL CAR have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 4501.01.



   OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICE.  A seat safety belt, shoulder belt,
harness, or other safety device for restraining a person who is an operator
of or passenger in an automobile and that satisfies the minimum federal
vehicle safety standards established by the United States Department of
Transportation.



   PASSENGER.  Any person in an automobile, other than its operator, who
is occupying a seating position for which an occupant restraining device is
provided.



   TORT ACTION. A civil action for damages for injury, death, or loss to
person or property. TORT ACTION includes a product liability claim, as
defined in R.C. § 2307.71, and as asbestos claim, as defined in R.C. §
2307.91, but does not include a civil action for damages for breach of
contract or another agreement between persons.



   VEHICLE and MOTOR VEHICLE.  As used in the definitions of the terms
set forth above, VEHICLE and MOTOR VEHICLE have the same meanings as in R.C.
§ 4511.01.



   (B)   Prohibited acts.  No person shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless he
or she is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted
occupant restraining device, or operate a school bus that has an occupant
restraining device installed for use in its operator's seat unless he or she
is wearing all of the available elements of the device, as properly adjusted.



      (2)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless
each passenger in the automobile who is subject to the requirement set forth
in division (B)(3) of this section is wearing all of the available elements
of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device.



      (3)   Occupy, as a passenger, a seating position on the front
seat of an automobile being operated on any street or highway unless he or
she is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
restraining device.



      (4)   Operate a taxicab on any street or highway unless all
factory-equipped occupant restraining devices in the taxicab are maintained
in usable form.



   (C)   Exceptions.  Division (B)(3) of this section does not apply
to a person who is required by R.C. § 4511.81 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance to be secured in a child restraint device or booster
seat.  Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is an
employee of the United States Postal Service or of a newspaper home delivery
service, during any period in which the person is engaged in the operation of
an automobile to deliver mail or newspapers to addressees.  Divisions (B)(1)
and (3) of this section do not apply to a person who has an affidavit signed
by a physician licensed to practice in this state under R.C. Chapter 4731 or
a chiropractor licensed to practice in this state under R.C. Chapter 4734
that states that the person has a physical impairment that makes use of an
occupant restraining device impossible or impractical.



   (D)   Officers not permitted to stop cars to determine violation. 
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law enforcement
officer shall cause an operator of an automobile being operated on any street
or highway to stop the automobile for the sole purpose of determining whether
a violation of division (B) of this section has been or is being committed or
for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or summons for the
violation or for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a
person for the violation.  No law enforcement officer shall view the
interior or visually inspect any automobile being operated on any street or
highway for the sole purpose of determining whether the violation has been or
is being committed.



   (E)   Use of fines for educational program.  All fines collected
for violations of division (B) of this section shall be forwarded to the
State Treasurer for deposit in the funds as set forth in R.C. § 4513.263(E).



   (F)   Limitations on evidence used for prosecution.



      (1)   Subject to division (F)(2) of this section, the failure
of a person to wear all of the available elements of a properly adjusted
occupant restraining device in violation of division (B)(1) or (B)(3) of this
section or the failure of a person to ensure that each minor who is a
passenger of an automobile being operated by that person is wearing all of
the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device in
violation of division (B)(2) of this section shall not be considered or used
by the trier of fact in a tort action as evidence of negligence or
contributory negligence. But, the trier of fact may determine based on
evidence admitted consistent with the Ohio Rules of Evidence that the failure
contributed to the harm alleged in the tort action and may diminish a
recovery of compensatory damages that represents non-economic loss, as
defined in R.C. § 2307.011, in a tort action that could have been recovered
but for the plaintiff's failure to wear all of the available elements of a
properly adjusted occupant restraining device. Evidence of that failure shall
not be used as a basis for a criminal prosecution of the person other than a
prosecution for a violation of this section; and shall not be admissible as
evidence in a criminal action involving the person other than a prosecution
for a violation of this section.



      (2)   If, at the time of an accident involving a passenger car
equipped with occupant restraining devices, any occupant of the passenger car
who sustained injury or death was not wearing an available occupant
restraining device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a
device, or was not wearing such a device as properly adjusted, then,
consistent with the Rules of Evidence, the fact that the occupant was not
wearing the available occupant restraining device, was not wearing all of the
available elements of such a device, or was not wearing such a device as
properly adjusted is admissible in evidence in relation to any claim for
relief in a tort action to the extent that the claim for relief satisfies all
of the following:



         (a)   It seeks to recover damages for injury or death to
the occupant;



         (b)   The defendant in question is the manufacturer,
designer, distributor, or seller of the passenger car;



         (c)   The claim for relief against the defendant in
question is that the injury or death sustained by the occupant was enhanced
or aggravated by some design defect in the passenger car or that the
passenger car was not crashworthy.



      (3)   As used in division (F)(2) of this section, TORT ACTION
means a civil action for damages for injury, death, or loss to person or
property.  TORT ACTION includes a product liability claim that is subject to
R.C. §§ 2307.71 to 2307.80, but does not include a civil action for damages
for a breach of a contract or another agreement between persons.



(R.C. § 4513.263(A) - (F))



   (G)   Each violation of this section shall be punishable pursuant to
§ 70.99.



(Am. Ord. 2011-17, passed 12-12-11)



Cross-reference:



   Child restraint systems, see § 72.73



   Installation and sale of seat safety belts, see § 74.33



   School bus operators, restraining devices, see § 72.84



§ 72.741  USE OF ENGINE BRAKES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   The non-emergency use of engine brakes within the municipality
is prohibited.



   (B)   As used in this section, ENGINE BRAKES shall be defined to
include, but is not limited to, Jake Brakes, Jacobs Brakes, C Brakes,
PacBrakes, TekBrakes, and any other type of engine retarders commonly
utilized within the trucking industry.



   (C)   This section does not apply to emergency vehicles operated by
fire, police, or military units.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



§ 72.742  OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE WHILE WEARING EARPHONES OR EARPLUGS.



   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle while wearing
earphones over, or earplugs in, both ears. As used in this section, EARPHONES
means any headset, radio, tape player, or other similar device that provides
the listener with radio programs, music, or other recorded information
through a device attached to the head and that covers all or a portion of
both ears. EARPHONES does not include speakers or other listening devices
that are built into protective headgear.



   (B)   This section does not apply to:



      (1)   Any person wearing a hearing aid;



      (2)   Law enforcement personnel while on duty;



      (3)   Fire department personnel and emergency medical service
personnel while on duty;



      (4)   Any person operating equipment for use in the
maintenance or repair of any highway;



      (5)   Any person engaged in the operation of refuse collection
equipment.



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.84)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.743  TEXTING WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle on any street, highway,
or property open to the public for vehicular traffic while using a handheld
electronic wireless communications device to write, send, or read a
text-based communication.



   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any of the
following:



      (1)   A person using a handheld electronic wireless
communications device in that manner for emergency purposes, including an
emergency contact with a law enforcement agency, hospital or health care
provider, fire department, or other similar emergency agency or entity;



      (2)   A person driving a public safety vehicle who uses a
handheld electronic wireless communications device in that manner in the
course of the person’s duties;



      (3)   A person using a handheld electronic wireless
communications device in that manner whose motor vehicle is in a stationary
position and who is outside a lane of travel;



      (4)   A person reading, selecting, or entering a name or
telephone number in a handheld electronic wireless communications device for
the purpose of making or receiving a telephone call;



      (5)   A person receiving wireless messages on a device
regarding the operation or navigation of a motor vehicle; safety-related
information, including emergency, traffic, or weather alerts; or data used
primarily by the motor vehicle;



      (6)   A person receiving wireless messages via radio waves;



      (7)   A person using a device for navigation purposes;



      (8)   A person conducting wireless interpersonal communication
with a device that does not require manually entering letters, numbers, or
symbols or reading text messages, except to activate, deactivate, or initiate
the device or a feature or function of the device;



      (9)   A person operating a commercial truck while using a
mobile data terminal that transmits and receives data;



      (10)   A person using a handheld electronic wireless
communications device in conjunction with a voice-operated or hands-free
device feature or function of the vehicle.



   (C)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause an operator of an automobile being operated
on any street or highway to stop the automobile for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of division (A) of this section has been or
is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of that nature or causing the arrest of or commencing
a prosecution of a person for a violation of that nature, and no law
enforcement officer shall view the interior or visually inspect any
automobile being operated on any street or highway for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of that nature has been or is being committed.



   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.



   (E)   A prosecution for a violation of this section does not
preclude a prosecution for a violation of R.C. § 4511.204 based on the same
conduct. However, if an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of this section and is also convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of R.C. § 4511.204 based on the same conduct, the two offenses are
allied offenses of similar import under R.C. § 2941.25.



   (F)   As used in this section:



      ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Includes any of the
following:



         (a)   A wireless telephone;



         (b)   A text-messaging device;



         (c)   A personal digital assistant;



         (d)   A computer, including a laptop computer and a
computer tablet;



         (e)   Any other substantially similar wireless device
that is designed or used to communicate text.



      VOICE-OPERATED OR HANDS-FREE DEVICE. A device that allows the
user to vocally compose or send, or to listen to a text-based communication
without the use of either hand except to activate or deactivate a feature or
function.



      WRITE, SEND, OR READ A TEXT-BASED COMMUNICATION. To manually
write or send, or read a text-based communication using an electronic
wireless communications device, including manually writing or sending, or
reading communications referred to as text messages, instant messages, or
electronic mail.



(R.C. § 4511.204)



Statutory reference:



    No preemption for local regulations imposing greater penalties, see
R.C. § 4511.204(E)



§ 72.744  USE OF ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATION DEVICES BY MINORS OR
PROBATIONARY DRIVERS WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit who has not
attained the age of 18 years and no holder of a probationary driver’s
license shall drive a motor vehicle on any street, highway, or property used
by the public for purposes of vehicular traffic or parking while using in any
manner an electronic wireless communications device.



   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to either of the
following:



      (1)   A person using an electronic wireless communications
device for emergency purposes, including an emergency contact with a law
enforcement agency, hospital or health care provider, fire department, or
other similar emergency agency or entity;



      (2)   A person using an electronic wireless communications
device whose motor vehicle is in a stationary position and the motor vehicle
is outside a lane of travel;



      (3)   A person using a navigation device in a voice-operated
or hands-free manner who does not manipulate the device while driving.



   (C)   (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this
section, whoever violates division (A) of this section shall be fined $150.
In addition, the court shall impose a class seven suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license or permit for a definite period of 60 days.



      (2)   If the person previously has been adjudicated a
delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of this
section, whoever violates this section shall be fined $300. In addition, the
court shall impose a class seven suspension of the person’s driver’s
license or permit for a definite period of one year.



   (D)   The filing of a sworn complaint against a person for a
violation of this section does not preclude the filing of a sworn complaint
for a violation of R.C. § 4511.205 for the same conduct. However, if a
person is adjudicated a delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for a
violation of this section and is also adjudicated a delinquent child or a
juvenile traffic offender for a violation of R.C. § 4511.205 for the same
conduct, the two offenses are allied offenses of similar import under R.C. §
2941.25.



   (E)   As used in this section, ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
DEVICE includes any of the following:



      (1)   A wireless telephone;



      (2)   A personal digital assistant;



      (3)   A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer
tablet;



      (4)   A text-messaging device;



      (5)   Any other substantially similar electronic wireless
device that is designed or used to communicate via voice, image, or written
word.



(R.C. § 4511.205)



SCHOOL BUSES



§ 72.75  REGULATIONS CONCERNING SCHOOL BUSES.



   (A)   The driver of a vehicle, upon meeting or overtaking from
either direction any school bus stopped for the purpose of receiving or
discharging any school child, person attending programs offered by community
boards of mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or
child attending a program offered by a head start agency, shall stop at least
ten feet from the front or rear of the school bus and shall not proceed until
such school bus resumes motion, or until signaled by the school bus driver to
proceed. It is no defense to a charge under this division that the school bus
involved failed to display or be equipped with an automatically extended stop
warning sign as required by division (B) of this section.



('69 Code, § 73.70)  (Ord. C-172, passed 3-13-61)



   (B)   Every school bus shall be equipped with amber and red visual
signals meeting the requirements of R.C. § 4511.771 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and an automatically extended stop warning
sign of a type approved by the state Board of Education, which shall be
actuated by the driver of the bus whenever but only whenever the bus is
stopped or stopping on the roadway for the purpose of receiving or
discharging school children, persons attending programs offered by community
boards of mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or
children attending programs offered by head start agencies. A school bus
driver shall not actuate the visual signals or the stop warning sign in
designated school bus loading areas where the bus is entirely off the roadway
or at school buildings when children or persons attending programs offered by
community boards of mental health and county boards of developmental
disabilities are loading or unloading at curbside or at buildings when
children attending programs offered by head start agencies are loading or
unloading at curbside. The visual signals and stop warning sign shall be
synchronized or otherwise operated as required by rule of the Board.



   (C)   Where a highway has been divided into four or more traffic
lanes, a driver of a vehicle need not stop for a school bus approaching from
the opposite direction which has stopped for the purpose of receiving or
discharging any school child, persons attending programs offered by community
boards of mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or
children attending programs offered by head start agencies. The driver of any
vehicle overtaking the school bus shall comply with division (A) above.



('69 Code, § 73.71)



   (D)   School buses operating on divided highways or on highways with
four or more traffic lanes shall receive and discharge all school children,
persons attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and
county boards of developmental disabilities, and children attending programs
offered by head start agencies on their residence side of the highway.



('69 Code, § 73.71)



   (E)   No school bus driver shall start the driver's bus until after
any child, person attending programs offered by community boards of mental
health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or child attending a
program offered by a head start agency who may have alighted therefrom has
reached a place of safety on the child's or person's residence side of the
road.



('69 Code, § 73.71)



   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section may be
fined an amount not to exceed $500.  A person who is issued a citation for a
violation of division (A) of this section is not permitted to enter a written
plea of guilty and waive the person's right to contest the citation in a
trial but instead must appear in person in the proper court to answer the
charge.



      (2)   In addition to and independent of any other penalty
provided by law, the court or mayor may impose upon an offender who violates
this section a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's license,
commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C.
§ 4510.02(A)(7).  When a license is suspended under this section, the court
or mayor shall cause the offender to deliver the license to the court, and
the court or clerk of the court immediately shall forward the license to the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles, together with notice of the court's action.



   (G)   As used in this section:



   HEAD START AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3301.32.



   SCHOOL BUS. As used in relation to children who attend a program
offered by a head start agency, means a bus that is owned and operated by a
head start agency, is equipped with an automatically extended stop warning
sign of a type approved by the State Board of Education, is painted the color
and displays the markings described in R.C. § 4511.77, and is equipped with
amber and red visual signals meeting the requirements of R.C. § 4511.77,
irrespective of whether or not the bus has 15 or more children aboard at any
time. The term does not include a van owned and operated by a head start
agency, irrespective of its color, lights or markings.



(R.C. § 4511.75)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.76  VIOLATION OF REGULATIONS; REPORT; INVESTIGATION; CITATION; WARNING.



   (A)   As used in this section, LICENSE PLATE includes, but is not
limited to, any temporary license placard issued under R.C. § 4503.182 or
similar law of another jurisdiction.



   (B)   When the operator of a school bus believes that a motorist has
violated R.C. § 4511.75(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the operator shall report the license plate number and general
description of the vehicle and of the operator of the vehicle to the law
enforcement agency exercising jurisdiction over the area where the alleged
violation occurred. The information contained in the report relating to the
license plate number and to the general description of the vehicle and the
operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation may be supplied
by any person with first-hand knowledge of the information. Information of
which the operator of the school bus has first-hand knowledge also may be
corroborated by any other person.



   (C)   Upon receipt of the report of the alleged violation of R.C. §
4511.75(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the law
enforcement agency shall conduct an investigation to attempt to determine the
identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation.
If the identity of the operator at the time of the alleged violation is
established, the reporting of the license plate number of the vehicle shall
establish probable cause for the law enforcement agency to issue a citation
for the violation of R.C. § 4511.75(A) or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance. However, if the identity of the operator of the vehicle
at the time of the alleged violation cannot be established, the law
enforcement agency shall issue a warning to the owner of the vehicle at the
time of the alleged violation, except in the case of a leased or rented
vehicle when the warning shall be issued to the lessee at the time of the
alleged violation.



(R.C. § 4511.751)



§ 72.77  SCHOOL BUS REGULATIONS BY DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION AND DEPARTMENT
OF HIGHWAY SAFETY.



   (A)   The Department of Public Safety, by and with the advice of the
Superintendent of Public Instruction, shall adopt and enforce rules relating
to the construction, design, and equipment, including lighting equipment
required by R.C. § 4511.771 of all school buses both publicly and privately
owned and operated in this state.



   (B)   The Department of Education, by and with the advice and
consent of the Director of Public Safety, shall adopt and enforce rules
relating to the operation of all vehicles used for pupil transportation.



   (C)   No person shall operate a vehicle used for pupil
transportation within this state in violation of the regulations of the
Department of Education or the Department of Public Safety.  No person,
being the owner thereof, or having the supervisory responsibility therefor,
shall permit the operation of a vehicle used for pupil transportation within
this state in violation of the rules of the Department of Education or the
Department of Public Safety.



('69 Code, § 73.72)



   (D)   The Department of Public Safety shall adopt and enforce rules
relating to the issuance of a license under R.C. § 4511.763.  The rules may
relate to the moral character of the applicant; the condition of the
equipment to be operated; the liability and property damage insurance carried
by the applicant; the posting of satisfactory and sufficient bond; and such
other rules as the Director of Public Safety determines reasonably necessary
for the safety of the pupils to be transported.



   (E)   As used in this section, VEHICLE USED FOR PUPIL TRANSPORTATION
means any vehicle that is identified as such by the department ofeducation by
rule and that is subject to Chapter 3301-83 of the Ohio Administrative Code.



   (F)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations
of this section or R.C. § 4511.76, or R.C. §§ 4511.63, 4511.761, 4511.762,
4511.764, 4511.77, or 4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any of those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 4511.76(C), (E), (F))  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.78  SCHOOL BUS INSPECTION.



   (A)   No person shall operate, nor shall any person being the owner
thereof, or having supervisory responsibility therefor, permit the operation
of, a school bus within this municipality, unless there is displayed thereon
the decals issued by the state highway patrol bearing the proper date of
inspection for the calendar year for which the inspection decals were issued.



('69 Code, § 73.73)



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations
of this section or R.C. § 4511.761, or R.C. §§ 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.762,
4511.764, 4511.77, or 4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any of those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



   (C)   Whenever a person is found guilty in a court of record of a
violation of this section, the trial judge, in addition to or independent of
all other penalties provided by law, may suspend for any period of time not
exceeding three years, or cancel the license of any person, partnership,
association, or corporation, issued under R.C. § 4511.763.



(R.C. § 4511.761)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.79  SCHOOL BUS NOT USED FOR SCHOOL PURPOSES.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, no person
who is the owner of a bus that previously was registered as a school bus that
is used or is to be used exclusively for purposes other than the
transportation of children shall operate the bus or permit it to be operated
within this municipality unless the bus has been painted a color different
from that prescribed for school buses by R.C. § 4511.77 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance and painted in such a way that the words
"stop" and "school bus" are obliterated.



   (B)   Any church bus that previously was registered as a school bus
and is registered under R.C. § 4503.07 may retain the paint color prescribed
for school buses by R.C. § 4511.77 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance if the bus complies with all of the following:



      (1)   The words "school bus" required by R.C. § 4511.77 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance are covered or obliterated and
the bus is marked on the front and rear with the words "church bus" painted
in black lettering not less than ten inches in height.



      (2)   The automatically extending stop warning sign required
by R.C. § 4511.75 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance is
removed and the word "stop" required by R.C. § 4511.77 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance is covered or obliterated.



      (3)   The flashing red and amber lights required by R.C. §
4511.771 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance are covered or
removed.



      (4)   The inspection decal required by R.C. § 4511.761 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance is covered or removed.



      (5)   The identification number assigned under R.C. §
4511.764 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance and marked in
black lettering on the front and rear of the bus is covered or obliterated.



('69 Code, § 73.74)



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations
of this section or R.C. § 4511.762, or R.C. §§ 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761,
4511.764, 4511.77, or 4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any of those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



   (D)   Whenever a person is found guilty in a court of record of a
violation of this section, the trial judge, in addition to or independent of
all other penalties provided by law, may suspend for any period of time not
exceeding three years, or cancel the license of any person, partnership,
association, or corporation, issued under R.C. § 4511.763.



(R.C. § 4511.762)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.80  LICENSING BY DEPARTMENT OF HIGHWAY SAFETY.



   (A)   No person, partnership, association, or corporation shall
transport pupils to or from school on a school bus or enter into a contract
with a board of education of any school district for the transportation of
pupils on a school bus without being licensed by the Department of Public
Safety.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.763)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.81  REGISTRATION AND IDENTIFICATION OF SCHOOL BUSES.



   (A)   No person shall operate, nor shall any person being the owner
thereof or having supervisory responsibility therefor, permit the operation
of a school bus within this municipality unless there is displayed thereon an
identifying number in accordance with R.C. § 4511.764.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations
of R.C. §§ 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762, 4511.77, or 4511.79 or a
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of those
sections, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.



(R.C. § 4511.764)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.82  SCHOOL BUS MARKING.



   (A)   No person shall operate, nor shall any person being the owner
thereof or having supervisory responsibility therefor permit the operation
of, a school bus within this municipality unless it is painted national
school bus yellow and is marked on both front and rear with the words "school
bus" in black lettering not less than eight inches in height and on the rear
of the bus with the word "stop" in black lettering not less than ten inches
in height.



('69 Code, § 73.75)



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations
of this section or R.C. § 4511.77, or R.C. §§ 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761,
4511.762, 4511.764, or 4511.79 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any of those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



   (C)   Whenever a person is found guilty in a court of record of a
violation of this section, the trial judge, in addition to or independent of
all other penalties provided by law, may suspend, for any period of time not
exceeding three years, or cancel the license of any person, partnership,
association, or corporation issued under R.C. § 4511.763.



(R.C. § 4511.77)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.83  FLASHING LIGHT SIGNAL LAMPS.



   (A)   Every school bus shall, in addition to any other equipment and
distinctive markings required pursuant to R.C. §§ 4511.76, 4511.761,
4511.764 and 4511.77, and any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances,
be equipped with signal lamps mounted as high as practicable, which shall
display to the front two alternately flashing red lights and two alternately
flashing amber lights located at the same level and to the rear two
alternately flashing red lights and alternately flashing amber lights located
at the same level, and these lights shall be visible at 500 feet in normal
sunlight. The alternately flashing red lights shall be spaced as widely as
practicable, and the alternately flashing amber lights shall be located next
to them.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.771)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 72.84  OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICE FOR OPERATOR.



   (A)   On and after May 6, 1986, no person, school board, or
governmental entity shall purchase, lease, or rent a new school bus unless
the school bus has an occupant restraining device, as defined in R.C. §
4513.263, installed for use in its operator's seat.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4511.772)  Penalty, see § 70.99



CHAPTER 73: MOTOR VEHICLE CRIMES



Section



   73.01   Driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs



   73.02   Implied consent



   73.03   Driving with impaired alertness or ability; use of drugs



   73.04   Immobilizing or disabling device violation



   73.05   Physical control of vehicle while under the influence



   73.06   Reckless operation of vehicles



   73.07   Reckless operation off streets and highways; competitive
operation



   73.08   Operator to be in reasonable control



   73.09   Operation restricted for mini-trucks and low-speed,
under-speed, or utility vehicles



Speed Regulations



   73.10   Speed limits



   73.11   Stopping or slow speed



   73.12   Emergency vehicles excepted from speed limitation



   73.13   Street racing defined; prohibited on public highways



Resisting Officer



   73.15   Prohibition against resisting officer



   73.16   Presenting false name or information to officer



Stopping After Accident



   73.20   Failure to stop after accident



   73.21   Stopping after accident on other than public roads or
highways



   73.22   Stopping after accident involving damage to realty



   73.23   Vehicle obstructing street after collision



   73.24   Failure to report accident



Illegal Use of Automobile Keys, Licenses, and Identity



   73.30   (Reserved)



   73.31   Officer may remove ignition key



§ 73.01  DRIVING UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL OR DRUGS.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate any vehicle within this
municipality, if, at the time of the operation, any of the following apply:



         (a)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a
drug of abuse, or a combination of them.



         (b)   The person has a concentration of 0.08% or more
but less than 0.17% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's
whole blood.



         (c)   The person has a concentration of 0.096% or more
but less than 0.204% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's
blood serum or plasma.



         (d)   The person has a concentration of 0.08 grams or
more but less than 0.17 grams by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the
person's breath.



         (e)   The person has a concentration of 0.11 grams or
more but less than 0.238 grams by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of
the person's urine.



         (f)   The person has a concentration of 0.17% or more by
weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's whole blood.



         (g)   The person has a concentration of 0.204% or more
by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's blood serum or plasma.



         (h)   The person has a concentration of 0.17 grams or
more by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person's breath.



         (i)   The person has a concentration of 0.238 grams or
more by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person's urine.



         (j)   Except as provided in division (K) of this
section, the person has a concentration of any of the following controlled
substances or metabolites of a controlled substance in the person's whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds any of the
following:



            1.   The person has a concentration of amphetamine
in the person's urine of at least 500 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter
of the person's urine or has a concentration of amphetamine in the person's
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of amphetamine
per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma.



            2.   The person has a concentration of cocaine in
the person's urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the
person's urine or has a concentration of cocaine in the person's whole blood
or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter
of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma.



            3.   The person has a concentration of cocaine
metabolite in the person's urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine
metabolite per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of
cocaine metabolite in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at
least 50 nanograms of cocaine metabolite per milliliter of the person's whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.



            4.   The person has a concentration of heroin in
the person's urine of at least 2,000 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of
the person's urine or has a concentration of heroin in the person's whole
blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of heroin per
milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma.



            5.   The person has a concentration of heroin
metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) in the person's urine of at least 10
nanograms of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the
person's urine or has a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl
morphine) in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 10
nanograms of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the
person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma.



            6.   The person has a concentration of L.S.D. in
the person's urine of at least 25 nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the
person's urine or a concentration of L.S.D. in the person's whole blood or
blood serum or plasma of at least 10 nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of
the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma.



            7.   The person has a concentration of marihuana
in the person's urine of at least 10 nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of
the person's urine or has a concentration of marihuana in the person's whole
blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 2 nanograms of marihuana per
milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma.



            8.   Either of the following applies:



               A.   The person is under the influence of
alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them, and the person has a
concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person’s urine of at least 15
nanograms of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s urine or
has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma of at least 5 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.



               B.   The person has a concentration of
marihuana metabolite in the person’s urine of at least 35 nanograms of
marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s urine or has a
concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.



            9.   The person has a concentration of
methamphetamine in the person's urine of at least 500 nanograms of
methamphetamine per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration
of methamphetamine in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at
least 100 nanograms of methamphetamine per milliliter of the person's whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.



            10.   The person has a concentration of
phencyclidine in the person's urine of at least 25 nanograms of phencyclidine
per milliliter of the person's urine or has a concentration of phencyclidine
in the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 10 nanograms
of phencyclidine per milliliter of the person's whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.



            11.   The State Board of Pharmacy has adopted a
rule pursuant to R.C. § 4729.041 that specifies the amount of salvia
divinorum and the amount of salvinorin A that constitute concentrations of
salvia divinorum and salvinorin A in a person's urine, in a person's whole
blood, or in a person's blood serum or plasma at or above which the person is
impaired for purposes of operating any vehicle within this state, the rule is
in effect, and the person has a concentration of salvia divinorum or
salvinorin A of at least that amount so specified by rule in the person's
urine, in the person's whole blood, or in the person's blood serum or plasma.



      (2)   No person who, within 20 years of the conduct described
in division (A)(2)(a) of this section, previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a violation of this division or a substantially equivalent
state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(1) or (B) of
this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
or any other equivalent offense shall do both of the following:



         (a)   Operate any vehicle within this municipality while
under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them;



         (b)   Subsequent to being arrested for operating the
vehicle as described in division (A)(2)(a) of this section, being asked by a
law enforcement officer to submit to a chemical test or tests under R.C. §
4511.191 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and being
advised by the officer in accordance with R.C. § 4511.192 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance of the consequences of the
person's refusal or submission to the test or tests, refuse to submit to the
test or tests.



   (B)   No person under 21 years of age shall operate any vehicle
within this municipality, if, at the time of the operation, any of the
following apply:



      (1)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02% but
less than 0.08% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's whole
blood.



      (2)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.03% but
less than 0.096% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person's blood
serum or plasma.



      (3)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02 grams
but less than 0.08 grams by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person's
breath.



      (4)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.028 grams
but less than 0.11 grams by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the
person's urine.



   (C)   In any proceeding arising out of one incident, a person may be
charged with a violation of division (A)(1)(a) or (A)(2) and a violation of
division (B)(1), (2), or (3) of this section, but the person may not be
convicted of more than one violation of these divisions.



   (D)   (1)   (a)   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile
court proceeding for a violation of division (A)(1)(a) of this section or for
an equivalent offense that is vehicle-related, the result of any test of any
blood or urine withdrawn and analyzed at any health care provider, as defined
in R.C. § 2317.02, may be admitted with expert testimony to be considered
with any other relevant and competent evidence in determining the guilt or
innocence of the defendant.



         (b)   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of
division (A) or (B) of this section or for an equivalent offense that is
vehicle-related, the court may admit evidence on the concentration of
alcohol, drugs of abuse, controlled substances, metabolites of a controlled
substance, or a combination of them in the defendant's whole blood, blood
serum or plasma, breath, urine, or other bodily substance at the time of the
alleged violation as shown by chemical analysis of the substance withdrawn
within three hours of the time of the alleged violation. The three-hour time
limit specified in this division regarding the admission of evidence does not
extend or affect the two-hour time limit specified in R.C. § 4511.192(A) as
the maximum period of time during which a person may consent to a chemical
test or tests as described in that section. The court may admit evidence on
the concentration of alcohol, drugs of abuse, or a combination of them as
described in this division when a person submits to a blood test at the
request of a law enforcement officer under R.C. § 4511.191 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a blood or urine sample is
obtained pursuant to a search warrant.  Only a physician, a registered
nurse, an emergency medical technician-intermediate, an emergency medical
technician-paramedic, or a qualified technician, chemist, or phlebotomist
shall withdraw a blood sample for the purpose of determining the alcohol,
drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or
combination of the whole blood, blood serum, or blood plasma. This limitation
does not apply to the taking of breath or urine specimens. A person
authorized to withdraw blood under this division may refuse to withdraw blood
under this division, if in that person's opinion, the physical welfare of the
person would be endangered by the withdrawing of blood. The bodily substance
withdrawn under this division (D)(1)(b) shall be analyzed in accordance with
methods approved by the Director of Health by an individual possessing a
valid permit issued by the Director pursuant to R.C. § 3701.143.



         (c)   As used in division (D)(1)(b) of this section,
EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-INTERMEDIATE and EMERGENCY MEDICAL
TECHNICIAN-PARAMEDIC have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4765.01.



      (2)   In a criminal prosecution for a violation of division
(A) of this section or for an equivalent offense that is vehicle-related, if
there was at the time the bodily substance was withdrawn a concentration of
less than the applicable concentration of alcohol specified in divisions
(A)(1)(b), (c), (d) and (e) of this section or less than the applicable
concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a
controlled substance specified for a violation of division (A)(1)(j) of this
section, that fact may be considered with other competent evidence in
determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant. This division does not
limit or affect a criminal prosecution for a violation of division (B) of
this section.



      (3)   Upon the request of the person who was tested, the
results of the chemical test shall be made available to the person or the
person’s attorney, immediately upon the completion of the chemical test
analysis.  If the chemical test was obtained pursuant to division (D)(1)(b)
of this section, the person tested may have a physician, a registered nurse,
or a qualified technician, chemist, or phlebotomist of the person’s own
choosing administer a chemical test or tests, at the person’s expense, in
addition to any administered at the request of a law enforcement officer. If
the person was under arrest as described in R.C. § 4511.191(A)(5), the
arresting officer shall advise the person at the time of the arrest that the
person may have an independent chemical test taken at the person’s own
expense. If the person was under arrest other than described in R.C. §
4511.191(A)(5), the form to be read to the person to be tested, as required
under § 73.02, shall state that the person may have an independent test
performed at the person’s expense. The failure or inability to obtain an
additional chemical test by a person shall not preclude the admission of
evidence relating to the chemical test or tests taken at the request of a law
enforcement officer.



      (4)   (a)   As used in division (D)(4)(b) and (c) of this
section, NATIONAL HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SAFETY ADMINISTRATION means the National
Highway Traffic Safety Administration established as an administration of the
United States Department of Transportation under 96 Stat. 2415 (1983), 49
U.S.C. § 105.



         (b)   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court
proceeding for a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section, of a
municipal ordinance relating to operating a vehicle while under the influence
of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or alcohol and a drug of abuse, or of a
municipal ordinance relating to operating a vehicle with a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or
urine, if a law enforcement officer has administered a field sobriety test to
the operator of the vehicle involved in the violation and if it is shown by
clear and convincing evidence that the officer administered the test in
substantial compliance with the testing standards for any reliable, credible,
and generally accepted field sobriety tests that were in effect at the time
the tests were administered, including, but not limited to, any testing
standards then in effect that were set by the National Highway Traffic Safety
Administration, all of the following apply:



            1.   The officer may testify concerning the
results of the field sobriety test so administered.



            2.   The prosecution may introduce the results of
the field sobriety test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the
criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding.



            3.   If testimony is presented or evidence is
introduced under division (D)(4)(b)1. or 2. of this section and if the
testimony or evidence is admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court
shall admit the testimony or evidence and the trier of fact shall give it
whatever weight the trier of fact considers to be appropriate.



         (c)   Division (D)(4)(b) of this section does not limit
or preclude a court, in its determination of whether the arrest of a person
was supported by probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a
criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that
division, from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise
disallowed by division (D)(4)(b) of this section.



   (E)   (1)   Subject to division (E)(3) of this section, in any
criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of division
(A)(1)(b), (A)(1)(c), (A)(1)(d), (A)(1)(e), (A)(1)(f), (A)(1)(g),
(A)(1)(h),(A)(1)(i), or (A)(1)(j) or (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3), or (B)(4) of
this section or for an equivalent offense that is substantially equivalent to
any of those divisions, a laboratory report from any laboratory personnel
issued a permit by the Department of Health authorizing an analysis as
described in this division that contains an analysis of the whole blood,
blood serum or plasma, breath, urine, or other bodily substance tested and
that contains all of the information specified in this division shall be
admitted as prima facie evidence of the information and statements that the
report contains. The laboratory report shall contain all of the following:



         (a)   The signature, under oath, of any person who
performed the analysis;



         (b)   Any findings as to the identity and quantity of
alcohol, a drug of abuse, or controlled substance, a metabolite of a
controlled substance or a combination of them that was found;



         (c)   A copy of a notarized statement by the laboratory
director of a designee of the director that contains the name of each
certified analyst or test performer involved with the report, the analyst's
or test performer's employment relationship with the laboratory that issued
the report, and a notation that performing an analysis of the type involved
is part of the analyst's or test performer's regular duties;



         (d)   An outline of the analyst's or test performer's
education, training, and experience in performing the type of analysis
involved and a certification that the laboratory satisfies appropriate
quality control standards in general and, in this particular analysis, under
rules of the Department of Health.



      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law regarding the
admission of evidence, a report of the type described in division (E)(1) of
this section is not admissible against the defendant to whom it pertains in
any proceeding, other than a preliminary hearing or a grand jury proceeding,
unless the prosecutor has served a copy of the report on the defendant's
attorney or, if the defendant has no attorney, on the defendant.



      (3)   A report of the type described in division (E)(1) of
this section shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents, identity, or
amount of any substance if, within seven days after the defendant to whom the
report pertains or the defendant's attorney receives a copy of the report,
the defendant or the defendant's attorney demands the testimony of the person
who signed the report. The judge in the case may extend the seven-day time
limit in the interest of justice.



   (F)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, any
physician, registered nurse, emergency medical technician-intermediate,
emergency medical technician-paramedic, or qualified technician, chemist, or
phlebotomist who withdraws blood from a person pursuant to this section or
R.C. § 4511.19, 4511.191 or 4511.192, and any hospital, first-aid station,
or clinic at which blood is withdrawn from a person pursuant to this section
or R.C. § 4511.19, 4511.191 or 4511.192, is immune from criminal liability
and civil liability based upon a claim of assault and battery or any other
claim that is not a claim of malpractice, for any act performed in
withdrawing blood from the person.  The immunity provided in this division
also extends to an emergency medical service organization that employs an
emergency medical technician-intermediate or emergency medical
technician-paramedic who withdraws blood under this section. The immunity
provided in this division is not available to a person who withdraws blood if
the person engages in willful or wanton misconduct.



      (2)   As used in division (F)(1), EMERGENCY MEDICAL
TECHNICIAN-INTERMEDIATE and EMERGENCY MEDICAL TECHNICIAN-PARAMEDIC have the
same meanings as in R.C. § 4765.01.



   (G)   (1)   Whoever violates any provisions of divisions
(A)(1)(a) through (A)(1)(i) or (A)(2) of this section is guilty of operating
a vehicle under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination
of them. Whoever violates division (A)(1)(j) of this section is guilty of
operating a vehicle while under the influence of a listed controlled
substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance. The court shall
sentence the offender for either offense under R.C. Chapter 2929, except as
otherwise authorized or required by divisions (G)(1)(a) through (G)(1)(e) of
this section:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division
(G)(1)(b), (c), (d), or (e) of this section, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree, and the court shall sentence the offender to
all of the penalties and sanctions provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(a)(i) to
(iv).



         (b)   Except as otherwise provided in division (G)(1)(e)
of this section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of division (A) or
(B) of this section or one other equivalent offense is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all
of the penalties and sanctions provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(b)(i) to (v).



         (c)   Except as otherwise provided in division (G)(1)(e)
of this section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations of division (A) or
(B) of this section or other equivalent offenses is guilty of a misdemeanor.
The court shall sentence the offender to all of the penalties and sanctions
provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(c)(i) to (vi).



         (d)   Except as otherwise provided in division (G)(1)(e)
of this section, an offender who, within ten years of the offense, previously
has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of
division (A) or (B) of this section or other equivalent offenses or an
offender who, within 20 years of the offense, previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to five or more violations of that nature is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



         (e)   An offender who previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) that was a felony,
regardless of when the violation and the conviction or guilty plea occurred,
is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)   An offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of division (A) of this section and who subsequently seeks
reinstatement of the driver's or occupational driver's license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege suspended under this section or R.C. §
4511.19 as a result of the conviction or guilty plea shall pay a
reinstatement fee as provided in R.C. § 4511.191(F)(2).



      (3)   (a)   If an offender is sentenced to a jail term
under R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(b)(i) or (ii) or (G)(1)(c)(i) or (ii) and if,
within 60 days of sentencing of the offender, the court issues a written
finding on the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail
where the offender is required to serve the term, the offender will not be
able to begin serving that term within the 60-day period following the date
of sentencing, the court may impose an alternative sentence as specified in
R.C. § 4511.19(G)(3) that includes a term of house arrest with electronic
monitoring, with continuous alcohol monitoring, or with both electronic
monitoring and continuous alcohol monitoring.



         (b)   As an alternative to the mandatory jail terms as
required by R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1), the court may sentence the offender as
provided in R.C. § 4511.19(G)(3).



      (4)   If an offender's driver's or occupational driver's
license or permit or nonresident operating privilege is suspended under
division (G) of this section or R.C. § 4511.19(G) and if R.C. § 4510.13
permits the court to grant limited driving privileges, the court may grant
the limited driving privileges in accordance with that section. If division
(A)(7) of that section requires the court impose as a condition of the
privileges that the offender must display on the vehicle that is driven
subject to the privileges restricted license plates that are issued under
R.C. § 4503.231, except as provided in division (B) of that section, the
court shall impose that condition as one of the conditions of the limited
driving privileges granted to the offender, except as provided in R.C. §
4503.231(B).



      (5)   Fines imposed under this section for a violation of
division (A) of this section shall be distributed as provided in R.C. §
4511.19(G)(5).



      (6)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order
of criminal forfeiture under division (G)(1)(c), (d), or (e) of this section
is assigned or transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (3) applies, in
addition to or independent of any other penalty established by law, the court
may fine the offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications
of the National Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds of any fine so
imposed shall be distributed in accordance with division (C)(2) of that
section.



      (7)   In all cases in which an offender is sentenced under
division (G) of this section, the offender shall provide the court with proof
of financial responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender
fails to provide that proof of financial responsibility, the court, in
addition to any other penalties provided by law, may order restitution
pursuant to § 130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not
exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident or collision
that was the direct and proximate result of the offender's operation of the
vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense for which the
offender is sentenced under division (G) of this section.



      (8)   A court may order an offender to reimburse a law
enforcement agency for any costs incurred by the agency with respect to a
chemical test or tests administered to the offender if all of the following
apply:



         (a)   The offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of division (A) of this section.



         (b)   The test or tests were of the offender’s whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine.



         (c)   The test or tests indicated that the offender had
a prohibited concentration of a controlled substance or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the offender’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
or urine at the time of the offense.



      (9)   As used in division (G) of this section, ELECTRONIC
MONITORING has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.



   (H)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
operating a motor vehicle after underage alcohol consumption and shall be
punished as follows:



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (H)(2) of this
section, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. In
addition to any other sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall
impose a class six suspension of the offender’s driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege form the range specified in R.C.
§ 4510.02(A)(6).  The court may grant limited driving privileges relative
to the suspension under R.C. §§ 4510.021 and 4510.13. The court may grant
unlimited driving privileges with an ignition interlock device relative to
the suspension and may reduce the period of suspension as authorized under
R.C. § 4510.022. If the court grants unlimited driving privileges under R.C.
§ 4510.022, the court shall suspend any jail term imposed under division
(H)(1) of this section as required under that section.



      (2)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations
of division (A) or (B) of this section or other equivalent offense or
offenses, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.  In
addition to any other sanction imposed for the offense, the court shall
impose a class four suspension of the offender’s driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in §
R.C. 4510.02(A)(4).  The court may grant limited driving privileges relative
to the suspension under R.C. §§ 4510.021 and 4510.13.



      (3)   If the offender also is convicted of or also pleads
guilty to a specification of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1414 and if
the court imposes a jail term for the violation of division (B) of this
section, the court shall impose upon the offender an additional definite jail
term pursuant to R.C. § 2929.24(E).



      (4)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of
financial responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails
to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any
other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to
§ 130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any
economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and
proximate result of the offender's operation of the vehicle before, during,
or after committing the violation of division (B) of this section.



   (I)   (1)   No court shall sentence an offender to an alcohol
treatment program under this section unless the treatment program complies
with the minimum standards for alcohol treatment programs adopted under R.C.
Chapter 5119 by the Director of Mental Health and Addiction Services.



      (2)   An offender who stays in a drivers' intervention program
or in an alcohol treatment program under an order issued under this section
shall pay the cost of the stay in the program. However, if the court
determines that an offender who stays in an alcohol treatment program under
an order issued under this section is unable to pay the cost of the stay in
the program, the court may order that the cost be paid from the court's
indigent drivers' alcohol treatment fund.



   (J)   If a person whose driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege is suspended under this section or
R.C. § 4511.19 files an appeal regarding any aspect of the person's trial or
sentence, the appeal itself does not stay the operation of the suspension.



   (K)   Division (A)(1)(j) of this section does not apply to a person
who operates a vehicle while the person has a concentration of a listed
controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance in the
person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds
the amount specified in that division, if both of the following apply:



      (1)   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to
a prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to
prescribe drugs.



      (2)   The person injected, ingested, or inhaled the controlled
substance in accordance with the health professional's directions.



   (L)   The prohibited concentrations of a controlled substance or a
metabolite of a controlled substance listed in division (A)(1)(j) of this
section also apply in a prosecution of a violation of R.C. § 2923.16(D) in
the same manner as if the offender is being prosecuted for a prohibited
concentration of alcohol.



   (M)   All terms defined in R.C. § 4510.01 apply to this section. If
the meaning of a term defined in R.C. § 4510.01 conflicts with the meaning
of the same term as defined in R.C. §§ 4501.01 or 4511.01, the term as
defined in R.C. § 4510.01 applies to this section.



(R.C. § 4511.19(A) - (M))



   (N)   As used in this section, § 73.02 and § 73.05:



      COMMUNITY RESIDENTIAL SANCTION, CONTINUOUS ALCOHOL MONITORING,
JAIL, MANDATORY PRISON TERM, MANDATORY TERM OF LOCAL INCARCERATION, PRISON
TERM, and SANCTION have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2929.01.



      DRUG OF ABUSE has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4506.01.



      EQUIVALENT OFFENSE means any of the following:



         (a)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B);



         (b)   A violation of a municipal OVI ordinance;



         (c)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.04 in a case in which
the offender was subject to the sanctions described in division (D) of that
section;



         (d)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.06(A)(1) or R.C. §
2903.08 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to either
of those divisions;



         (e)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.06(A)(2), (A)(3), or
(A)(4), R.C. § 2903.08(A)(2), or former R.C. § 2903.07, or a municipal
ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of those divisions or that
former section, in a case in which a judge or jury as the trier of fact found
that the offender was under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a
combination of them;



         (f)   A violation of R.C. § 1547.11(A) or (B);



         (g)   A violation of a municipal ordinance prohibiting a
person from operating or being in physical control of any vessel underway or
from manipulating any water skis, aquaplane, or similar device on the waters
of this state while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a
combination of them or prohibiting a person from operating or being in
physical control of any vessel underway or from manipulating any water skis,
aquaplane, or similar device on the waters of this state with a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or
urine;



         (h)   A violation of an existing or former municipal
ordinance, law of another state, or law of the United States that is
substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B) or R.C. § 1547.11(A)
or (B);



         (i)   A violation of a former law of this state that was
substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B) or R.C. § 1547.11(A)
or (B).



      EQUIVALENT OFFENSE THAT IS VEHICLE-RELATED. Means an equivalent
offense that is any of the following:



         (a)   A violation described in division (a), (b), (c),
(d), or (e) of the definition for "equivalent offense" provided in this
division (N);



         (b)   A violation of an existing or former municipal
ordinance, law of another state, or law of the United States that is
substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B);



         (c)   A violation of a former law of this state that was
substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B).



      MANDATORY JAIL TERM means the mandatory term in jail of 3, 6, 10,
20, 30, or 60 days that must be imposed under R.C. § 4511.19(G)(1)(a),
(G)(1)(b), or (G)(1)(c) upon an offender convicted of a violation of division
(A) of that section and in relation to which all of the following apply:



         (a)   Except as specifically authorized under R.C. §
4511.19, the term must be served in a jail.



         (b)   Except as specifically authorized under R.C. §
4511.19, the term cannot be suspended, reduced, or otherwise modified
pursuant to R.C. §§ 2929.21 through 2929.28 or any other provision of the
Ohio Revised Code.



      MUNICIPAL OVI ORDINANCE and MUNICIPAL OVI OFFENSE mean any
municipal ordinance prohibiting a person from operating a vehicle while under
the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them or
prohibiting a person from operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration
of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance
in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine.



(R.C. § 4511.181) 



Cross-reference:



   Endangering children, see § 135.14



   Power to suspend or revoke driver's license, see § 33.05



Statutory reference:



   Mandatory suspension periods; immobilizing or disabling device;
restricted license, see R.C.  § 4510.13



   Trial judge to suspend or revoke driver's license, see R.C. § 4507.16



§ 73.02  IMPLIED CONSENT.



   (A)   (1)   As used in this section:



         ALCOHOL MONITORING DEVICE. Means any device that provides
for continuous alcohol monitoring, any ignition interlock device, any
immobilizing or disabling device other than an ignition interlock device that
is constantly available to monitor the concentration of alcohol in a person's
system, or any other device that provides for the automatic testing and
periodic reporting of alcohol consumption by a person and that a court orders
a person to use as a sanction imposed as a result of the person's conviction
of or plea of guilty to an offense.



         COMMUNITY ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER.  Has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 5119.01.



         PHYSICAL CONTROL has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4511.194.



      (2)   Any person who operates a vehicle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for vehicular travel or parking
within this municipality or who is in physical control of a vehicle shall be
deemed to have given consent to a chemical test or tests of the person’s
whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine to determine the
alcohol, drug, of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled
substance, or combination content of the person’s whole blood, blood serum
or plasma, breath, or urine if arrested for a violation of § 73.01(A) or
(B), § 73.05, R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or any other municipal OVI ordinance.



      (3)   The chemical test or tests under division (A)(2) of this
section shall be administered at the request of a law enforcement officer
having reasonable grounds to believe the person was operating or in physical
control of a vehicle in violation of a division, section, or ordinance
identified in division (A)(2) of this section. The law enforcement agency by
which the officer is employed shall designate which of the tests shall be
administered.



      (4)   Any person who is dead or unconscious, or who otherwise
is in a condition rendering the person incapable of refusal, shall be deemed
to have consented as provided in division (A)(2) of this section, and the
test or tests may be administered, subject to R.C. §§ 313.12 to 313.16.



      (5)   (a)   If a law enforcement officer arrests a person
for a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a municipal OVI ordinance
and if the person if convicted would be required to be sentenced under R.C.
§ 4511.19(G)(1)(c), (d), or (e), the law enforcement officer shall request
the person to submit, and the person shall submit, to a chemical test or
tests of the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine
for the purpose of determining the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled
substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or combination content of
the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine. A law
enforcement officer who makes a request pursuant to this division that a
person submit to a chemical test or tests is not required to advise the
person of the consequences of submitting to, or refusing to submit to, the
test or tests and is not required to give the person the form described in
division (C) of this section, but the officer shall advise the person at the
time of the arrest that if the person refuses to take a chemical test the
officer may employ whatever reasonable means are necessary to ensure that the
person submits to a chemical test of the person's whole blood or blood serum
or plasma. The officer shall also advise the person at the time of the arrest
that the person may have an independent chemical test taken at the person's
own expense.  Divisions (A)(3) and (A)(4) of this section apply to the
administration of a chemical test or tests pursuant to this division.



         (b)   If a person refuses to submit to a chemical test
upon a request made pursuant to division (A)(5)(a) of this section, the law
enforcement officer who made the request may employ whatever reasonable means
are necessary to ensure that the person submits to a chemical test of the
person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma. A law enforcement officer who
acts pursuant to this division to ensure that a person submits to a chemical
test of the person's whole blood or blood serum or plasma is immune from
criminal and civil liability based upon a claim for assault and battery or
any other claim for the acts, unless the officer so acted with malicious
purpose, in bad faith, or in a wanton or reckless manner.



(R.C. § 4511.191(A))



   (B)   Except as provided in division (A)(5) of this section, the
arresting law enforcement officer shall give advice in accordance with this
section to any person under arrest for a violation of § 73.01(A) or (B), §
73.05, R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or any other municipal OVI ordinance. The
officer shall give that advice in a written form that contains the
information described in division (C) of this section and shall read the
advice to the person. The form shall contain a statement that the form was
shown to the person under arrest and read to the person by the arresting
officer. One or more persons shall witness the arresting officer's reading of
the form, and the witnesses shall certify to this fact by signing the form. 
The person must submit to the chemical test or tests, subsequent to the
request of the arresting officer, within two hours of the time of the alleged
violation and, if the person does not submit to the test or tests within that
two-hour time limit, the failure to submit automatically constitutes a
refusal to submit to the test or tests.



If a person is under arrest as described in division (B) of this section,
before the person may be requested to submit to a chemical test or tests to
determine the alcohol, drug of abuse, controlled substance, metabolite of a
controlled substance, or combination content of the person's whole blood,
blood serum or plasma, and drug content of the person's blood, breath, or
urine, the arresting officer shall read the following form to the person:



   "You now are under arrest for (specifically state the offense under
state law or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance for which the
person was arrested – operating a vehicle under the influence of alcohol, a
drug, or a combination of them; operating a vehicle while under the influence
of a listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled
substance; operating a vehicle after underage alcohol consumption; or having
physical control of a vehicle while under the influence).



   "If you refuse to take any chemical test required by law, your Ohio
driving privileges will be suspended immediately, and you will have to pay a
fee to have the privileges reinstated. If you have a prior conviction of OVI,
OVUAC, or operating a vehicle while under the influence of a listed
controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance under
state or municipal law within the preceding 20 years, you are now under
arrest for state OVI, and, if you refuse to take a chemical test, you will
face increased penalties if you subsequently are convicted of the state OVI.



   "(Read this part unless the person is under arrest for solely having
physical control of a vehicle while under the influence.) If you take any
chemical test required by law and are found to be at or over the prohibited
amount of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled
substance in your whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine as set
by law, your Ohio driving privileges will be suspended immediately, and you
will have to pay a fee to have the privileges reinstated.



   (C)   Except as provided in division (A)(5) of this section, if a
person is under arrest as described in division (B) of this section, before
the person may be requested to submit to a chemical test or tests to
determine the alcohol and drug content of the person's blood, breath, or
urine, the arresting officer shall read the following form to the person:



   "You now are under arrest for (specifically stat the offense under
state law or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance for which the
person was arrested – operating a vehicle under the influence of alcohol, a
drug, or a combination of them; operating a vehicle after underage alcohol
consumption; or having physical control of a vehicle while under the
influence).



   "If you refuse to take any chemical test required by law, your Ohio
driving privileges will be suspended immediately, and you will have to pay a
fee to have the privileges reinstated. If you have a prior OVI or OVUAC
conviction under state or municipal law within the preceding 20 years, you
are now under arrest for state OVI, and, if you refuse to take a chemical
test, you will face increased penalties if you subsequently are convicted of
the state OVI.



   "(Read this part unless the person is under arrest for solely having
physical control of a vehicle while under the influence.) If you take any
chemical test required by law and are found to be at or over the prohibited
amount of alcohol in your blood, breath, or urine as set by law, your Ohio
driving privileges will be suspended immediately, and you will have to pay a
fee to have the privileges reinstated.



   "If you take a chemical test, you may have an independent chemical test
taken at your own expense."



   (D)   If the arresting law enforcement officer does not ask a person
under arrest as described in division (B) of this section or division (A)(5)
of this section to submit to a chemical test or tests under R.C. § 4511.191
or this section, the arresting officer shall seize the Ohio or out-of-state
driver's or commercial driver's license or permit of the person and
immediately forward it to the court in which the arrested person is to appear
on the charge. If the arrested person is not in possession of the person's
license or permit or it is not in the person's vehicle, the officer shall
order the person to surrender it to the law enforcement agency that employs
the officer within 24 hours after the arrest, and, upon the surrender, the
agency immediately shall forward the license or permit to the court in which
the person is to appear on the charge. Upon receipt of the license or permit,
the court shall retain it pending the arrested person's initial appearance
and any action taken under R.C. § 4511.196.



   (E)   (1)   If a law enforcement officer asks a person under
arrest as described in division (A)(5) of this section to submit to a
chemical test or tests under that division and the test results indicate a
prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite
of a controlled substance in the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, or urine at the time of the alleged offense, or if a law enforcement
officer asks a person under arrest as described in division (B) of this
section to submit to a chemical test or tests under R.C. § 4511.191 or this
section, if the officer advises the person in accordance with this section of
the consequences of the person's refusal or submission, and if either the
person refuses to submit to the test or tests or, unless the arrest was for a
violation of § 73.05, R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the person submits to the test or tests and the test
results indicate a prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled
substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in the person's whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine at the time of the alleged
offense, the arresting officer shall do all of the following:



         (a)   On behalf of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles,
notify the person that, independent of any penalties or sanctions imposed
upon the person, the person's Ohio driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit or nonresident operating privilege is suspended immediately, that the
suspension will last at least until the person's initial appearance on the
charge, which will be held within five days after the date of the person's
arrest or the issuance of a citation to the person, and that the person may
appeal the suspension at the initial appearance or during the period of time
ending 30 days after that initial appearance;



         (b)   Seize the driver's or commercial driver's license
or permit of the person and immediately forward it to the Registrar. If the
arrested person is not in possession of the person's license or permit or it
is not in the person's vehicle, the officer shall order the person to
surrender it to the law enforcement agency that employs the officer within 24
hours after the person is given notice of the suspension, and, upon the
surrender, the officer's employing agency immediately shall forward the
license or permit to the Registrar;



         (c)   Verify the person's current residence and, if it
differs from that on the person's driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit, notify the Registrar of the change;



         (d)   Send to the Registrar, within 48 hours after the
arrest of the person, a sworn report that includes all of the following
statements:



            1.   That the officer had reasonable grounds to
believe that, at the time of the arrest, the arrested person was operating a
vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B) or a municipal OVI
ordinance or for being in physical control of a stationary vehicle in
violation of R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance;



            2.   That the person was arrested and charged with
a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or a municipal OVI ordinance;



            3.   Unless division (E)(1)(d)5. of this section
applies, that the officer asked the person to take the designated chemical
test or tests, advised the person in accordance with this section of the
consequences of submitting to, or refusing to take, the test or tests, and
gave the person the form described in division (C) of this section;



            4.   Unless division (E)(1)(d)5. of this section
applies, that either the person refused to submit to the chemical test or
tests or, unless the arrest was for a violation of R.C. § 4511.194 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the person submitted to the
chemical test or tests and the test results indicate a prohibited
concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, or urine at the time of the alleged offense.



            5.   If the person was under arrest as described
in division (A)(5) of this section and the chemical test or tests were
performed in accordance with that division, that the person was under arrest
as described in that division, that the chemical test or tests were performed
in accordance with that division, and that test results indicated a
prohibited concentration of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite
of a controlled substance in the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma,
breath, or urine at the time of the alleged offense.



      (2)   Division (E)(1) of this section does not apply to a
person who is arrested for a violation of § 73.05, R.C. § 4511.194 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, who is asked by a law
enforcement officer to submit to a chemical test or tests under this section,
and who submits to the test or tests, regardless of the amount of alcohol, a
controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance that the test
results indicate is present in the person's whole blood, blood serum or
plasma, breath, or urine.



   (F)   The arresting officer shall give the officer's sworn report
that is completed under this section to the arrested person at the time of
the arrest, or the Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall send the report to the
person by regular first class mail as soon as possible after receipt of the
report, but not later than 14 days after receipt of it. An arresting officer
may give an unsworn report to the arrested person at the time of the arrest
provided the report is complete when given to the arrested person and
subsequently is sworn to by the arresting officer. As soon as possible, but
not later than 48 hours after the arrest of the person, the arresting officer
shall send a copy of the sworn report to the court in which the arrested
person is to appear on the charge for which the person was arrested.



   (G)   The sworn report of an arresting officer completed under this
section is prima facie proof of the information and statements that it
contains. It shall be admitted and considered as prima facie proof of the
information and statements that it contains in any appeal under R.C. §
4511.197 relative to any suspension of a person's driver's or commercial
driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege that results
from the arrest covered by the report.



(R.C. § 4511.192)



   (H)   (1)   A suspension of a person's driver's or commercial
driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege under this
section for the time described in R.C. § 4511.191(B) or (C) is effective
immediately from the time at which the arresting officer serves the notice of
suspension upon the arrested person. Any subsequent finding that the person
is not guilty of the charge that resulted in the person's being requested to
take the chemical test or tests under division (A) of this section does not
affect the suspension.



      (2)   If a person arrested for operating a vehicle in
violation of § 73.01(A) or (B), R.C. § 4511.19(A) or (B), or any other
municipal OVI ordinance, or for being in physical control of a vehicle in
violation of § 73.05 or R.C. § 4511.194 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, regardless of whether the person's driver's or
commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege is
or is not suspended under R.C. § 4511.191(B) or (C) or R.C. Chapter 4510,
the person's initial appearance on the charge resulting from the arrest shall
be held within five days of the persons' arrest or the issuance of the
citation to him or her, subject to any continuance granted by the court
pursuant to R.C. § 4511.197 regarding the issues specified in that section.



(R.C. § 4511.191(D))



Statutory reference:



   Disposition of fines, immobilization of vehicle and impoundment of
license plates, criminal forfeiture for municipal ordinance conviction,see
R.C. § 4511.193



   Effect of refusal to submit to test, seizure of license, suspension
periods, appeal procedures, occupational driving privileges, and indigent
drivers alcohol treatment funds, see R.C. § 4511.191



   Judicial pretrial suspension, initial appearance, see R.C. § 4511.196



   Mandatory suspension periods; immobilizing or disabling device;
restricted license, see R.C.  § 4510.13



   Seizure of vehicles upon arrest, see R.C.  § 4511.195



§ 73.03  DRIVING WITH IMPAIRED ALERTNESS OR ABILITY; USE OF DRUGS.



   (A)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle, as defined
in R.C. § 4506.01, or a commercial car or commercial tractor, as defined in
R.C. § 4501.01, while the person's ability or alertness is so impaired by
fatigue, illness, or other causes that it is unsafe for the person to drive
such vehicle. No driver shall use any drug which would adversely affect the
driver's ability or alertness.



   (B)   No owner, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01, of a commercial motor
vehicle, commercial car or commercial tractor, or a person employing or
otherwise directing the driver of such vehicle, shall require or knowingly
permit a driver in any such condition described in division (A) of this
section to drive such vehicle upon any street or highway.



('69 Code, § 72.07)



   (C)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations
of this section or R.C. § 4511.79, or R.C. §§ 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761,
4511.762, 4511.764, or 4511.77 or a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any of those sections, whoever violates this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 4511.79)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.04  IMMOBILIZING OR DISABLING DEVICE VIOLATION.



   (A)   (1)   No offender who has been granted limited or unlimited
driving privileges, during any period that the offender is required to
operate only a motor vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling
device, shall request or permit any other person to breathe into the device
if it is an ignition interlock device or another type of device that monitors
the concentration of alcohol in a person’s breath or to otherwise start the
motor vehicle equipped with the device, for the purpose of providing the
offender with an operable motor vehicle.



      (2)   No person shall breathe into an immobilizing or
disabling device that is an ignition interlock device or another type of
device that monitors the concentration of alcohol in a person’s breath or
otherwise start a motor vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling
device, for the purpose of providing an operable motor vehicle to another
person who has been granted limited or unlimited driving privileges under the
condition that the person operate only a motor vehicle equipped with an
immobilizing or disabling device.



      (3)   No unauthorized person shall tamper with or circumvent
the operation of an immobilizing or disabling device.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of an immobilizing or
disabling device violation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 4510.44)



§ 73.05  PHYSICAL CONTROL OF VEHICLE WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE.



   (A)   As used in this section, PHYSICAL CONTROL means being in the
driver's position of the front seat of a vehicle and having possession of the
vehicle's ignition key or other ignition device.



   (B)   No person shall be in physical control of a vehicle if, at the
time of the physical control, any of the following apply:



      (1)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of
abuse, or a combination of them.



      (2)   The person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath,
or urine contains at least the concentration of alcohol specified in §
73.01(A)(1)(b), (A)(1)(c), (A)(1)(d), or (A)(1)(e).



      (3)   Except as provided in division (E) of this section, the
person has a concentration of a listed controlled substance or a listed
metabolite of a controlled substance in the person's whole blood, blood serum
or plasma, or urine that equals or exceeds the concentration specified in §
73.01(A)(1)(j).



   (C)   (1)   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court
proceeding for a violation of this section, if a law enforcement officer has
administered a field sobriety test to the person in physical control of the
vehicle involved in the violation and if it is shown by clear and convincing
evidence that the officer administered the test in substantial compliance
with the testing standards for any reliable, credible, and generally
acceptable field sobriety tests that were in effect at the time the tests
were administered, including but not limited to any testing standards then in
effect what were set by the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration,
all of the following apply:



         (a)   The officer may testify concerning the results of
the field sobriety test so administered.



         (b)   The prosecution may introduce the results of the
field sobriety test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the
criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding.



         (c)   If testimony is presented or evidence is
introduced under division (C)(1)(a) or (b) of this section and if the
testimony or evidence is admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court
shall admit the testimony or evidence, and the trier of fact shall give it
whatever weight the trier of fact considers to be appropriate.



      (2)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not limit or
preclude a court, in its determination of whether the arrest of a person was
supported by probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a
criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that
division, from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise
disallowed by division (C)(1) of this section.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of having physical
control of a vehicle while under the influence, a misdemeanor of the first
degree. In addition to other sanctions imposed, the court may impose on the
offender a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's license,
commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C.
§ 4510.02(A)(7).



   (E)   Division (B)(3) of this section does not apply to a person who
is in physical control of a vehicle while the person has a concentration of a
listed controlled substance or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance
in the person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or urine that equals or
exceeds the amount specified in § 73.01(A)(1)(j) if both of the following
apply:



      (1)   The person obtained the controlled substance pursuant to
a prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to
prescribe drugs.



      (2)   The person injected, ingested, or inhaled the controlled
substance in accordance with the health professional's directions.



(R.C. § 4511.194)



§ 73.06  RECKLESS OPERATION OF VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any street or highway in
willful or wanton disregard of the safety of persons or property.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.20)  ('69 Code, § 72.08(A))  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.07  RECKLESS OPERATION OFF STREETS AND HIGHWAYS; COMPETITIVE OPERATION.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any public or
private property other than streets or highways in willful or wanton
disregard of the safety of persons or property.



      (2)   This section does not apply to the competitive operation
of vehicles on public or private property when the owner of such property
knowingly permits such operation thereon.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.201)  ('69 Code, § 72.08(B))  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.08  OPERATOR TO BE IN REASONABLE CONTROL.



   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, agricultural tractor,
or agricultural tractor that is towing, pulling, or otherwise drawing a unit
of farm machinery on any street, highway, or property open to the public for
vehicular traffic without being in reasonable control of the vehicle,
agricultural tractor, or unit of farm machinery.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor
vehicle or agricultural tractor without being in control of it, a minor
misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4511.202)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.09  OPERATION RESTRICTED FOR MINI-TRUCKS AND LOW-SPEED, UNDER-SPEED,
OR UTILITY VEHICLES.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate a low-speed vehicle upon any
street or highway having an established speed limit greater than 35 miles per
hour.



      (2)   No person shall operate an under-speed or utility
vehicle or a mini-truck upon any street or highway except as follows:



         (a)   Upon a street or highway having an established
speed limit not greater than 35 miles per hour and only upon such streets or
highways where the municipality has granted permission for such operation in
accordance with division (E) of this section;



         (b)   A state park or political subdivision employee or
volunteer operating a utility vehicle exclusively within the boundaries of
state parks or political subdivision parks for the operation or maintenance
of state or political subdivision park facilities.



      (3)   No person shall operate a motor-driven cycle or motor
scooter upon any street or highway having an established speed limit greater
than 45 miles per hour.



   (B)   This section does not prohibit either of the following:



      (1)   A person operating a low-speed, under-speed, or utility
vehicle or a mini-truck from proceeding across an intersection of a street or
highway having a speed limit greater than 35 miles per hour;



      (2)   A person operating a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter
from proceeding across an intersection of a street or highway having a speed
limit greater than 45 miles per hour.



   (C)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the municipality from
adopting more stringent local ordinances, resolutions, or regulations
governing the operation of a low-speed vehicle or a mini-truck, or a
motor-driven cycle or motor scooter.



   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.214)



   (E)   By ordinance or resolution, the municipality may authorize the
operation of under-speed or utility vehicles or mini-trucks on a public
street or highway under its jurisdiction. The municipality shall do all of
the following:



      (1)   Limit the operation of those vehicles to streets and
highways having an established speed limit not greater than 35 miles per hour;



      (2)   Require the vehicle owner who wishes to operate an
under-speed or utility vehicle or a mini-truck on the public streets or
highways to submit the vehicle to an inspection conducted by a local law
enforcement agency that complies with inspection requirements established by
the Department of Public Safety under R.C. § 4513.02;



      (3)   Permit the operation on public streets or highways of
only those vehicles that successfully pass the required vehicle inspection,
are registered in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4503, and are titled in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 4505;



      (4)   Notify the Director of Public Safety, in a manner the
Director determines, of the authorization for the operation of under-speed or
utility vehicles or mini-trucks.



   (F)   The municipality may establish additional requirements for the
operation of under-speed or utility vehicles or mini-trucks on its streets
and highways.



(R.C. § 4511.215)



   (G)   Notwithstanding divisions (A) through (F) of this section, a
person may operate a utility vehicle on any public roads or right-of-way,
other than a freeway, when traveling from one farm field to another for
agricultural purposes if the vehicle is displaying a triangular slow-moving
vehicle emblem as described in R.C. § 4513.11.



(R.C. § 4511.216)



   (H)   (1)   Except as provided in this division (H) and divisions
(E) and (F) of this section, no person shall operate a mini-truck within this
municipality.



      (2)   A person may operate a mini- truck on a farm for
agricultural purposes only when the owner of the farm qualifies for the
current agricultural use valuation tax credit. A mini-truck may be operated
by or on behalf of such a farm owner on public roads and rights-of-way only
when traveling from one farm field to another.



      (3)   A person may operate a mini- truck on property owned or
leased by a dealer who sells mini-trucks at retail.



      (4)   Whoever violates this division (H) shall be penalized as
provided in division (D) of this section.



(R.C. § 4519.401)



SPEED REGULATIONS



§ 73.10  SPEED LIMITS.



   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater or
less than is reasonable or proper, having due regard for the traffic,
surface, and width of the street or highway and any other conditions, and no
person shall drive any motor vehicle in and upon any street or highway at a
greater speed than will permit him or her to bring it to a stop within the
assured clear distance ahead.



   (B)   It is prima facie lawful, in the absence of a lower limit
declared or established pursuant to this section by the Director of
Transportation or local authorities, for the operator of a motor vehicle to
operate the same at a speed not exceeding the following:



      (1)   (a)   Twenty miles per hour in school zones during
school recess and while children are going to or leaving school during the
opening or closing hours, and when 20 miles per hour school speed limit signs
are erected, except that on controlled-access highways and expressways, if
the right-of-way line fence has been erected without pedestrian opening, the
speed shall be governed by division (B)(4) of this section, and on freeways,
if the right-of-way line fence has been erected without pedestrian opening,
the speed shall be governed by divisions (B)(10) and (B)(11) of this section.
The end of every school zone may be marked by a sign indicating the end of
the zone. Nothing in this section or in the Manual and Specifications for a
Uniform System of Traffic- Control Devices shall be construed to require
school zones to be indicated by signs equipped with flashing or other lights,
or giving other special notice of the hours in which the school zone speed
limit is in effect.



         (b)   As used in this section, SCHOOL means any school
chartered under R.C. § 3301.16 and any nonchartered school that during the
preceding year filed with the Department of Education in compliance with
O.A.C. § 3301-35-08, a copy of the school’s report for the parents of the
school’s pupils certifying that the school meets state minimum standards
for nonchartered, nontax-supported schools and presents evidence of this
filing to the jurisdiction from which it is requesting the establishment of a
school zone. The term also includes a special elementary school that in
writing requests the County Engineer to create a school zone at the location
of the school. Upon receipt of such written request, the County Engineer
shall create a school zone at that location by erecting appropriate signs.



         (c)   As used in this section, SCHOOL ZONE means that
portion of a street or highway passing a school fronting upon the street or
highway that is encompassed by projecting the school property lines to the
fronting street or highway, and also includes that portion of a state
highway. Upon request from local authorities for streets and highways under
their jurisdiction and that portion of a state highway under the jurisdiction
of the Director of Transportation or a request from a County Engineer in the
case of a school zone for a special elementary school, the Director may
extend the traditional school zone boundaries. The distances in divisions
(B)(1)(c)1. through (B)(1)(c)3. below shall not exceed 300 feet per approach
per direction, and are bounded by whichever of the following distances or
combination thereof the Director approves as most appropriate:



            1.   The distance encompassed by projecting the
school building lines normal to the fronting highway and extending a distance
of 300 feet on each approach direction;



            2.   The distance encompassed by projecting the
school property lines intersecting the fronting highway and extending a
distance of 300 feet on each approach direction;



            3.   The distance encompassed by the special
marking of the pavement for a principal school pupil crosswalk plus a
distance of 300 feet on each approach direction of the highway.



         (d)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to
invalidate the Director’s initial action on August 9, 1976, establishing
all school zones at the traditional school zone boundaries defined by
projecting school property lines, except when those boundaries are extended
as provided in divisions (B)(1)(a) and (B)(1)(c) of this section.



         (e)   As used in this division, CROSSWALK has the
meaning given that term in R.C. § 4511.01(LL)(2).



         (f)   The Director may, upon request by resolution of
the Legislative Authority and upon submission by the municipality of such
engineering, traffic, and other information as the Director considers
necessary, designate a school zone on any portion of a state route lying
within the municipality that includes a crosswalk customarily used by
children going to or leaving a school during recess and opening and closing
hours, whenever the distance, as measured in a straight line, from the school
property line nearest the crosswalk to the nearest point of a crosswalk is no
more than 1,320 feet. Such a school zone shall include the distance
encompassed by the crosswalk and extending 300 feet in each appropriate
direction of the state route.



         (g)   As used in this section, SPECIAL ELEMENTARY SCHOOL
means a school that meets all of the following:



            1.   It is not chartered and does not receive tax
revenue from any source.



            2.   It does not educate children beyond the
eighth grade.



            3.   It is located outside the limits of a
municipal corporation.



            4.   A majority of the total number of students
enrolled at the school are not related by blood.



            5.   The principal or other person in charge of
the special elementary school annually sends a report to the superintendent
of the school district in which the special elementary school is located
indicating the total number of students enrolled at the school, but otherwise
the principal or other person in charge does not report any other information
or data to the superintendent.



      (2)   Twenty-five miles per hour in all other portions of the
municipality, except on state routes outside business districts, through
highways outside business districts, and alleys;



      (3)   Thirty-five miles per hour on all state routes or
through highways within the municipality outside business districts, except
as provided in divisions (B)(4) and (B)(6) of this section;



      (4)   Fifty miles per hour on controlled-access highways and
expressways within the municipality;



      (5)   Fifty-five miles per hour on highways outside the
municipality, other than highways within island jurisdictions as provided in
division (B)(8) of this section, highways as provided in divisions (B)(9) and
(B)(10) of this section, and highways, expressways and freeways as provided
in divisions (B)(13), (B)(14), (B)(15) and (B)(17) of this section;



      (6)   Fifty miles per hour on state routes within the
municipality outside urban districts unless a lower prima facie speed is
established as further provided in this section;



      (7)   Fifteen miles per hour on all alleys within the
municipality;



      (8)   Thirty-five miles per hour on highways outside the
municipality that are within an island jurisdiction;



      (9)   Thirty-five miles per hour on through highways, except
state routes, that are outside municipal corporations and that are within a
national park with boundaries extending through two or more counties;



      (10)   Sixty miles per hour on two- lane state routes outside
municipal corporations as established by the Director under R.C. §
4511.21(H)(2);



      (11)   Fifty-five miles per hour at all times on freeways with
paved shoulders inside the municipality, other than freeways as provided in
divisions (B)(15) and (B)(17) of this section;



      (12)   Fifty-five miles per hour at all times on freeways
outside the municipality, other than freeways as provided in divisions
(B)(15) and (B)(17) of this section;



      (13)   Sixty miles per hour for operators of any motor vehicle
at all times on all portions of rural divided highways;



      (14)   Sixty-five miles per hour for operators of any motor
vehicle at all times on all rural expressways without traffic control signals;



      (15)   Seventy miles per hour for operators of any motor
vehicle at all times on all rural freeways;



      (16)   Fifty-five miles per hour for operators of any motor
vehicle at all times on all portions of freeways in congested areas as
determined by the Director and that are part of the interstate system and are
located within a municipal corporation or within an interstate freeway
outerbelt;



      (17)   Sixty-five miles per hour for operators of any motor
vehicle at all times on all portions of freeways in urban areas as determined
by the Director and that are part of the interstate system and are part of an
interstate freeway outerbelt.



   (C)   It is prima facie unlawful for any person to exceed any of the
speed limitations in divisions (B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6),
(B)(7), (B)(8) and (B)(9) of this section or any declared or established
pursuant to this section by the Director or local authorities and it is
unlawful for any person to exceed any of the speed limitations in division
(D) of this section. No person shall be convicted of more than one violation
of this section for the same conduct, although violations of more than one
provision of this section may be charged in the alternative in a single
affidavit.



   (D)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon a street or
highway as follows:



      (1)   At a speed exceeding 55 miles per hour, except upon a
two-lane state route as provided in division (B)(10) of this section and upon
a highway, expressway or freeway as provided in divisions (B)(13), (B)(14),
(B)(15) and (B)(17) of this section;



      (2)   At a speed exceeding 60 miles per hour upon a two-lane
state route as provided in division (B)(10) of this section and upon a
highway as provided in division (B)(13) of this section;



      (3)   At a speed exceeding 65 miles per hour upon an
expressway as provided in division (B)(14) of this section or upon a freeway
as provided in division (B)(17) of this section, except upon a freeway as
provided in division (B)(15) of this section;



      (4)   At a speed exceeding 70 miles per hour upon a freeway as
provided in division (B)(15) of this section;



      (5)   At a speed exceeding the posted speed limit upon a
highway, expressway or freeway for which the Director has determined and
declared a speed limit pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(I)(2) or (L)(2).



   (E)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(E), in every charge of violating
this section, the affidavit and warrant shall specify the time, place and
speed at which the defendant is alleged to have driven, and in charges made
in reliance upon division (C) of this section also the speed which division
(B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6), (B)(7), (B)(8) or (B)(9) of, or a
limit declared or established pursuant to, this section or R.C. § 4511.21
declares is prima facie lawful at the time and place of such alleged
violation, except that in affidavits where a person is alleged to have driven
at a greater speed than will permit the person to bring the vehicle to stop
within the assured clear distance ahead, the affidavit and warrant need not
specify the speed at which the defendant is alleged to have driven.



   (F)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(F), when a speed in excess of both
a prima facie limitation and a limitation in division (D) of this section is
alleged, the defendant shall be charged in a single affidavit, alleging a
single act, with a violation indicated of both division (B)(1)(a), (B)(2),
(B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6), (B)(7), (B)(8) or (B)(9) of this section, or of a
limit declared or established pursuant to this section or R.C. § 4511.21 by
the Director or local authorities, and of the limitation in division (D) of
this section. If the court finds a violation of division (B)(1)(a), (B)(2),
(B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6), (B)(7), (B)(8) or (B)(9) of, or a limit declared or
established pursuant to, this section or R.C. § 4511.21 has occurred, it
shall enter a judgment of conviction under such division and dismiss the
charge under division (D) of this section. If it finds no violation of
division (B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6), (B)(7), (B)(8) or (B)(9)
of, or a limit declared or established pursuant to, this section or R.C. §
4511.21, it shall then consider whether the evidence supports a conviction
under division (D) of this section.



   (G)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(G), points shall be assessed for a
violation of a limitation under division (D) of this section in accordance
with R.C. § 4510.036.



(R.C. § 4511.21(A) - (G))



   (H)   Whenever, in accordance with R.C. § 4511.21(H) through (N),
the maximum prima facie speed limitations as established herein have been
altered, either higher or lower, and the appropriate signs giving notice have
been erected as required, operators of motor vehicles shall be governed by
the speed limitations set forth on such signs. It is prima facie unlawful for
any person to exceed the speed limits posted upon such signs.



   (I)   As used in this section:



      COMMERCIAL BUS. Means a motor vehicle designed for carrying more
than nine passengers and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation.



      INTERSTATE SYSTEM. Has the same meaning as in 23 U.S.C. § 101.



      NONCOMMERCIAL BUS. Includes but is not limited to a school bus,
or a motor vehicle operated solely for the transportation of persons
associated with a charitable or nonprofit organization.



      OUTERBELT. A portion of a freeway that is part of the interstate
system and is located in the outer vicinity of a major municipal corporation
or group of municipal corporations, as designated by the Director.



      RURAL. Outside urbanized areas, as designated in accordance with
23 U.S.C. § 101, and outside of a business or urban district.



(R.C. § 4511.21(O))



   (J)   Speed limits for private roads and driveways.



      (1)   The owner of a private road or driveway located in a
private residential area containing 20 or more dwelling units may establish a
speed limit on the road or driveway by complying with all of the following
requirements:



         (a)   The speed limit is not less than 25 miles per hour
and is indicated by a sign that is in a proper position, is sufficiently
legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person, and meets the
specifications for the basic speed limit sign included in the manual adopted
by the Department of Transportation pursuant to R.C. § 4511.09;



         (b)   The owner has posted a sign at the entrance of the
private road or driveway that is in plain view and clearly informs persons
entering the road or driveway that they are entering private property, a
speed limit has been established for the road or driveway, and the speed
limit is enforceable by law enforcement officers under state law.



      (2)   No person shall operate a vehicle upon a private road or
driveway as provided in division (J)(1) of this section at a speed exceeding
any speed limit established and posted pursuant to division (J)(1).



      (3)   When a speed limit is established and posted in
accordance with division (J)(1) of this section, a law enforcement officer
may apprehend a person violating the speed limit of the residential area by
utilizing any of the means described in R.C. § 4511.091 or by any other
accepted method of determining the speed of a motor vehicle and may stop and
charge the person with exceeding the speed limit.



      (4)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.211(D), points shall be
assessed for violation of a speed limit established and posted in accordance
with division (J)(1) of this section in accordance with R.C. § 4510.036.



      (5)   As used in this division (J):



         OWNER. Includes but is not limited to a person who holds
title to the real property in fee simple, a condominium owners’
association, a property owners’ association, a board of directors or
trustees of a private community, and a nonprofit corporation governing a
private community.



         PRIVATE RESIDENTIAL AREA CONTAINING 20 OR MORE DWELLING
UNITS. Does not include a Chautauqua assembly as defined in R.C. § 4511.90.



(R.C. § 4511.211(A) - (E))



   (K)   Penalties.



      (1)   Divisions (A) through (I).



         (a)   A violation of any provision of divisions (A)
through (I) of this section is one of the following:



            1.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions
(K)(1)(a)2., (K)(1)(a)3., (K)(1)(b), and (K)(1)(c) of this section, a minor
misdemeanor;



            2.   If, within one year of the offense, the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations
of any provision of divisions (A) through (I) of this section, R.C. §
4511.21, or any provision of any other municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to any provision of that section, a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree;



            3.   If, within one year of the offense, the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more
violations of any provision of divisions (A) through (I) of this section,
R.C. § 4511.21, or any provision of any other municipal ordinance that is
substantially equivalent to any provision of that section, a misdemeanor of
the third degree.



         (b)   If the offender has not previously been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to a violation of any provision of division (A) through
(I) of this section, R.C. § 4511.21, or any other municipal ordinance that
is substantially equivalent to any provision of that section, and operated a
motor vehicle faster than 35 miles an hour in a business district of the
municipality, faster than 50 miles an hour in other portions of the
municipality, or faster than 35 miles an hour in a school zone during recess
or while children are going to or leaving school during the school’s
opening or closing hours, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



         (c)   Notwithstanding division (K)(1)(a) of this
section, if the offender operated a motor vehicle in a construction zone
where a sign was then posted in accordance with R.C. § 4511.98, the court,
in addition to all other penalties provided by law, shall impose upon the
offender a fine of two times the usual amount imposed for the violation. No
court shall impose a fine of two times the usual amount imposed for the
violation upon an offender if the offender alleges, in an affidavit filed
with the court prior to the offender’s sentencing, that the offender is
indigent and is unable to pay the fine imposed pursuant to this division and
if the court determines that the offender is an indigent person and unable to
pay the fine.



         (d)   If the offender commits the offense while
distracted and the distracting activity is a contributing factor to the
commission of the offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine
established under § 70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.21(P))



      (2)   Division (J).



         (a)   A violation of division (J)(2) of this section is
one of the following:



            1.   Except as otherwise provided in divisions
(K)(2)(a)2. and (K)(2)(a)3. of this section, a minor misdemeanor;



            2.   If, within one year of the offense, the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two violations
of division (J)(2) of this section, R.C. § 4511.211(B), or any other
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that division, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree;



            3.   If, within one year of the offense, the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or more
violations of division (J)(2) of this section, R.C. § 4511.211(B), or any
other municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that division,
a misdemeanor of the third degree.



         (b)   If the offender commits the offense while
distracted and the distracting activity is a contributing factor to the
commission of the offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine
established under § 70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.211(F)) ('69 Code, §§ 73.01, 73.02) (Ord. C-123, passed
12-8-58; Am. Ord. C-172, passed 3-13-61; Am. Ord. 2001-15, passed 8-13-01)



Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Alteration of speed limits with approval of Director, see R.C. §
4511.21(H) - (N)



   Arrest pending warrant when radar, electrical or mechanical timing
device used to determine violation, see R.C. § 4511.091



§ 73.11  STOPPING OR SLOW SPEED.



   (A)   No person shall stop or operate a vehicle at such an
unreasonably slow speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable
movement of traffic, except when stopping or reduced speed is necessary for
safe operation or to comply with law.



('69 Code, § 73.04(A))



   (B)   Whenever the Director of Transportation or local authorities
determine on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that slow
speeds on any part of a controlled-access highway, expressway, or freeway
consistently impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, the
Director or such local authority may declare a minimum speed limit below
which no person shall operate a motor vehicle, except when necessary for safe
operation or in compliance with the law.  No minimum speed limit established
hereunder shall be less than 30 miles per hour, greater than 50 miles per
hour, nor effective until the provisions of R.C. § 4511.21 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, relating to appropriate signs,
have been fulfilled and local authorities have obtained the approval of the
Director.



   (C)   In a case involving a violation of this section, the trier of
fact, in determining whether the vehicle was being operated at an
unreasonably slow speed, shall consider the capabilities of the vehicle and
its operator.



   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (E)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.22)  ('69 Code, § 73.04(B))  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.12  EMERGENCY VEHICLES EXCEPTED FROM SPEED LIMITATION.



   The prima facie speed limitations set forth in R.C. § 4511.21 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance do not apply to emergency
vehicles or public safety vehicles when they are responding to emergency
calls and are equipped with and displaying at least one flashing, rotating,
or oscillating light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a
distance of 500 feet to the front of the vehicle, and when the drivers
thereof sound audible signals by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle.  This
section does not relieve the driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety
vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons
using the street or highway.



(R.C. § 4511.24)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.13  STREET RACING DEFINED; PROHIBITED ON PUBLIC HIGHWAYS.



   (A)   As used in this section, STREET RACING means the operation of
two or more vehicles from a point side by side at accelerating speeds in a
competitive attempt to outdistance each other, or the operation of one or
more vehicles over a common selected course, from the same point to the same
point, wherein timing is made of the participating vehicles involving
competitive accelerations or speeds. Persons rendering assistance in any
manner to such competitive use of vehicles shall be equally charged as the
participants. The operation of two or more vehicles side by side either at
speeds in excess of prima facie lawful speeds established by R.C. §
4511.21(B)(1)(a) through (B)(9) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, or rapidly accelerating from a common starting point to a speed in
excess of such prima facie lawful speeds shall be prima facie evidence of
street racing.



   (B)   No person shall participate in street racing upon any public
road, street, or highway in this municipality.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of street racing, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition to any other sanctions, the
court shall suspend the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privileges for not less than 30 days or more than three years. No
judge shall suspend the first 30 days of any suspension of an offender's
license, permit, or privilege imposed under this division.



(R.C. § 4511.251)  ('69 Code, § 73.03)  (Ord. C-172, passed 3-13-61)



RESISTING OFFICER



§ 73.15  PROHIBITION AGAINST RESISTING OFFICER.



   (A)   No person shall resist, hinder, obstruct, or abuse any
sheriff, constable, or other official while that official is attempting to
arrest offenders under any provision of this Title. No person shall interfere
with any person charged under any provision of this Title with the
enforcement of the law relative to public highways.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.36)



   (C)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the
hindrance, obstruction, resistance, or interference alleged consisted of
constitutionally protected speech only.



('69 Code, § 70.24)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.16  PRESENTING FALSE NAME OR INFORMATION TO OFFICER.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly present, display, or orally
communicate a false name, social security number, or date of birth to a law
enforcement officer who is in the process of issuing to the person a traffic
ticket or complaint.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C. § 4513.361)



STOPPING AFTER ACCIDENT



§ 73.20  FAILURE TO STOP AFTER ACCIDENT.



   (A)   (1)   In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision
with persons or property on a public road or highway, the operator of the
motor vehicle, having knowledge of the accident or collision, immediately
shall stop the operator’s motor vehicle at the scene of the accident or
collision. The operator shall remain at the scene of the accident or
collision until the operator has given the operator’s name and address and,
if the operator is not the owner, the name and address of the owner of that
motor vehicle, together with the registered number of that motor vehicle, to
all of the following:



         (a)   Any person injured in the accident or collision;



         (b)   The operator, occupant, owner, or attendant of any
motor vehicle damaged in the accident or collision;



         (c)   The police officer at the scene of the accident or
collision.



      (2)   In the event an injured person is unable to comprehend
and record the information required to be given under division (A)(1) of this
section, the other operator involved in the accident or collision shall
notify the nearest police authority concerning the location of the accident
or collision, and the operator’s name, address, and the registered number
of the motor vehicle the operator was operating. The operator shall remain at
the scene of the accident or collision until a police officer arrives, unless
removed from the scene by an emergency vehicle operated by a political
subdivision or an ambulance.



      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or
unattended motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle
shall securely attach the information required to be given in this section,
in writing, to a conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended
motor vehicle.



   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is
guilty of failure to stop after an accident. Except as otherwise provided in
division (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this section, failure to stop after an accident
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (2)   If the accident or collision results in serious physical
harm to a person, failure to stop after an accident is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (3)   If the accident or collision results in the death of a
person, failure to stop after an accident is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



      (4)   In all cases, the court, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). No
judge shall suspend the first six months of suspension of an offender’s
license, permit, or privilege required by this division.



      (5)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of
financial responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails
to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any
other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to
R.C. § 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or
after committing the offense charged under this section.



(R.C. § 4549.02) ('69 Code, § 72.38) (Ord. C-123, passed 12-8-58) Penalty,
see § 70.99



§ 73.21  STOPPING AFTER ACCIDENT ON OTHER THAN PUBLIC ROADS OR HIGHWAYS.



   (A)   (1)   In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision
resulting in injury or damage to persons or property on any public or private
property other than a public road or highway, the operator of the motor
vehicle, having knowledge of the accident or collision, shall stop at the
scene of the accident or collision. Upon request of any person who is injured
or damaged, or any other person, the operator shall give that person the
operator’s name and address, and, if the operator is not the owner, the
name and address of the owner of that motor vehicle, together with the
registered number of that motor vehicle, and, if available, exhibit the
operator’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license.



      (2)   If the operator of the motor vehicle involved in the
accident or collision does not provide the information specified in division
(A)(1) of this section, the operator shall give that information, within 24
hours after the accident or collision, to the police department of the city
or village in which the accident or collision occurred, or if it occurred
outside the corporate limits of a city or village, to the sheriff of the
county in which the accident or collision occurred.



      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or
unattended motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle
shall securely attach the information required under division (A)(1) of this
section, in writing, to a conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or
unattended motor vehicle.



   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is
guilty of failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident. Except as
otherwise provided in division (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this section, failure to
stop after a nonpublic road accident is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (2)   If the accident or collision results in serious physical
harm to a person, failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (3)   If the accident or collision results in the death of a
person, failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (4)   In all cases, the court, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(5). No
judge shall suspend the first six months of suspension of an offender’s
license, permit, or privilege required by this division.



      (5)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of
financial responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails
to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any
other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to
R.C. § 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or
after committing the offense charged under this section.



(R.C. § 4549.021) ('69 Code, § 72.39) (Ord. C-172, passed 3-13-61) Penalty,
see § 70.99



§ 73.22  STOPPING AFTER ACCIDENT INVOLVING DAMAGE TO REALTY.



   (A)   (1)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident
resulting in damage to real property, or personal property attached to real
property, legally upon or adjacent to a public road or highway immediately
shall stop and take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person
in charge of the property of that fact, of the driver's name and address, and
of the registration number of vehicle the driver is driving and, upon request
and if available, shall exhibit the driver's driver's or commercial driver's
license.



      (2)   If the owner or person in charge of the property cannot
be located after reasonable search, the driver of the vehicle involved in the
accident resulting in damage to the property, within 24 hours after accident,
shall forward to the police department of the municipality the same
information required to be given to the owner or person in control of the
property and give the location of the accident and a description of the
damage insofar as it is known.



   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is
guilty of failure to stop after an accident involving the property of others,
a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (2)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of
financial responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails
to provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any
other penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to
§ 130.99(G) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any
economic loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and
proximate result of the offender's operation of the motor vehicle before,
during, or after committing the offense charged under this section.



(R.C. § 4549.03)  ('69 Code, § 72.40)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.23  VEHICLE OBSTRUCTING STREET AFTER COLLISION.



   (A)   Whenever, following a collision not involving personal
injuries, a vehicle, whether or not the same is damaged or wrecked, is so
placed as to interfere with traffic or with the proper operation and service
of the divisions of fire, police or highway maintenance, the driver or other
person in charge of such vehicle, shall, without delay, move or cause the
same to be moved to a location where it will not interfere with, or impede,
traffic operations.  Whenever any such vehicle is left unattended, or
whenever, upon request, the owner or operator of the same, fails to remove it
as provided, any member of the police or fire departments, or any employee of
the Division of Highway Maintenance, shall be authorized to remove it to a
location where it will not interfere with or impede traffic operation.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



('69 Code, § 72.41)  (Ord. C-123, passed 12-8-58)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 73.24  FAILURE TO REPORT ACCIDENT.



   (A)   No person shall fail to report a motor vehicle accident as
required under state or local law.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4509.74)  ('69 Code, § 72.99)  Penalty, see § 70.99



ILLEGAL USE OF AUTOMOBILE KEYS



§ 73.30  (RESERVED).



§ 73.31  OFFICER MAY REMOVE IGNITION KEY.



   A law enforcement officer may remove the ignition key left in the
ignition switch of an unlocked and unattended motor vehicle parked on a
street or highway.  The officer removing the key shall place notification
upon the vehicle detailing his or her name and badge number, the place where
the key may be reclaimed, and the procedure for reclaiming the key. The key
shall be returned to the owner of the motor vehicle upon presentation of
proof of ownership.



(R.C. § 4549.05)



CHAPTER 74: EQUIPMENT AND LOADS



Section



Equipment



   74.01   Unsafe vehicles, prohibition against operation



   74.02   Bumpers on motor vehicles



   74.03   Lighted lights required



   74.04   Headlights



   74.05   Taillights and illumination of rear license plate



   74.06   Red reflectors required



   74.07   Safety lighting of commercial vehicles



   74.08   Stoplight regulations



   74.09   Obscured lights on vehicles



   74.10   Red light or flag required



   74.11   Lights on parked vehicles



   74.12   Lights on slow-moving vehicles; slow-moving vehicle emblem;
light and reflector requirements for multi-wheel agricultural tractors or
farm machinery



   74.13   Spotlight and auxiliary driving lights



   74.14   Cowl, fender, and back-up lights



   74.15   Two lights displayed



   74.16   Headlights required



   74.17   Lights of less intensity



   74.18   Number of lights permitted; red and flashing lights



   74.19   Standards for lights on snow removal equipment and oversize
vehicles



   74.20   Flashing lights permitted for certain types of vehicles



   74.21   Lights and sign on transportation for preschool children



   74.22   Focus and aim of headlights



   74.23   Brake equipment; specifications



   74.24   Brake fluid



   74.25   Minimum standards for brakes and components



   74.26   Horns, sirens, and warning devices



   74.27   Mufflers; excessive smoke or gas



   74.28   Rearview mirrors



   74.29   Windshields and wipers



   74.30   Solid tire requirements



   74.31   Requirements for safety glass in motor vehicles



   74.32   Directional signals



   74.33   Installation and sale of seat safety belts required;
definition



   74.34   Requirements for extra signal equipment



   74.35   Display of warning devices on disabled vehicles



   74.36   Requirements for vehicles transporting explosives



   74.37   Wheel protectors required on heavy commercial vehicles



   74.38   Maximum width, height, and length



   74.39   Air bags



Loads



   74.40   Permit required to exceed load limits



   74.41   Permit required for road rollers, power shovels and other
heavy equipment



   74.42   Limitation of load extension on left side of vehicle



   74.43   All loads shall be properly secured



   74.44   Towing requirements; exception to size and weight
restrictions



EQUIPMENT



§ 74.01  UNSAFE VEHICLES, PROHIBITION AGAINST OPERATION.



   (A)   No person shall drive or move, or cause or knowingly permit to
be driven or moved, on any highway any vehicle or combination of vehicles
which is in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person.



('69 Code, § 71.02)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.02(A), (H))  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.02  BUMPERS ON MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   GROSS VEHICLE WEIGHT RATING means the manufacturer's gross vehicle
weight rating established for that vehicle.



   MANUFACTURER has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.



   MULTIPURPOSE PASSENGER VEHICLE means a motor vehicle with motive power,
except a motorcycle, designed to carry ten persons or less, that is
constructed either on a truck chassis or with special features for occasional
off-road operation.



   PASSENGER CAR means any motor vehicle with motive power, designed for
carrying ten persons or less, except a multipurpose passenger vehicle or
motorcycle.



   TRUCK means every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers,
designed and used to carry property and having a gross vehicle weight rating
of 10,000 pounds or less.



   (B)   Rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety, in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119, shall govern the maximum bumper height or, in the
absence of bumpers and in cases where bumper height have been lowered or
modified, the maximum height to the bottom of the frame rail of any passenger
car, multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck.



   (C)   No person shall operate upon a street or highway any passenger
car, multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this state that
does not conform to the requirements of this section or any applicable rule
adopted pursuant to R.C. § 4513.021.



   (D)   No person shall modify any motor vehicle registered in this
state in such a manner as to cause the vehicle body or chassis to come in
contact with the ground, expose the fuel tank to damage from collision, or
cause the wheels to come in contact with the body under normal operation, and
no person shall disconnect any part of the original suspension system of the
vehicle to defeat the safe operation of that system.



   (E)   Nothing contained in this section or in the rules adopted
pursuant to R.C. § 4513.021 shall be construed to prohibit either of the
following:



      (1)   The installation upon a passenger car, multipurpose
passenger vehicle or truck registered in this state of heavy duty equipment,
including shock absorbers and overload springs:



      (2)   The operation on a street or highway of a passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle, or truck registered in this state with normal
wear to the suspension system if the normal wear does not adversely affect
the control of the vehicle.



   (F)   This section and the rules adopted pursuant to R.C. §
4513.021 do not apply to any specially designed or modified passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle, or truck when operated off a street or
highway in races and similar events.



   (G)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.021)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Maximum height on bumpers, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-43



§ 74.03  LIGHTED LIGHTS REQUIRED.



   (A)   Every vehicle, other than a motorized bicycle, operated upon a
street or highway within this state shall display lighted lights and
illuminating devices as required by R.C. §§ 4513.04 to 4513.37 during all
of the following times:



      (1)   The time from sunset to sunrise;



      (2)   At any other time when, due to insufficient natural
light or unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons, vehicles, and
substantial objects on the highway are not discernible at a distance of 1,000
feet ahead;



      (3)   At any time when the windshield wipers of the vehicle
are in use because of precipitation on the windshield.



   (B)   Every motorized bicycle shall display at such times lighted
lights meeting the rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under
R.C. § 4511.521. No motor vehicle, during any time specified in this
section, shall be operated upon a street or highway within this state using
only parking lights as illumination.



   (C)   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the
distance from which certain lamps and devices shall render objects visible,
or within which such lamps or devices shall be visible, such distance shall
be measured upon a straight level unlighted highway under normal atmospheric
conditions unless a different condition is expressly stated.



   (D)   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the
mounted height of lights or devices, it shall mean from the center of such
light or device to the level ground upon which the vehicle stands.



   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a vehicle being operated upon
a street or highway within this state to stop the vehicle solely because the
officer observes that a violation of division (A)(3) of this section has been
or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation,
or summons for a violation of that division, or causing the arrest of or
commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of that division.



   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.03)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.04  HEADLIGHTS.



   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, shall
be equipped with at least two headlights with at least one near each side of
the front of the motor vehicle.



      (2)   Every motorcycle shall be equipped with at least one and
not more than two headlights.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.04)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.05  TAILLIGHTS AND ILLUMINATION OF REAR LICENSE PLATE.



   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, pole
trailer or vehicle which is being drawn at the end of a train of vehicles
shall be equipped with at least one tail light mounted on the rear which,
when lighted, shall emit a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to
the rear, provided that in the case of a train of vehicles only the tail
light on the rearmost vehicle need be visible from the distance specified.



      (2)   Either a tail light or a separate light shall be so
constructed and placed as to illuminate with a white light the rear
registration plate, when such registration plate is required, and render it
legible from a distance of 50 feet to the rear. Any tail light, together with
any separate light for illuminating the rear registration plate, shall be so
wired as to be lighted whenever the headlights or auxiliary driving lights
are lighted, except where separate lighting systems are provided for trailers
for the purpose of illuminating such registration plate.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.05)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.06  RED REFLECTORS REQUIRED.



   (A)   (1)   Every new motor vehicle sold after September 6, 1941,
and operated on a highway, other than a commercial tractor to which a trailer
or semitrailer is attached, shall carry at the rear, either as a part of the
tail lamps or separately, two red reflectors meeting the requirements of this
section, except that vehicles of the type mentioned in R.C. § 4513.07 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall be equipped with
reflectors as required by the regulations provided for in that section.



      (2)   Every such reflector shall be of such size and
characteristics and so maintained as to be visible at night from all
distances within 300 feet to 50 feet from such vehicle.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.06)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.07  SAFETY LIGHTING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.



   (A)   (1)   When the Director of Public Safety prescribes and
promulgates regulations relating to clearance lights, marker lights,
reflectors and stop lights on buses, trucks, commercial tractors, trailers,
semitrailers and pole trailers, when operated upon any highway, these
vehicles shall be equipped as required by such regulations, and such
equipment shall be lighted at all times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, except that clearance lights
and side marker lights need not be lighted on any such vehicle when it is
operated within the municipality where there is sufficient light to reveal
any person or substantial object on the highway at a distance of 500 feet.



      (2)   Such equipment shall be in addition to all other lights
specifically required by R.C. §§ 4513.03 through 4513.16, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances.



      (3)   Vehicles operated under the jurisdiction of the Public
Utilities Commission are not subject to this section.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.07)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.08  STOPLIGHT REGULATIONS.



   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, and pole
trailer when operated upon a highway shall be equipped with two or more stop
lights, except that passenger cars manufactured or assembled prior to January
1, 1967, motorcycles, and motor-driven cycles shall be equipped with at least
one stop light. Stop lights shall be mounted on the rear of the vehicle,
actuated upon application of the service brake, and may be incorporated with
other rear lights. Such stop lights when actuated shall emit a red light
visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear; provided that in the case of
a train of vehicles only the stop lights on the rearmost vehicle need be
visible from the distance specified.



      (2)   Such stop lights when actuated shall give a steady
warning light to the rear of a vehicle or train of vehicles to indicate the
intention of the operator to diminish the speed of or stop a vehicle or train
of vehicles.



      (3)   When stop lights are used as required by this section,
they shall be constructed or installed so as to provide adequate and reliable
illumination and shall conform to the appropriate rules and regulations
established under R.C. § 4513.19.



      (4)   Historical motor vehicles as defined in R.C. §
4503.181, not originally manufactured with stop lights, are not subject to
this section.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.071)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.09  OBSCURED LIGHTS ON VEHICLES.



   Whenever motor and other vehicles are operated in combination during
the time that lights are required, any light, except tail lights, which by
reason of its location on a vehicle of the combination would be obscured by
another vehicle of the combination, need not be lighted, but this section
does not affect the requirement that lighted clearance lights be displayed on
the front of the foremost vehicle required to have clearance lights or that
all lights required on the rear of the rearmost vehicle of any combination
shall be lighted.



(R.C. § 4513.08)  ('69 Code, § 71.08)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.10  RED LIGHT OR FLAG REQUIRED.



   (A)   Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four
feet or more beyond the bed or body of this vehicle, there shall be displayed
at the extreme rear end of the load, at the times specified in R.C. §
4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, a red light or
lantern plainly visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the sides and
rear. The red light or lantern required by this section is in addition to the
red rear light required upon every vehicle. At any other time there shall be
displayed at the extreme rear end of such load a red flag or cloth not less
than 16 inches square.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.09)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.11  LIGHTS ON PARKED VEHICLES.



   (A)   Except in case of an emergency, whenever a vehicle is parked
or stopped upon a roadway open to traffic or a shoulder adjacent thereto,
whether attended or unattended, during the times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, such vehicle shall be
equipped with one or more lights which shall exhibit a white or amber light
on the roadway side visible from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such
vehicle, and a red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear. No
lights need be displayed upon any such vehicle when it is stopped or parked
within the municipality where there is sufficient light to reveal any person
or substantial object within a distance of 500 feet upon such highway. Any
lighted headlights upon a parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed.



(R.C. § 4513.10)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.99)  ('69 Code, § 71.10)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.12  LIGHTS ON SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES; SLOW-MOVING VEHICLE EMBLEM; LIGHT
AND REFLECTOR REQUIREMENTS FOR MULTI-WHEEL AGRICULTURAL TRACTORS OR FARM
MACHINERY.



   (A)   All vehicles other than bicycles, including animal-drawn
vehicles and vehicles referred to in R.C. § 4513.02(G), not specifically
required to be equipped with lamps or other lighting devices by R.C. §§
4513.03 through 4513.10, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinances, shall, at the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03  or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, be equipped with at least one
lamp displaying a white light visible from a distance of not less than 1,000
feet to the front of the vehicle and also shall be equipped with two lamps
displaying red light visible from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet to
the rear of the vehicle, or as an alternative, one lamp displaying a red
light visible from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the rear and two
red reflectors visible from all distances of 600 feet to 100 feet to the rear
when illuminated by the lawful lower beams of headlamps.  Lamps and
reflectors required by this section shall meet standards adopted by the
Director of Public Safety.



('69 Code, § 71.11)



   (B)   All boat trailers, farm machinery and other machinery,
including all road construction machinery, upon a street or highway, except
when being used in actual construction and maintenance work in an area
guarded by a flagperson, or where flares are used, or when operating or
traveling within the limits of a construction area designated by the Director
of Transportation, a city or village engineer, or the county engineer of the
several counties, when such construction area is marked in accordance with
requirements of the Director and the Manual and Specifications for a Uniform
System of Traffic-Control Devices, as set forth in R.C. § 4511.09, which is
designed for operation at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less, shall be
operated at a speed not exceeding 25 miles per hour, and shall display a
triangular slow-moving vehicle emblem (SMV).  The emblem shall be mounted so
as to be visible from a distance of not less than 500 feet to the rear.  The
Director of Public Safety shall adopt standards and specifications for the
design and position of mounting the SMV emblem.  The standards and
specifications for SMV emblems referred to in this section shall correlate
with and, so far as possible, conform with those approved by the American
Society of Agricultural Engineers.  A unit of farm machinery that is
designed by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per
hour may be operated on a street or highway at a speed greater than 25 miles
per hour provided it is operated in accordance with this section. As used in
this division, MACHINERY does not include any vehicle designed to be drawn by
an animal.



('69 Code, § 71.11) 



   (C)   The use of the SMV emblem shall be restricted to animal-drawn
vehicles and to the slow-moving vehicles specified in division (B) of this
section operating or traveling within the limits of the highway.  Its use on
slow-moving vehicles being transported upon other types of vehicles or on any
other type of vehicle or stationary object on the highway is prohibited.



   (D)   (1) No person shall sell, lease, rent or operate any boat
trailer, farm machinery or other machinery defined as a slow-moving vehicle
in division (B) of this section, except those units designed to be completely
mounted on a primary power unit, which is manufactured or assembled on or
after April 1, 1966, unless the vehicle is equipped with a slow-moving
vehicle emblem mounting device as specified in division (B) of this section.



      (2)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate on a
street or highway any unit of farm machinery that is designed by its
manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless the
unit displays a slow-moving vehicle emblem as specified in division (B) of
this section and a speed identification symbol that meets the specifications
contained in the American Society of Agricultural Engineers Standard
ANSI/ASAE S584 JAN2005, Agricultural Equipment: Speed Identification Symbol
(SIS).



   (E)   Any boat trailer, farm machinery or other machinery defined as
a slow-moving vehicle in division (B) of this section, in addition to the use
of the slow-moving vehicle emblem, and any unit of farm machinery that is
designed by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per
hour, in addition to the display of a speed identification symbol, may be
equipped with a red flashing light that shall be visible from a distance of
not less than 1,000 feet to the rear at all times specified in R.C. §
4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.  When a
double-faced light is used, it shall display amber light to the front and red
light to the rear.  In addition to the lights described in this division,
farm machinery and motor vehicles escorting farm machinery may display a
flashing, oscillating or rotating amber light, as permitted by R.C. §
4513.17 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and also may
display simultaneously flashing turn signals or warning lights, as permitted
by that section.



   (F)   (1)   Every animal-drawn vehicle upon a street or highway
shall at all times be equipped in one of the following ways:



         (a)   With a slow-moving vehicle emblem complying with
division (B) of this section;



         (b)   With alternate reflective material complying with
rules adopted under division (F)(2) below;



         (c)   With both a slow-moving vehicle emblem and
alternate reflective material as specified in division (F)(2) below.



      (2)   Rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety, subject
to R.C. Chapter 119, establishing standards and specifications for the
position of mounting of the alternate reflective material authorized by this
division, permit, as a minimum, the alternate reflective material to be
black, gray, or silver in color.  The alternate reflective material shall be
mounted on the animal-drawn vehicle so as to be visible, at all times
specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, from a distance of not less than 500 feet to the rear when
illuminated by the lawful lower beams of headlamps.



   (G)   (1)   Every unit of farm machinery that is designed by its
manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour shall
display a slow-moving vehicle emblem and a speed identification symbol that
meets the specifications contained in the American Society of Agricultural
Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S584 JAN2005, Agricultural Equipment: Speed
Identification Symbol (SIS) when the unit is operated upon a street or
highway, irrespective of the speed at which the unit is operated on the
street or highway. The speed identification symbol shall indicate the maximum
speed in miles per hour at which the unit of farm machinery is designed by
its manufacturer to operate. The display of the speed identification symbol
shall be in accordance with the standard prescribed in this division.



      (2)   If an agricultural tractor that is designed by its
manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour is being
operated on a street or highway at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour and
is towing, pulling, or otherwise drawing a unit of farm machinery, the unit
of farm machinery shall display a slow-moving vehicle emblem and a speed
identification symbol that is the same as the speed identification symbol
that is displayed on the agricultural tractor.



   (H)   When an agricultural tractor that is designed by its
manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour is being
operated on a street or highway at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour,
the operator shall possess some documentation published or provided by the
manufacturer indicating the maximum speed in miles per hour at which the
manufacturer designed the agricultural tractor to operate.



   (I)   As used in this section, BOAT TRAILER means any vehicle
designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage
and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or
highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles
per hour or less.



(R.C. § 4513.11)



   (J)   Lights and reflector requirements for multi-wheel agricultural
tractors or farm machinery.



      (1)   (a)   Every multi-wheel agricultural tractor whose
model year was 2001 or earlier, when being operated or traveling on a street
or highway at the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, at a minimum shall be equipped with and
display reflectors and illuminated amber lamps so that the extreme left and
right projections of the tractor are indicated by flashing lamps displaying
amber light, visible to the front and the rear; by amber reflectors, all
visible to the front; and by red reflectors, all visible to the rear.



         (b)   The lamps displaying amber light need not flash
simultaneously and need not flash in conjunction with any directional signals
of the tractor.



         (c)   The lamps and reflectors required by division
(H)(1)(a) of this section and their placement shall meet standards and
specifications contained in rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 119.  The rules governing the amber lamps,
amber reflectors, and red reflectors and their placement shall correlate with
and, as far as possible, conform with paragraphs 4.1.4.1, 4.1.7.1, and
4.1.7.2, respectively, of theAmerican Society of Agricultural Engineers
Standard ANSI/ASAE S279.10 OCT98, Lighting and Marking of Agricultural
Equipment on Highways.



      (2)   Every unit of farm machinery whose model year was 2002
or later, when being operated or traveling on a street or highway at the
times specified in R.C. § 4513.03, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, shall be equipped with and display markings and illuminated lamps
that meet or exceed the lighting, illumination, and marking standards and
specifications that are applicable to that type of farm machinery for the
unit's model year specified in the American Society of Agricultural Engineers
Standard ANSI/ASAE S279.11 APR01, Lighting and Marking of Agricultural
Equipment on Highways, or any subsequent revisions of that standard.



      (3)   The lights and reflectors required by division (H)(1) of
this section are in addition to the slow-moving vehicle emblem and lights
required or permitted by R.C. §§ 4513.11 or 4513.17, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, to be displayed on farm machinery being
operated or traveling on a street or highway.



      (4)   No person shall operate any unit of farm machinery on a
street or highway or cause any unit of farm machinery to travel on a street
or highway in violation of divisions (J)(1) or (J)(2) of this section.



(R.C. § 4513.111)



   (K)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. §§ 4513.11(I), 4513.111(E))  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Slow-moving vehicle emblem, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-13



§ 74.13  SPOTLIGHT AND AUXILIARY DRIVING LIGHTS.



   (A)   (1)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than
one spotlight and every lighted spotlight shall be so aimed and used upon
approaching another vehicle that no part of the high-intensity portion of the
beam will be directed to the left of the prolongation of the extreme left
side of the vehicle, nor more than 100 feet ahead of the vehicle.



      (2)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than
three auxiliary driving lights mounted on the front of the vehicle.  Any
such lights which do not conform to the specifications for auxiliary driving
lights and the regulations for their use prescribed by the Director of Public
Safety shall not be used.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.12)  ('69 Code, § 71.12)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.14  COWL, FENDER, AND BACK-UP LIGHTS.



   (A)   (1)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with side cowl or
fender lights which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.



      (2)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with lights on each
side thereof which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.



      (3)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with back-up lights,
either separately or in combination with another light.  No back-up lights
shall be continuously lighted when the motor vehicle is in forward motion.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.13)  ('69 Code, § 71.13)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.15  TWO LIGHTS DISPLAYED.



   (A)   At all times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, at least two lighted lights shall be
displayed, one near each side of the front of every motor vehicle, except
when such vehicle is parked subject to the regulations governing lights on
parked vehicles.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.14)  ('69 Code, § 71.14)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.16  HEADLIGHTS REQUIRED.



   (A)   Whenever a motor vehicle is being operated on a roadway or
shoulder adjacent thereto during the times specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the driver shall use a
distribution of light, or composite beam, directed high enough and of
sufficient intensity to reveal persons, vehicles and substantial objects at a
safe distance in advance of the vehicle, subject to the following
requirements:



      (1)   Whenever the driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming
vehicle, such driver shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam, so
aimed that the glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the oncoming
driver.



      (2)   Every new motor vehicle registered in this state which
has multiple-beam road lighting equipment shall be equipped with a beam
indicator, which shall be lighted whenever the uppermost distribution of
light from the headlights is in use, and shall not otherwise be lighted. 
This indicator shall be so designed and located that, when lighted, it will
be readily visible without glare to the driver of the vehicle.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.15)  ('69 Code, § 71.15)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.17  LIGHTS OF LESS INTENSITY.



   (A)   Any motor vehicle may be operated under the conditions
specified in R.C. § 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance when it is equipped with two lighted lights upon the front thereof
capable of revealing persons and substantial objects 75 feet ahead, in lieu
of lights required in R.C. § 4513.14 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, provided that such vehicle shall not be operated at a speed in
excess of 20 miles per hour.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.16)  ('69 Code, § 71.16)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.18  NUMBER OF LIGHTS PERMITTED; RED AND FLASHING LIGHTS.



   (A)   Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with headlights is also
equipped with any auxiliary lights or spotlight or any other light on the
front thereof projecting a beam of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower,
not more than a total of five of any such lights on the front of a vehicle
shall be lighted at any one time when the vehicle is upon a highway.



   (B)   Any lighted light or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle,
other than headlights, spotlights,signal lights, or auxiliary driving lights,
that projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower
shall be so directed that no part of the beam will strike the level of the
roadway on which the vehicle stands at a distance of more than 75 feet from
the vehicle.



   (C)   (1)   Flashing lights are prohibited on motor vehicles,
except as a means for indicating a right or a left turn, or in the presence
of vehicular traffic hazard requiring unusual care in approaching, or
overtaking or passing.  This prohibition does not apply to emergency
vehicles, road service vehicles servicing or towing a disabled vehicle,
stationary waste collection vehicles actively collecting garbage, refuse,
trash, or recyclable materials on the roadside, rural mail delivery vehicles,
vehicles as provided in R.C. § 4513.182 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, highway maintenance vehicles, funeral hearses, funeral
escort vehicles, and similar equipment operated by the Department or local
authorities, which shall be equipped with and display, when used on a street
or highway for the special purpose necessitating such lights, a flashing,
oscillating or rotating amber light, but shall not display a flashing,
oscillating or rotating light of any other color, nor to vehicles or
machinery permitted by R.C. § 4513.11 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance to have a flashing red light.



      (2)   When used on a street or highway, farm machinery and
vehicles escorting farm machinery may be equipped with and display a
flashing, oscillating or rotating amber light, and the prohibition contained
in division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to such machinery or
vehicles.  Farm machinery may also display the lights described in R.C. §
4513.11 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (D)   Except a person operating a public safety vehicle, as defined
in R.C. § 4511.01(E), or a school bus, no person shall operate, move, or
park upon or permit to stand within the right-of-way of any public street or
highway any vehicle or equipment that is equipped with and displaying a
flashing red or a flashing combination red and white light, or an oscillating
or rotating red light, or a combination red and white oscillating or rotating
light; and except a public law enforcement officer, or other person sworn to
enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state, operating a public safety
vehicle when on duty, no person shall operate, move or park upon or permit to
stand within the right-of-way of any street or highway any vehicle or
equipment that is equipped with, or upon which is mounted, and displaying a
flashing blue or a flashing combination blue and white light, or an
oscillating or rotating blue light, or a combination blue and white
oscillating or rotating light.



   (E)   This section does not prohibit the use of warning lights
required by law or the simultaneous flashing of turn signals on disabled
vehicles or on vehicles being operated in unfavorable atmospheric conditions
in order to enhance their visibility.  This section also does not prohibit
the simultaneous flashing of turn signals or warning lights whether on farm
machinery or vehicles escorting farm machinery when used on a street or
highway.



(R.C. § 4513.17)  ('69 Code, § 71.17) 



   (F)   (1)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a motor
vehicle operated by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner's investigator may
be equipped with a flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and
siren, whistle or bell capable of emitting sound audible under normal
conditions from a distance of not less than 500 feet.  Such a vehicle may
display the flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and may give
the audible signal of the siren, whistle or bell only when responding to a
fatality or a fatal motor vehicle accident on a street or highway and only at
those locations where the stoppage of traffic impedes the ability of the
coroner, deputy coroner or coroner's investigator to arrive at the site of
the fatality.



      (2)   This division (F) does not relieve the coroner, deputy
coroner or coroner's investigator operating a motor vehicle from the duty to
drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the
highway.



(R.C. § 4513.171)



   (G)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.17(F), 4513.171(B))  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.19  STANDARDS FOR LIGHTS ON SNOW REMOVAL EQUIPMENT AND OVERSIZE
VEHICLES.



   (A)   It is unlawful to operate snow removal equipment on a highway
unless the lights thereon comply with and are lighted when and as required by
the standards and specifications adopted by the Director of Transportation
pursuant to R.C. § 4513.18.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.18)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.20  FLASHING LIGHTS PERMITTED FOR CERTAIN TYPES OF VEHICLES.



   Rural mail delivery vehicles, state highway survey vehicles, and
funeral escort vehicles are permitted to use flashing lights.



(R.C. § 4513.181)



§ 74.21  LIGHTS AND SIGN ON TRANSPORTATION FOR PRESCHOOL CHILDREN.



   (A)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle owned, leased, or
hired by a nursery school, kindergarten, or day-care center, while
transporting preschool children to or from such an institution unless the
motor vehicle is equipped with and displaying two amber flashing lights
mounted on a bar attached to the top of the vehicle, and a sign bearing the
designation "caution — children," which shall be attached to the bar
carrying the amber flashing lights in such a manner as to be legible to
persons both in front of and behind the vehicle.  The lights and sign shall
meet standards and specifications adopted by the Director of Public Safety.



   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle displaying the lights
and sign required by this section for any purpose other than the
transportation of preschool children as provided in this section.



(R.C. § 4513.182)



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.99)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.22  FOCUS AND AIM OF HEADLIGHTS.



   (A)   No person shall use any lights mentioned in R.C. §§ 4513.03
through 4513.18, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, upon
any motor vehicle, trailer or semitrailer unless these lights are equipped,
mounted and adjusted as to focus and aim in accordance with regulations which
are prescribed by the Director of Public Safety.



   (B)   The headlights on any motor vehicle shall comply with the
headlamp color requirements contained in Federal Motor Vehicle Safety
Standard Number 108, 49 C.F.R. § 571.108. No person shall operate a motor
vehicle in violation of this division.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.19)  ('69 Code, § 71.18)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.23  BRAKE EQUIPMENT; SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   The following requirements govern as to brake equipment on
vehicles:



      (1)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, when
operated upon a highway shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the
movement of and to stop and hold the motor vehicle, including two separate
means of applying the brakes, each of which means shall be effective to apply
the brakes to at least two wheels. If these two separatemeans of applying the
brakes are connected in any way, then on such motor vehicles, manufactured or
assembled after January 1, 1942, they shall be so constructed that failure of
any one part of the operating mechanism shall not leave the motor vehicle
without brakes on at least two wheels.



      (2)   Every motorcycle, when operated upon a highway shall be
equipped with at least one adequate brake, which may be operated by hand or
by foot.



      (3)   Every motorized bicycle shall be equipped with brakes
meeting the rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety under R.C. §
4511.521.



      (4)   When operated upon the highways, the following vehicles
shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop
and to hold the vehicle, designed to be applied by the driver of the towing
motor vehicle from its cab, and also designed and connected so that, in case
of a breakaway of the towed vehicle, the brakes shall be automatically
applied:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this section,
every trailer or semitrailer, except a pole trailer, with an empty weight of
2,000 pounds or more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1942;



         (b)   Every manufactured home or travel trailer with an
empty weight of 2,000 pounds or more, manufactured or assembled on or after
January 1, 2001.



      (5)   Every watercraft trailer with a gross weight or
manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating of 3,000 pounds or more that is
manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 2008, shall have separate
brakes equipped with hydraulic surge or electrically operated brakes on two
wheels.



      (6)   In any combination of motor-drawn trailers or
semitrailers equipped with brakes, means shall be provided for applying the
rearmost brakes in approximate synchronism with the brakes on the towing
vehicle, and developing the required braking effort on the rearmost wheels at
the fastest rate; or means shall be provided for applying braking effort
first on the rearmost brakes; or both of the above means, capable of being
used alternatively, may be employed.



      (7)   Every vehicle and combination of vehicles, except
motorcycles and motorized bicycles, and except trailers and semitrailers of a
gross weight of less than 2,000 pounds, and pole trailers, shall be equipped
with parking brakes adequate to hold the vehicle on any grade on which it is
operated, under all conditions of loading, on a surface free from snow, ice,
or loose material. The parking brakes shall be capable of being applied in
conformance with the foregoing requirements by the driver's muscular effort
or by spring action or by equivalent means. Their operation may be assisted
by the service brakes or other source of power provided that failure of the
service brake actuation system or other power assisting mechanism will not
prevent the parking brakes from being applied in conformance with the
foregoing requirements. The parking brakes shall be so designed that when
once applied they shall remain applied with the required effectiveness
despite exhaustion of any source of energy or leakage of any kind.



      (8)   The same brake drums, brake shoes and lining assemblies,
brake shoe anchors, and mechanical brake shoe actuation mechanism normally
associated with the wheel brake assemblies may be used for both the service
brakes and the parking brakes. If the means of applying the parking brakes
and the service brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed
that failure of any one part shall not leave the vehicle without operative
brakes.



      (9)   Every motor vehicle or combination of motor-drawn
vehicles shall, at all times and under all conditions of loading, be capable
of being stopped on a dry, smooth, level road free from loose material, upon
application of the service or foot brake, within the following specified
distances, or shall be capable of being decelerated at a sustained rate
corresponding to these distances:



         (a)   Vehicles or combinations of vehicles having brakes
on all wheels shall come to a stop in 30 feet or less from a speed of 20
miles per hour.



         (b)   Vehicles or combinations of vehicles not having
brakes on all wheels shall come to a stop in 40 feet or less from a speed of
20 miles per hour.



      (10)   All brakes shall be maintained in good working order
and shall be so adjusted as to operate as equally as practicable with respect
to the wheels on opposite sides of the vehicle.



(R.C. § 4513.20)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.99)  ('69 Code, § 71.19)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.24  BRAKE FLUID.



   (A)   No hydraulic brake fluid for use in motor vehicles shall be
sold in this municipality if the brake fluid is below the minimum standard of
specifications for heavy duty type brake fluid established by the society of
automotive engineers and the standard of specifications established by 49 CFR
571.116, as amended.



   (B)   All manufacturers, packers, or distributors of brake fluid
selling such fluid in this municipality shall state on the containers that
the brake fluid meets or exceeds the applicable minimum SAE standard of
specifications, and the standard of specifications established in 49 CFR
571.116, as amended.



(R.C. § 4513.201)



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.99)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.25  MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR BRAKES AND COMPONENTS.



   (A)   No brake lining, brake lining material, or brake lining
assemblies for use as repair and replacement parts in motor vehicles shall be
sold in this municipality if these items do not meet or exceed the minimum
standard of specifications established by the Society of Automotive Engineers
and the standard of specifications established in 49 CFR 571.105, as amended,
and 49 CFR 571.135, as amended.



   (B)   All manufacturers or distributors of brake lining, brake
lining material, or brake lining assemblies selling these items for use as
repair and replacement parts in motor vehicles shall state that the items
meet or exceed the applicable minimum standard of specifications.



   (C)   As used in this section, MINIMUM STANDARD OF SPECIFICATIONS
means a minimum standard for brake system or brake component performance that
meets the need for motor vehicle safety and complies with the applicable SAE
standards and recommended practices, and the federal motor vehicle safety
standards that cover the same aspect of performance for any brake lining,
brake lining material, or brake lining assemblies.



(R.C. § 4513.202)



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.99)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.26  HORNS, SIRENS, AND WARNING DEVICES.



   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle when operated upon a highway
shall be equipped with a horn which is in good working order and capable of
emitting sound audible, under normal conditions, from a distance of not less
than 200 feet.



      (2)   No motor vehicle shall be equipped with, nor shall any
person use upon a vehicle, any siren, whistle, or bell.  Any vehicle may be
equipped with a theft alarm signal device which shall be so arranged that it
cannot be used as an ordinary warning signal.  Every emergency vehicle shall
be equipped with a siren, whistle or bell, capable of emitting sound audible
under normal conditions from a distance of not less than 500 feet and of a
type approved by the Director of Public Safety.  Such equipment shall not be
used except when such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or
is in the immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, in
which case the driver of the emergency vehicle shall sound such equipment
when it is necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers of the approach
thereof.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.21)  ('69 Code, § 71.20)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.27  MUFFLERS; EXCESSIVE SMOKE OR GAS.



   (A)   (1)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle with an internal
combustion engine shall at all times be equipped with a muffler which is in
good working order and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual
noise, and no person shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device
upon a motor vehicle on a highway. Every motorcycle muffler shall be equipped
with baffle plates.



      (2)   No person shall own, operate or have in the person's
possession any motor vehicle or motorcycle equipped with a device for
producing excessive smoke or gas, or so equipped as to permit oil or any
other chemical to flow into or upon the exhaust pipe or muffler of such
vehicle, or equipped in any way to produce or emit smoke or dangerous or
annoying gases from any portion of such vehicle, other than the ordinary
gases emitted by the exhaust of an internal combustion engine under normal
operation.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.22)  ('69 Code, § 71.21)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.28  REARVIEW MIRRORS.



   (A)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle shall be equipped with a
mirror so located as to reflect to the operator a view of the highway to the
rear of such vehicle or motorcycle.  Operators of vehicles and motorcycles
shall have a clear and unobstructed view to the front and to both sides of
their vehicles and motorcycles and shall have a clear view to the rear of
their vehicles and motorcycles by mirror.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.23)  ('69 Code, § 71.22)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.29  WINDSHIELDS AND WIPERS.



   (A)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle on a street or highway
in this municipality, other than a motorcycle or motorized bicycle, that is
not equipped with a windshield.



   (B)   (1)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle, other than a
bus, with any sign, poster, or other nontransparent material upon the front
windshield, sidewings, side, or rear windows of such vehicle other than a
certificate or other paper required to be displayed by law, except that there
may be in the lower left-hand or right-hand corner of the windshield a sign,
poster, or decal not to exceed four inches in height by six inches in
width.  No sign, poster, or decal shall be displayed in the front windshield
in such a manner as to conceal the vehicle identification number for the
motor vehicle when, in accordance with federal law, that number is located
inside the vehicle passenger compartment and so placed as to be readable
through the vehicle glazing without moving any part of the vehicle.



      (2)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to a
person who is driving a passenger car with an electronic device, including an
antenna, electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional
navigation device, or other similar electronic device located in the front
windshield if the device meets both of the following:



         (a)   It does not restrict the vehicle operator's sight
lines to the road and highway signs and signals.



         (b)   It does not conceal the vehicle identification
number.



      (3)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to a
person who is driving a commercial car with an electronic device, including
an antenna, electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional
navigation device, or other similar electronic device located in the front
windshield if the device meets both of the following:



         (a)   It does not restrict the vehicle operator's sight
lines to the road and highway signs and signals.



         (b)   It is mounted not more than six inches below the
upper edge of the windshield and is outside the area swept by the vehicle's
windshield wipers.



   (C)   The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a
device for cleaning rain, snow, or other moisture from the windshield.  The
device shall be maintained in good working order and so constructed as to be
controlled or operated by the operator of the vehicle.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.24)  ('69 Code, § 71.23)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.30  SOLID TIRE REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Every solid tire, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01, on a vehicle
shall have rubber or other resilient material on its entire traction surface
at least one inch thick above the edge of the flange of the entire periphery.



(R.C. § 4513.25)  ('69 Code, § 71.24)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.99)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.31  REQUIREMENTS FOR SAFETY GLASS IN MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   Safety glass.



      (1)   No person shall sell any new motor vehicle nor shall any
new motor vehicle be registered, and no person shall operate any motor
vehicle, which is registered in this state and which has been manufactured or
assembled on or after January 1, 1936, unless the motor vehicle is equipped
with safety glass, wherever glass is used in the windshields, doors,
partitions, rear windows, and windows on each side immediately adjacent to
the rear window.



      (2)   SAFETY GLASS means any product composed of glass so
manufactured, fabricated, or treated as substantially to prevent shattering
and flying of the glass when it is struck or broken, or such other or similar
product as may be approved by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles.



      (3)   Glass other than safety glass shall not be offered for
sale, or sold for use in, or installed in any door, window, partition, or
windshield that is required by this section to be equipped with safety glass.



(R.C. § 4513.26)  ('69 Code, § 71.25) 



   (B)   Tinted or reflectorized material.



      (1)   No person shall operate, on any highway or other public
or private property open to the public for vehicular travel or parking,
lease, or rent any motor vehicle that is registered in this state unless the
motor vehicle conforms to the requirements concerning tinted glass and
reflectorized material of R.C. § 4513.241 and of any applicable rule adopted
under that section.



      (2)   No person shall install in or on any motor vehicle, any
glass or other material that fails to conform to the requirements of R.C. §
4513.241 or of any rule adopted under that section.



      (3)   (a)   No used motor vehicle dealer or new motor
vehicle dealer, as defined in R.C. § 4517.01, shall sell any motor vehicle
that fails to conform to the requirements of R.C. § 4513.241 or of any rule
adopted under that section.



         (b)   No manufacturer, remanufacturer, or distributor,
as defined in R.C. § 4517.01, shall provide to a motor vehicle dealer
licensed under R.C. Chapter 4517 or to any other person, a motor vehicle that
fails to conform to the requirements of R.C. § 4513.241  or of any rule
adopted under that section.



      (4)   No reflectorized materials shall be permitted upon or in
any front windshield, side windows, sidewings, or rear window.



      (5)   This division (B) does not apply to the manufacturer's
tinting or glazing of motor vehicle windows or windshields that is otherwise
in compliance with or permitted by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard #205.



      (6)   With regard to any side window behind a driver's seat or
any rear window other than any window on an emergency door, this division (B)
does not apply to any school bus used to transport a child with disabilities
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3323, whom it is impossible or impractical to
transport by regular school bus in the course of regular route transportation
provided by a school district.  As used in this subdivision, CHILDWITH
DISABILITIES has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3323.01.



      (7)   This division (B) does not apply to any school bus that
is to be sold and operated outside the municipality.



      (8)   (a)   This division (B) does not apply to a motor
vehicle used by a law enforcement agency under either of the following
circumstances:



            1.   The vehicle does not have distinctive
markings of a law enforcement vehicle but is operated by or on behalf of the
law enforcement agency in an authorized investigation or other activity
requiring that the presence and identity of the vehicle occupants be
undisclosed.



            2.   The vehicle primarily is used by the law
enforcement canine unit for transporting a police dog.



         (b)   As used in this division, LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY
means a police department, the office of a sheriff, the State Highway Patrol,
a county prosecuting attorney, or a federal, state, or local governmental
body that enforces criminal laws and that has employees who have a statutory
power of arrest.



(R.C. § 4513.241(C) - (J))



   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.99)



      (2)   Whoever violates division (B)(1), (B)(3)(b) or (B)(4) of
this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



      (3)   Whoever violates division (B)(3)(a) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor if the dealer or the dealer’s agent knew of
the nonconformity at the time of sale.



      (4)   (a)   Whoever violates division (B)(2) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, except that an
organization may not be convicted unless the act of installation was
authorized by the board of directors, trustees, partners, or by a high
managerial officer acting on behalf of the organization, and installation was
performed by an employee of the organization acting within the scope of the
person’s employment.



         (b)   In addition to any other penalty imposed under
this section, whoever violates division (B)(2) of this section is liable in a
civil action to the owner of a motor vehicle on which was installed the
nonconforming glass or material for any damages incurred by that person as a
result of the installation of the nonconforming glass or material, costs of
maintaining the civil action, and attorney fees.



         (c)   In addition to any other penalty imposed under
this section, if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (B)(2) of this section and the offender is
a motor vehicle repair operator registered under R.C. Chapter 4775 or a motor
vehicle dealer licensed under R.C. Chapter 4517, whoever violates division
(B)(2) of this section is subject to a registration or license suspension, as
applicable, for a period of not more than 180 days.



(R.C. § 4513.241(K))  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.32  DIRECTIONAL SIGNALS.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle
manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1954, unless the vehicle is
equipped with electrical or mechanical directional signals.



      (2)   No person shall operate any motorcycle or motor-driven
cycle manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1968, unless the
vehicle is equipped with electrical or mechanical directional signals.



   (B)   DIRECTIONAL SIGNALS means an electrical or mechanical signal
device capable of clearly indicating an intention to turn either to the right
or to the left and which shall be visible from both the front and rear.



   (C)   All mechanical signal devices shall be self-illuminating
devices when in use at the times mentioned in R.C. § 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.261)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.33  INSTALLATION AND SALE OF SEAT SAFETY BELTS REQUIRED; DEFINITION.



   (A)   As used in this section and in R.C. § 4513.263 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the component parts of a SEAT
SAFETY BELT include a belt, anchor attachment assembly, and a buckle or
closing device.



   (B)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate any passenger
car, as defined in R.C. § 4501.01(E), that is registered or to be registered
in this state and that is manufactured or assembled on or after January 1,
1962, unless the passenger car is equipped with sufficient anchorage units at
the attachment points for attaching at least two sets of seat safety belts to
its front seat.  Such anchorage units at the attachment points shall be of
such construction, design, and strength to support a loop load pull of not
less than 4,000 pounds for each belt.



   (C)   No person shall sell, lease, or rent any passenger car, as
defined in R.C. § 4501.01(E), that is registered or to be registered in this
state and that is manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1966,
unless the passenger car has installed in its front seat at least two seat
safety belt assemblies.



   (D)   After January 1, 1966, neither any seat safety belt for use in
a motor vehicle nor any component part of any such seat safety belt shall be
sold in this municipality unless the seat safety belt or the component part
satisfies the minimum standard of specifications established by the society
of automotive engineers for automotive seat belts and unless the seat safety
belt or component part is labeled so as to indicate that it meets those
minimum standard specifications.



   (E)   Each sale, lease, or rental in violation of this section
constitutes a separate offense.



   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.262)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Child restraint systems, administrative regulations, see O.A.C. Chapter
4501-37



§ 74.34  REQUIREMENTS FOR EXTRA SIGNAL EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   No person shall operate any motor truck, bus, or commercial
tractor upon any highway at any time from sunset to sunrise unless there is
carried in such vehicle, except as provided in division (B) of this section,
the following equipment which shall be of the types approved by the Director
of Transportation.



      (1)   At least three flares or three red reflectors or three
red electric lanterns, each of which is capable of being seen and
distinguished at a distance of 500 feet under normal atmospheric conditions
at nighttime;



      (2)   At least three red-burning fusees, unless red reflectors
or red electric lanterns are carried;



      (3)   At least two red cloth flags, not less than two inches
square, with standards to support them;



      (4)   The type of red reflectors shall comply with such
standards and specifications in effect on September 16, 1963, or later
established by the Interstate Commerce Commission and must be certified as
meeting such standards by Underwriters Laboratories.



   (B)   No person shall operate at the time and under the conditions
stated in this section any motor vehicle used in transporting flammable
liquids in bulk, or in transporting compressed flammable gases, unless there
is carried in such vehicle three red electric lanterns or three red
reflectors meeting the requirements stated in division (A) of this section. 
There shall not be carried in any such vehicle any flare, fusee, or signal
produced by a flame.



   (C)   This section does not apply to any person who operates any
motor vehicle in a work area designated by protection equipment devices that
are displayed and used in accordance with the manual adopted by the
Department of Transportation under R.C. § 4511.09.



(R.C. § 4513.27)



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.99)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.35  DISPLAY OF WARNING DEVICES ON DISABLED VEHICLES.



   (A)   Whenever any motor truck, bus, commercial tractor, trailer,
semitrailer, or pole trailer is disabled upon any freeway, expressway,
thruway and connecting, entering, or exiting ramps within the municipality,
at any time when lighted lamps are required on vehicles, the operator of such
vehicle shall display the following warning devices upon the highway during
the time the vehicle is so disabled on the highway except as provided in
division (B) of this section:



      (1)   A lighted fusee shall be immediately placed on the
roadway at the traffic side of such vehicle, unless red electric lanterns or
red reflectors are displayed.



      (2)   Within the burning period of the fusee and as promptly
as possible, three lighted flares or pot torches, or three red reflectors or
three red electric lanterns shall be placed on the roadway as follows:



         (a)   One at a distance of 40 paces or approximately 100
feet in advance of the vehicle;



         (b)   One at a distance of 40 paces or approximately 100
feet to the rear of the vehicle, except as provided in this section, each in
the center of the lane of traffic occupied by the disabled vehicle;



         (c)   One at the traffic side of the vehicle.



   (B)   Whenever any vehicle used in transporting flammable liquids in
bulk, or in transporting compressed flammable gases, is disabled upon a
highway at any time or place mentioned in division (A) of this section, the
driver of such vehicle shall display upon the roadway the following warning
devices:



      (1)   One red electric lantern or one red reflector shall be
immediately placed on the roadway at the traffic side of the vehicle;



      (2)   Two other red electric lanterns or two other red
reflectors shall be placed to the front and rear of the vehicle in the same
manner prescribed for flares in division (A) of this section.



   (C)   When a vehicle of a type specified in division (B) of this
section is disabled, the use of flares, fusees, or any signal produced by
flame as warning signals is prohibited.



   (D)   Whenever any vehicle of a type referred to in this section is
disabled upon any freeway, expressway, thruway, and connecting, entering, or
exiting ramps within the municipality, at any time when the display of
fusees, flares, red reflectors, or electric lanterns is not required, the
operator of such vehicle shall display two red flags upon the roadway in the
lane of traffic occupied by the disabled vehicle, one at a distance of 40
paces or approximately 100 feet in advance of the vehicle, and one at a
distance of 40 paces or approximately 100 feet to the rear of the vehicle,
except as provided in this section.



   (E)   The flares, fusees, lanterns, red reflectors, and flags to be
displayed as required in this section shall conform with the applicable
requirements of R.C. § 4513.27 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.



   (F)   In the event the vehicle is disabled near a curve, crest of a
hill, or other obstruction of view, the flare, flag, reflector, or lantern in
that direction shall be placed as to afford ample warning to other users of
the highway, but in no case shall it be placed less than 40 paces or
approximately 100 feet nor more than 120 paces or approximately 300 feet from
the disabled vehicle.



   (G)   This section does not apply to the operator of any vehicle in
a work area designated by protection equipment devices that are displayed and
used in accordance with the manual adopted by the Department of
Transportation under R.C. § 4511.09.



   (H)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.28)  ('69 Code, § 71.28)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.36  REQUIREMENTS FOR VEHICLES TRANSPORTING EXPLOSIVES.



   (A)   Any person operating any vehicle transporting explosives upon
a highway shall at all times comply with the following requirements:



      (1)   The vehicle shall be marked or placarded on each side
and on the rear with the word "EXPLOSIVES" in letters not less than eight
inches high, or there shall be displayed on the rear of such vehicle a red
flag not less than 24 inches square marked with the word "DANGER" in white
letters six inches high, or shall be marked or placarded in accordance with
Section 177.823 of the United States Department of Transportation regulations.



      (2)   The vehicle shall be equipped with not less than two
fire extinguishers, filled and ready for immediate use, and placed at
convenient points on such vehicle.



(R.C. § 4513.29)  ('69 Code, § 71.26)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.99)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.37  WHEEL PROTECTORS REQUIRED ON HEAVY COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.



   (A)   No person shall drive or operate, or cause to be driven or
operated, any commercial car, trailer, or semitrailer, used for the
transportation of goods or property, the gross weight of which, with load,
exceeds three tons, upon the public highways, streets, bridges, and culverts
within the municipality, unless such vehicle is equipped with suitable metal
protectors or substantial flexible flaps on the rearmost wheels of such
vehicle or combination of vehicles to prevent, as far as practicable, the
wheels from throwing dirt, water, or other materials on the windshields of
following vehicles.  Such protectors or flaps shall have a ground clearance
of not more than one-third of the distance from the center of the rearmost
axle to the center of the flaps under any conditions of loading of the
vehicle, and they shall be at least as wide as the tires they are
protecting.  If the vehicle is so designed and constructed that such
requirements are accomplished by means of fenders, body construction, or
other means of enclosure, then no such protectors or flaps are required. 
Rear wheels not covered at the top by fenders, bodies, or other parts of the
vehicle shall be covered at the top by protective means extending at least to
the center line of the rearmost axle.



(R.C. § 5577.11)



   (B)   Each violation of this section shall be penalized pursuant to
§ 70.99.



('69 Code, § 71.27) (Am. Ord. 2011-17, passed 12-12-11)



§ 74.38  MAXIMUM WIDTH, HEIGHT, AND LENGTH.



   (A)   No vehicle shall be operated upon the public highways,
streets, bridges, and culverts within this municipality whose dimensions
exceed those specified in this section.



   (B)   No such vehicle shall have a width in excess of:



      (1)   104 inches for passenger bus type vehicles operated
exclusively within the municipality.



      (2)   102 inches, excluding such safety devices as are
required by law, for passenger bus type vehicles operated over freeways, and
such other state roads with minimum pavement widths of 22 feet, except those
roads or portions of roads over which operation of 102-inch buses is
prohibited by order of the Director of Transportation.



      (3)   132 inches for traction engines.



      (4)   102 inches for recreational vehicles, excluding safety
devices and retracted awnings and other appurtenances of six inches or less
in width and except that the Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch
recreational vehicles on designated state highways or portions of highways.



      (5)   102 inches, including load, for all other vehicles,
except that the Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch vehicles on
such state highways or portions of state highways as the Director designates.



   (C)   No such vehicle shall have a length in excess of:



      (1)   66 feet for passenger bus type vehicles and articulated
passenger bus type vehicles operated by a regional transit authority pursuant
to R.C. §§ 306.30 to 306.54.



      (2)   45 feet for all other passenger bus type vehicles.



      (3)   53 feet for any semitrailer when operated in a
commercial tractor-semitrailer combination, with or without load, except that
the Director may prohibit the operation of any such commercial
tractor-semitrailer combination on such state highways or portions of state
highways as the Director designates.



      (4)   28.5 feet for any semitrailer or trailer when operated
in a commercial tractor- semitrailer-trailer or commercial
tractor-semitrailer- semitrailer combination, except that the Director may
prohibit the operation of any such commercial tractor- semitrailer-trailer or
commercial tractor-semitrailer- semitrailer combination on such state
highways or portions of state highways as the Director designates.



      (5)   (a)   97 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle
transporter combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle
transporter combinations when operated on any interstate, United States
route, or state route, including reasonable access travel on all other
roadways for a distance not to exceed one road mile from any interstate,
United States route, or state route, not to exceed three saddlemounted
vehicles, but which may include one fullmount;



         (b)   75 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle
transporter combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle
transporter combinations when operated on any roadway not designated as an
interstate, United States route, or state route, not to exceed three
saddlemounted vehicles, but which may include one fullmount.



      (6)   65 feet for any other combination of vehicles coupled
together, with or without load, except as provided in division (C)(3) and
(4), and in division (E) below.



      (7)   45 feet for recreational vehicles.



      (8)   50 feet for all other vehicles, except trailers and
semitrailers, with or without load.



   (D)   No such vehicle shall have a height in excess of 13.5 feet,
with or without load.



   (E)   An automobile transporter or boat transporter shall be allowed
a length of 65 feet, and a stinger-steered automobile transporter or stinger-
steered boat transporter shall be allowed a length of 75 feet, except that
the load thereon may extend no more than four feet beyond the rear of such
vehicles and may extend no more than three feet beyond the front of such
vehicles, and except further that the Director may prohibit the operation of
a stinger- steered automobile transporter, stinger-steered boat transporter,
or a B-train assembly on any state highway or portion of any state highway
that the Director designates.



   (F)   (1)   The widths prescribed in division (B) of this section
shall not include side mirrors, turn signal lamps, marker lamps, handholds
for cab entry and egress, flexible fender extensions, mud flaps, splash and
spray suppressant devices, and load-induced tire bulge.



      (2)   The widths prescribed in division (B)(5) of this section
shall not include automatic covering devices, tarp and tarp hardware, and
tiedown assemblies, provided these safety devices do not extend more than
three inches from either side of the vehicle.



      (3)   The lengths prescribed in divisions (C)(2) to (C)(7)
shall not include safety devices, bumpers attached to the front or rear of
such bus or combination, non-property carrying devices or components that do
not extend more than 24 inches beyond the rear of the vehicle and are needed
for loading or unloading, B-train assembly used between the first and second
semitrailer of a commercial tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combination,
energy conservation devices as provided in any regulations adopted by the
Secretary of the United States Department of Transportation, or any
noncargo-carrying refrigerator equipment attached to the front of trailers
and semitrailers. In special cases, vehicles that dimensions exceed those
prescribed by this section may operate in accordance with rules adopted by
the Director.



   (G)   (1)   This section does not apply to fire engines, fire
trucks, or other vehicles or apparatus belonging to the municipality or to
the volunteer fire department thereof or used by such department in the
discharge of its functions. This section does not apply to vehicles and pole
trailers used in the transportation of wooden and metal poles, nor to the
transportation of pipes or well-drilling equipment, nor to farm machinery and
equipment. The owner or operator of any vehicle, machinery, or equipment not
specifically enumerated in this section but the dimensions of which exceed
the dimensions provided by this section, when operating the same on the
highways and streets of the municipality, shall comply with the rules of the
Director governing such movement. Any person adversely affected shall have
the same right of appeal as provided in R.C. Chapter 119.



      (2)   The owner or operator of any vehicle, machinery, or
equipment not specifically enumerated in this section but the dimensions of
which exceed the dimensions provided by this section, when operating the same
on the highways and streets of the municipality, shall comply with the rules
of the Director governing such movement. Any person adversely affected shall
have the same right of appeal as provided in R.C. Chapter 119.



      (3)   This section does not require the municipality or any
railroad or other private corporation to provide sufficient vertical
clearance to permit the operation of such vehicle, or to make any changes in
or about existing structures now crossing streets, roads, and other public
thoroughfares.



   (H)   As used in this section, RECREATIONAL VEHICLE has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.



(R.C. § 5577.05)



   (I)   No person shall violate any rule or regulation promulgated by
the Director of Transportation in accordance with R.C. § 5577.05.



(R.C. § 5577.06)



   (J)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor
on a first offense; on a second or subsequent offense, such person is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 5577.99(C)) 



§ 74.39  AIR BAGS.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      AIR BAG. Has the same meaning as in 49 C.F.R. § 579.4, as
amended.



      COUNTERFEIT AIR BAG. An air bag displaying a mark identical or
similar to the genuine mark of a motor vehicle manufacturer, without the
authorization of the motor vehicle manufacturer.



      NONFUNCTIONAL AIR BAG. Any of the following:



         (a)   A replacement air bag that has been previously
deployed or damaged;



         (b)   A replacement air bag that has an electrical fault
that is detected by the air bag diagnostic system of a vehicle after the air
bag is installed;



         (c)   A counterfeit air bag, air bag cover, or some
other object that is installed in a vehicle to deceive an owner or operator
of the vehicle into believing that a functional air bag has been installed.



   (B)   No person shall install or reinstall in any motor vehicle a
counterfeit or nonfunctional air bag or any object intended to fulfill the
function of an air bag other than an air bag that was designed in conformance
with or that is regulated by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 208
for the make, model, and model year of the vehicle, knowing that the object
is not in accordance with that standard.



   (C)   No person shall knowingly manufacture, import, sell, or offer
for sale any of the following:



      (1)   A counterfeit air bag;



      (2)   A nonfunctional air bag;



      (3)   Any other object that is intended to be installed in a
motor vehicle to fulfill the function of an air bag and that is not in
conformance with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 208 for the
make, model, and model year of the vehicle in which the object is intended to
be installed.



   (D)   No person shall knowingly sell, install, or reinstall a device
in a motor vehicle that causes the diagnostic system of a vehicle to
inaccurately indicate that the vehicle is equipped with a functional air bag.



   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (B) or (D) of this section
is guilty of improper replacement of a motor vehicle air bag, a misdemeanor
of the first degree on a first offense. On each subsequent offense, or if the
violation results in serious physical harm to an individual, the person is
guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)   A violation of division (C) of this section is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (3)   Each manufacture, importation, installation,
reinstallation, sale, or offer for sale in violation of this section shall
constitute a separate and distinct violation.



(R.C. § 4549.20)



LOADS



§ 74.40  PERMIT REQUIRED TO EXCEED LOAD LIMITS.



   (A)   (1)   The municipality, with respect to highways under
their jurisdiction, upon application in writing, shall issue a special
regional heavy hauling permit authorizing the applicant to operate or move a
vehicle or combination of vehicles as follows:



         (a)   At a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding
the maximum specified in R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or otherwise not in
conformity with R.C. §§ 4513.01 to 4513.37.



         (b)   Upon any highway under the jurisdiction of
municipality except those highways with a condition insufficient to bear the
weight of the vehicle or combination of vehicles as stated in the application.



         (c)   For regional trips at distances of 150 miles or
less from a facility stated on the application as the applicant’s point of
origin.



         (d)   Issuance of a special regional heavy hauling
permit is subject to the payment of a fee established by the municipality in
accordance with this section.



      (2)   In circumstances where a person is not eligible to
receive a permit under division (A)(1) of this section, the municipality,
with respect to highways under its jurisdiction, upon application in writing
and for good cause shown, may issue a special permit in writing authorizing
the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a
size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified in R.C.
§§ 5577.01 through 5577.09, or otherwise not in conformity with R.C. §§
4513.01 through 4513.37, upon any highway under its jurisdiction.



   (B)   Notwithstanding R.C. §§ 715.22 and 723.01, the holder of a
special permit issued by the Director of Transportation under R.C. § 4513.34
may move the vehicle or combination of vehicles described in the special
permit on any highway that is a part of the state highway system, when the
movement is partly within and partly without the corporate limits of the
municipality.  No local authority shall require any other permit or license
or charge any license fee or other charge against the holder of a permit for
the movement of a vehicle or combination of vehicles on any highway which is
a part of the state highway system.  The Ohio Director of Transportation
shall not require the holder of a permit issued by the municipality to obtain
a special permit for the movement of vehicles or combination of vehicles on
highways within the jurisdiction of the municipality.  Permits may be issued
for any period of time not to exceed one year, as the local authority in its
discretion determines advisable or for the duration of any public
construction project.



   (C)   (1)   The application for a permit issued under this
section shall be in the form that the municipality prescribes. The
municipality may prescribe a permit fee to be imposed and collected when any
permit described in this section is issued. The permit fee may be in an
amount sufficient to reimburse the municipality for the administrative costs
incurred in issuing the permit, and also to cover the cost of normal and
expected damage caused to the roadway or a street or highway structure as the
result of the operation of the nonconforming vehicle or combination of
vehicles.



      (2)   For the purposes of this section and of rules adopted by
the Director under R.C. § 4513.34, milk transported in bulk by vehicle is
deemed a nondivisible load.



      (3)   For purposes of this section and of rules adopted by the
Director under R.C. § 4513.34, three or fewer aluminum coils, transported by
a vehicle, are deemed a nondivisible load. The Director shall adopt rules
establishing requirements for an aluminum coil permit that are substantially
similar to the requirements for a steel coil permit under O.A.C. Chapter
5501:2-1.



   (D)   The municipality shall issue a special regional heavy hauling
permit under division (A)(1) of this section upon application and payment of
the applicable fee. However, the municipality may issue or withhold a special
permit specified in division (A)(2) of this section. If a permit is to be
issued, the municipality may limit or prescribe conditions of operation for
the vehicle and may require the posting of a bond or other security
conditioned upon the sufficiency of the permit fee to compensate for damage
caused to the roadway or a street or highway structure. In addition, the
municipality, as a condition of issuance of an overweight permit, may require
the applicant to develop and enter into a mutual agreement with the
municipality to compensate for or to repair excess damage caused to the
roadway by travel under the permit.



   (E)   Every permit issued under this section shall be carried in the
vehicle or combination of vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to
inspection by any police officer or authorized agent of any authority
granting the permit.  No person shall violate any of the terms of a permit.



   (F)   The Director of Transportation may debar an applicant from
applying for a special permit under this section upon a finding based on a
reasonable belief that the applicant has done any of the actions specified in
R.C. § 4513.34(F).



   (G)   Notice and procedures for debarment shall be as provided in
R.C. § 4513.34(G).



   (H)   (1)   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued
under this section that relate to gross load limits.



      (2)   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued
under this section that relate to axle load by more than 2,000 pounds per
axle or group of axles.



      (3)   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued
under this section that relate to an approved route except upon order of a
law enforcement officer or authorized agent of the issuing authority.



   (I)   A permit issued by the municipality under this section for the
operation of a vehicle or combination of vehicles is valid for the purposes
of the vehicle operation in accordance with the conditions and limitations
specified on the permit. Such a permit is voidable by law enforcement only
for operation of a vehicle or combination of vehicles in violation of the
weight, dimension, or route provisions of the permit. However, a permit is
not voidable for operation in violation of a route provision of a permit if
the operation is upon the order of a law enforcement officer.



(R.C. § 4513.34) ('69 Code, § 71.37)



   (J)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.99)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Overweight or oversized vehicles, state permit regulations, see O.A.C.
Chapter 5501:2-1



§ 74.41  PERMIT REQUIRED FOR ROAD ROLLERS, POWER SHOVELS AND OTHER HEAVY
EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   No person shall drive over the improved highways of this
municipality a traction engine or tractor with tires or wheels equipped with
ice picks, spuds, spikes, chains or other projections of any kind extending
beyond the cleats, and no person shall tow or in any way pull another vehicle
over the improved highways of this municipality which towed or pulled vehicle
has tires or wheels equipped with ice picks, spuds, spikes, chains or other
projections of any kind.  TRACTION ENGINE or TRACTOR, as used in this
section, applies to all self-propelling engines equipped with metal-tired
wheels operated or propelled by any form of engine, motor or mechanical power.



   (B)   This municipality shall not adopt, enforce, or maintain any
ordinance, rule or regulation contrary to or inconsistent with division (A),
nor shall this municipality require any license tax upon or registration fee
for any traction engine, tractor, or trailer, or any permit or license to
operate.  Operators of traction engines or tractors shall have the same
rights upon the public streets and highways as the drivers of any other
vehicles, unless some other safe and convenient way is provided, and no
public road open to traffic shall be closed to traction engines or tractors.



(R.C. § 5589.08)  ('69 Code, § 71.38)  (Ord. C-123, passed 12-8-58)



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 5589.99(B))



§ 74.42  LIMITATION OF LOAD EXTENSION ON LEFT SIDE OF VEHICLES.



   (A)   No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on a highway with
any load carried on the vehicle which extends more than six inches beyond the
line of the fenders on the vehicle's left side.



(R.C. § 4513.30)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.99)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.43  ALL LOADS SHALL BE PROPERLY SECURED.



   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless the
vehicle is so constructed, loaded, or covered as to prevent any of its load
from dropping, sifting, leaking, or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that
sand or other substances may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction,
or water or other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or
maintaining the roadway.



   (B)   Except for a farm vehicle used to transport agricultural
produce or agricultural production materials or a rubbish vehicle in the
process of acquiring its load, no vehicle loaded with garbage, swill, cans,
bottles, waste paper, ashes, refuse, trash, rubbish, waste, wire, paper,
cartons, boxes, glass, solid waste, or any other material of an
unsanitarynature that is susceptible to blowing or bouncing from a moving
vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless the load is covered
with a sufficient cover to prevent the load or any part of the load from
spilling onto the highway.



(R.C. § 4513.31)  ('69 Code, § 71.34)



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.99)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 74.44  TOWING REQUIREMENTS; EXCEPTION TO SIZE AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.



   (A)   (1)   When one vehicle is towing another vehicle, the
drawbar or other connection shall be of sufficient strength to pull all the
weight towed thereby, and the drawbar or other connection shall not exceed 15
feet from one vehicle to the other, except the connection between any two
vehicles transporting poles, pipe, machinery, or other objects of structural
nature which cannot readily be dismembered.



      (2)   When one vehicle is towing another and the connection
consists only of a chain, rope, or cable, there shall be displayed upon such
connection a white flag or cloth not less than 12 inches square.



      (3)   In addition to such drawbar or other connection, each
trailer and each semitrailer which is not connected to a commercial tractor
by means of a fifth wheel shall be coupled with stay chains or cables to the
vehicle by which it is being drawn.  These chains or cables shall be of
sufficient size and strength to prevent the towed vehicle's parting from the
drawing vehicle in case the drawbar or other connection should break or
become disengaged.  In case of a loaded pole trailer, the connecting pole to
the drawing vehicle shall be coupled to the drawing vehicle with stay chains
or cables of sufficient size and strength to prevent the towed vehicle's
parting from the drawing vehicle.



      (4)   Every trailer or semitrailer, except pole and cable
trailers and pole and cable dollies operated by a public utility as defined
in R.C. § 5727.01, shall be equipped with a coupling device which shall be
so designed and constructed that the trailer will follow substantially in the
path of the vehicle drawing it, without whipping or swerving from side to
side.  Vehicles used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural
production materials between a local place of storage and supply and the
farm, when drawn or towed on a street or highway at a speed of 25 miles per
hour or less, and vehicles designed and used exclusively to transport a boat
between a place of storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when
drawn or towed on a street or highway for a distance of no more than ten
miles and at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less, shall have a drawbar or
other connection, including the hitch mounted on the towing vehicle, which
shall be of sufficient strength to pull all the weight towed thereby.  Only
one such vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural
production materials as provided in this section may be towed or drawn at one
time except as follows:



         (a)   An agricultural tractor may tow or draw more than
one such vehicle;



         (b)   A pickup truck or straight truck designed by the
manufacturer to carry a load of not less than one-half ton and not more than
two tons may tow or draw not more than two such vehicles that are being used
to transport agricultural produce from the farm to a local place of
storage.  No vehicle being so towed by such a pickup truck or straight truck
shall be considered to be a motor vehicle.



(R.C. § 4513.32)  ('69 Code, § 71.36)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4513.99)



   (C)   Exception to size and weight restrictions.



      (1)   The size and weight provisions of this chapter and R.C.
Chapter 5577 do not apply to a person who is engaged in the initial towing or
removal or a wrecked or disabled motor vehicle from the site of an emergency
on a public highway where the vehicle became wrecked or disabled to the
nearest site where the vehicle can be brought into conformance with the
requirements of this chapter and R.C. Chapter 5577 or to the nearest
qualified repair facility.



      (2)   Any subsequent towing of a wrecked or disabled vehicle
shall comply with the size and weight provisions of this chapter and R.C.
Chapter 5577.



      (3)   No court shall impose any penalty prescribed in R.C. §
5577.99, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or the civil
liability established in R.C. § 5577.12 upon a person towing or removing a
vehicle in the manner described in division (C)(1) of this section.



(R.C. § 5577.15)



CHAPTER 75: BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES AND OFF-ROAD VEHICLES



Section



General Provisions



   75.01   Bicycles; application of Title VII



   75.02   Operation of motorized bicycle



   75.03   Rules for bicycles, motorcycles, and snowmobiles



   75.04   Prohibition against attaching bicycles and sleds to vehicles



   75.05   Riding bicycles; motorcycles abreast



   75.06   Equipment of bicycles



Snowmobiles, Off-Highway Motorcycles, and All-Purpose Vehicles



   75.25   Definitions



   75.26   Equipment



   75.27   Code application; prohibited operation



   75.28   Permitted operation



   75.29   Licensing requirements of operator



   75.30   Maintenance of vehicles for hire



   75.31   Accident reports



   75.32   Impounding of vehicle



   75.33   Local control within police power



   75.34   Registration of vehicles



   75.35   Certificate of title; prohibitions



Statutory reference:



   Bicycle regulations to be consistent with state law, see R.C. §
4511.07(A)(8)



   Protective eye devices required for motorcycle operators and
passengers; helmets required for persons under 18 years of age, see O.A.C. §
4501-17-01



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 75.01  BICYCLES; APPLICATION OF TITLE VII.



   (A)   The provisions of this title that are applicable to bicycles
apply whenever a bicycle is operated upon any highway or upon any path set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.



   (B)   Except as provided in division (D) of this section, a bicycle
operator who violates any provisions of this title described in division (A)
of this section that is applicable to bicycles may be issued a ticket,
citation, or summons by a law enforcement officer for the violation in the
same manner as the operator of a motor vehicle would be cited for the same
violation. A person who commits any such violation while operating a bicycle
shall not have any points assessed against the person's driver's license,
commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, or probationary
license under R.C. § 4510.036.



   (C)   Except as provided in division (D) of this section, in the
case of a violation of any provision of this title described in division (A)
of this section by a bicycle operator or by a motor vehicle operator when the
trier of fact finds that the violation by the motor vehicle operator
endangered the lives of bicycle riders at the time of the violation, the
court, notwithstanding any provision of the Ohio Revised Code to the
contrary, may require the bicycle operator or motor vehicle operator to take
and successfully complete a bicycling skills course approved by the court in
addition to or in lieu of any penalty otherwise prescribed by this Traffic
Code or the Ohio Revised Code for that violation.



   (D)   Divisions (B) and (C) of this section do not apply to
violations of R.C. § 4511.19, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.



(R.C. § 4511.52)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 75.02  OPERATION OF MOTORIZED BICYCLE.



   (A)   No person shall operate a motorized bicycle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking, unless all of the following conditions are met:



      (1)   The person is 14 or 15 years of age and holds a valid
probationary motorized bicycle license issued after the person has passed the
test provided for in this section, or the person is 16 years of age or older
and holds either a valid commercial driver's license issued under R.C.
Chapter 4506 or a driver's license issued under R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid
motorized bicycle license issued after the person has passed the test
provided for in this section, except that if a person is 16 years of age, has
a valid probationary motorized bicycle license and desires a motorized
bicycle license, the person is not required to comply with the testing
requirements provided for in this section.



      (2)   The motorized bicycle is equipped in accordance with the
rules adopted under division (B) of this section and is in proper working
order.



      (3)   The person, if under 18 years of age, is wearing a
protective helmet on the person's head with the chin strap properly fastened
and the motorized bicycle is equipped with a rearview mirror.



      (4)   The person operates the motorized bicycle when
practicable within three feet of the right edge of the roadway obeying all
traffic rules applicable to vehicles.



   (B)   The Director of Public Safety, subject to R.C. Chapter 119,
shall adopt and promulgate rules concerning protective helmets, the equipment
of motorized bicycles, and the testing and qualifications of persons who do
not hold a valid driver's or commercial driver's license. The test shall be
as near as practicable to the examination required for a motorcycle
operator's endorsement under R.C. § 4507.11. The test shall also require the
operator to give an actual demonstration of the operator's ability to operate
and control a motorized bicycle by driving one under the supervision of an
examining officer.



   (C)   Every motorized bicycle license expires on the birthday of the
applicant in the fourth year after the date it is issued, but in no event
shall any motorized bicycle license be issued for a period longer than four
years.



   (D)   No person operating a motorized bicycle shall carry another
person upon the motorized bicycle.



   (E)   The protective helmet and rearview mirror required by division
(A)(3) of this section shall, on and after January 1, 1985, conform with
rules adopted by the Director under division (B) of this section.



   (F)   Each probationary motorized bicycle license or motorized
bicycle license shall be laminated with a transparent plastic material.



   (G)   Whoever violates division (A), (D), or (E) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4511.521)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Suspension of probationary motorized bicycle license by the state, see
R.C. § 4510.34



§ 75.03  RULES FOR BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES, AND SNOWMOBILES.



   (A)   For purposes of this section, SNOWMOBILE has the same meaning
as given that term in R.C. § 4519.01.



   (B)   (1)   No person operating a bicycle shall ride other than
upon or astride the permanent and regular seat attached thereto or carry any
other person upon such bicycle other than upon a firmly attached and regular
seat thereon, and no person shall ride upon a bicycle other than upon such a
firmly attached and regular seat.



      (2)   No person operating a motorcycle shall ride other than
upon or astride the permanent and regular seat or saddle attached thereto, or
carry any other person upon such motorcycle other than upon a firmly attached
and regular seat or saddle thereon, and no person shall ride upon a
motorcycle other than upon such a firmly attached and regular seat or saddle.



      (3)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped
with a saddle other than while sitting astride the saddle, facing forward,
with one leg on each side of the motorcycle.



      (4)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped
with a seat other than while sitting upon the seat.



      (5)   No person operating a bicycle shall carry any package,
bundle, or article that prevents the driver from keeping at least one hand
upon the handlebars.



      (6)   No bicycle or motorcycle shall be used to carry more
persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped. No
motorcycle shall be operated on a highway when the handlebars rise higher
than the shoulders of the operator when the operator is seated in the
operator’s seat or saddle.



   (C)   (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(3) of this
section, no person shall operate or be a passenger on a snowmobile or
motorcycle without using safety glasses or other protective eye device.
Except as provided in division (C)(3) of this section, no person who is under
the age of 18 years, or who holds a motorcycle operator’s endorsement or
license bearing a “novice” designation that is currently in effect as
provided in R.C. § 4507.13, shall operate a motorcycle on a highway, or be a
passenger on a motorcycle, unless wearing a protective helmet on the
person’s head, and no other person shall be a passenger on a motorcycle
operated by such a person unless similarly wearing a protective helmet. The
helmet, safety glasses, or other protective eye device shall conform with
rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety. The provisions of this
paragraph or a violation thereof shall not be used in the trial of any civil
action.



      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (C)(3) of this
section, no person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary
instruction permit and temporary instruction permit identification card
issued by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles pursuant to R.C. § 4507.05 unless
the person, at the time of such operation, is wearing on the person’s head
a protective helmet that conforms with rules adopted by the Ohio Director of
Public Safety.



         (b)   No person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid
temporary instruction permit and temporary instruction permit identification
card issued by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles pursuant to R.C. § 4507.05 in
any of the following circumstances:



            1.   At any time when lighted lights are required
by R.C. § 4513.03(A)(1);



            2.   While carrying a passenger;



            3.   On any limited access highway or heavily
congested roadway.



      (3)   Divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2)(a) of this section do not
apply to a person who operates or is a passenger in an autocycle or
cab-enclosed motorcycle when the occupant compartment top is in place
enclosing the occupants.



   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the
carrying of a child in a seat or trailer that is designed for carrying
children and is firmly attached to the bicycle.



   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates division (B) or (C)(1) or (C)(3) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor
vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates division (B) or (C)(1) or (C)(3)
of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates division
(B) or (C)(1) or (C)(3) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.53)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 75.04  PROHIBITION AGAINST ATTACHING BICYCLES AND SLEDS TO VEHICLES.



   (A)   (1)   No person riding upon any bicycle, coaster, roller
skates, sled, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or self to any vehicle
upon a roadway.



      (2)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person riding
upon any bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, or toy vehicle to attach the
same or self to any vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway.



      (3)   This section does not apply to towing a disabled vehicle.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.54)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 75.05  RIDING BICYCLES; MOTORCYCLES ABREAST.



   (A)   Every person operating a bicycle upon a roadway shall ride as
near to the right side of the roadway as practicable obeying all traffic
rules applicable to vehicles and exercising due care when passing a standing
vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.



   (B)   Persons riding bicycles or motorcycles upon a roadway shall
ride not more than two abreast in a single lane, except on paths or parts of
roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles or motorcycles.



   (C)   This section does not require a person operating a bicycle to
ride at the edge of the roadway when it is unreasonable or unsafe to do so.
Conditions that may require riding away from the edge of the roadway include
when necessary to avoid fixed or moving objects, parked or moving vehicles,
surface hazards, or if it otherwise is unsafe or impracticable to do so,
including if the lane is too narrow for the bicycle and an overtaking vehicle
to travel safely side by side within the lane.



   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (E)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
offense, the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
70.99(B).



(R.C. § 4511.55)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 75.06  EQUIPMENT OF BICYCLES.



   (A)   Every bicycle when in use at the times specified in R.C. §
4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall be equipped
with the following:



      (1)   A lamp mounted on the front of either the bicycle or the
operator that shall emit a white light visible from a distance of at least
500 feet to the front and 300 feet to the sides. A generator-powered lamp
that emits light only when the bicycle is moving may be used to meet this
requirement.



      (2)   A red reflector on the rear that shall be visible from
all distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of
lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle;



      (3)   A lamp emitting either flashing or steady red light
visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear shall be used in addition to
the red reflector. If the red lamp performs as a reflector in that it is
visible as specified in division (A)(2) of this section, the red lamp may
serve as the reflector and a separate reflector is not required.



   (B)   Additional lamps and reflectors may be used in addition to
those required under division (A) of this section, except that red lamps and
red reflectors shall not be used on the front of the bicycle and white lamps
and white reflectors shall not be used on the rear of the bicycle.



   (C)   A bicycle may be equipped with a device capable of giving an
audible signal, except that a bicycle shall not be equipped with nor shall
any person use upon a bicycle any siren or whistle.



   (D)   Every bicycle shall be equipped with an adequate brake when
used on a street or highway.



   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.56)  Penalty, see § 70.99



SNOWMOBILES, OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLES, AND ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLES



§ 75.25  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLE.  Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily
for cross-country travel on land and water, or on more than one type of
terrain, and steered by wheels or caterpillar treads, or any combination
thereof, including vehicles that operate on a cushion of air, vehicles
commonly known as all-terrain vehicles, all season vehicles, mini-bikes and
trail bikes.  The term does not include a utility vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 4501.01 or any vehicle principally used in playing golf, any motor vehicle
or aircraft required to be registered under R.C. Chapter 4503 or R.C. Chapter
4561, and any vehicle excepted from definition as a motor vehicle by R.C. §
4501.01(B).



   DEALER.  Any person or firm engaged in the business of manufacturing
or selling snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles at
wholesale or retail, or who rents, leases or otherwise furnishes snowmobiles,
off-highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles for hire.



   ELECTRONIC and ELECTRONIC RECORD.  Have the same meanings as in R.C.
§ 4501.01.



   ELECTRONIC DEALER. A dealer whom the registrar of motor vehicles
designates under R.C. § 4519.511.



   INTERSTATE HIGHWAY.  Any part of the interstate system of highways as
defined in subsection (e), 90 Stat. 431 (1976), 23 USC 103, as amended.



   LIMITED ACCESS HIGHWAY OR FREEWAY.  Have the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 5511.02.



   MINI-TRUCK. A vehicle that has four wheels, is propelled by an electric
motor with a rated power of 7,500 watts or less or an internal combustion
engine with a piston displacement capacity of 660 cubic centimeters or less,
has a total dry weight of 900 to 2,200 pounds, contains an enclosed cabin and
a seat for the vehicle operator, resembles a pickup truck or van with a cargo
area or bed located at the rear of the vehicle, and was not originally
manufactured to meet federal motor vehicle safety standards.



   OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE.  Every motorcycle, as defined in R.C. §
4511.01, that is designed to be operated primarily on lands other than a
street or highway.



   OPERATOR.  Any person who operates or is in actual physical control of
a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle.



   OWNER.  Any person or firm, other than a lienholder or dealer, having
title to a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle, or
other right to the possession thereof.



   PROOF OF FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4509.01.



   SNOWMOBILE.  Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for use on
snow or ice, and steered by skis, runners or caterpillar treads.



   STATE HIGHWAY and STATE ROUTE. Have the same meanings as in R.C. §
4511.01.



   STREET or HIGHWAY.  Have the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.



(R.C. § 4519.01)



§ 75.26  EQUIPMENT.



   (A)   In addition to any rules or regulations promulgated by the
Ohio Director of Public Safety pursuant to R.C. § 4519.20 and R.C. Chapter
119, equipment of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all-purpose
vehicles shall include but not necessarily be limited to requirements for the
following items of equipment:



      (1)   At least one headlight having a minimum candlepower of
sufficient intensity to reveal persons and objects at a distance of at least
100 feet ahead under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness;



      (2)   At least one red tail light having a minimum candlepower
of sufficient intensity to be plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to
the rear under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness;



      (3)   Every snowmobile, while traveling on packed snow, shall
be capable of carrying a driver who weighs 175 pounds or more, and, while
carrying such driver, be capable of stopping in no more than 40 feet from an
initial steady speed of 20 miles per hour, or locking its traction belt; and



      (4)   A muffler system capable of precluding the emission of
excessive smoke or exhaust fumes, and of limiting the engine noise of
vehicles. On snowmobiles manufactured after January 1, 1973, such requirement
shall include sound dampening equipment such that noise does not exceed 82
decibels on the "A" scale at 50 feet as measured according to SAE J192
(September 1970).



   (B)   No person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle in violation of this section, except that
equipment specified in division (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this section shall not
be required on snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles
operated during the daylight hours.



(R.C. § 4519.20(A), (B))



   (C)   No person shall sell, offer for sale, lease, rent or otherwise
furnish for hire in this municipality any new snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle that fails to comply with any rule adopted
by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under R.C. § 4519.20 after the
effective date of the rule.



(R.C. § 4519.22(A))



   (D)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division,
whoever violates division (B) of this section shall be fined not more than
$50.  If the offender within the preceding year previously has committed a
violation of division (B) of this section or of R.C. § 4519.20(B), whoever
violates division (B) of this section shall be fined not less than $15 nor
more than $100, imprisoned not more than three days, or both.



(R.C. § 4519.20(C))



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates division (C) of this section shall be fined not more than $50.  If
the offender within the preceding year previously has committed a violation
of division (C) of this section or of R.C. § 4519.22(A), whoever violates
this section shall be fined not less than $15 nor more than $100, imprisoned
not more than three days, or both.



(R.C. § 4519.22(B))



§ 75.27  CODE APPLICATION; PROHIBITED OPERATION.



   (A)   The applicable provisions of this traffic code apply to the
operation of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all-purpose vehicles,
except that no person shall operate a snowmobile, off- highway motorcycle, or
all-purpose vehicle as follows:



      (1)   On any state highway, including a limited access highway
or freeway or the right-of-way thereof, except for emergency travel during
such time and in such manner as the Ohio Director of Public Safety designates
or except as authorized by R.C. § 4519.41(F);



      (2)   On any private property, or in any nursery or planting
area, without the permission of the owner or other person having the right to
possession of the property;



      (3)   On any land or waters controlled by the state, except at
those locations where a sign has been posted permitting such operation;



      (4)   On the tracks or right-of-way of any operating railroad;



      (5)   While transporting any firearm, bow or other implement
for hunting that is not unloaded and securely encased;



      (6)   For the purpose of chasing, pursuing, capturing or
killing any animal or wild fowl;



      (7)   During the time from sunset to sunrise, unless
displaying lighted lights as required by R.C. § 4519.20 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance; or



      (8)   On any village owned property.



   (B)   Prohibitions contained in this section shall not apply to
authorized maintenance, public safety, or public utility vehicles.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $50
nor more than $500, imprisoned not less than three nor more than 30 days, or
both.



(R.C. § 4519.40)  (Ord. 2009-15, passed 9-14-09)



§ 75.28  PERMITTED OPERATION.



   Snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all-purpose vehicles may be
operated as follows:



   (A)   To make a crossing of a highway, other than a highway as
designated in R.C. § 4519.40(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, whenever the crossing can be made in safety and will not interfere
with the movement of vehicular traffic approaching from any direction on the
highway, and provided that the operator yields the right-of-way to any
approaching traffic that presents an immediate hazard;



   (B)   On highways in the county or township road systems whenever
the local authority having jurisdiction over such highways so permits;



   (C)   Off and alongside street or highway for limited distances from
the point of unloading from a conveyance to the point at which the
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle is intended and
authorized to be operated;



   (D)   On the berm or shoulder of a highway, other than a highway as
designated in R.C. § 4519.40(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, when the terrain permits such operation to be undertaken safely
and without the necessity of entering any traffic lane;



   (E)   On the berm or shoulder or a county or township road, while
traveling from one area of operation of the snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle to another such area.



   (F)   For snowmobiles without metal studded tracks and all-purpose
vehicles, on state highways located on an island in Lake Erie, including
limited access highways and freeways, between the first day of November and
the thirtieth day of April, provided that all of the following conditions
apply:



      (1)   The operator has a valid driver’s license as required
under R.C. § 4519.44.



      (2)   The snowmobile or all- purpose vehicle is in compliance
with rules governing safety equipment adopted under R.C. § 4519.20.



      (3)   The owner of the snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle
maintains proof of financial responsibility for both on-road and off-road use
of the snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle.



      (4)   The operator obeys all traffic rules and regulations.



(R.C. § 4519.41)



§ 75.29  LICENSING REQUIREMENTS OF OPERATOR.



   (A)   No person who does not hold a valid, current motor vehicle
driver's or commercial driver's license, motorcycle operator's endorsement or
probationary license, issued under R.C. Chapter 4506 or R.C. Chapter 4507 or
a valid, current driver's license issued by another jurisdiction, shall
operate a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle on any
street or highway in this municipality, on any portion of the right-of-way
thereof, or on any public land or waters.



   (B)   No person who is less than 16 years of age shall operate a
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle on any land or
waters other than private property or waters owned by or leased to the
person's parent or guardian, unless accompanied by another person who is 18
years of age or older, and who holds a license as provided in division (A) of
this section, except that the Ohio Department of Natural Resources may permit
such operation on state controlled land under its jurisdiction when such
person is less than 16 years of age and is accompanied by a parent or
guardian who is a licensed driver 18 years of age or older.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $50
nor more than $500, imprisoned not less than three nor more than 30 days, or
both.



(R.C. § 4519.44)



§ 75.30  MAINTENANCE OF VEHICLES FOR HIRE.



   (A)   Any dealer who rents, leases or otherwise furnishes a
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle for hire shall
maintain the vehicle in safe operating condition.  No dealer, or agent or
employee of a dealer, shall rent, lease or otherwise furnish a snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle for hire to any person who
does not hold a license as required by R.C. § 4519.44(A) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or to any person whom the dealer or an agent
or employee of the dealer has reasonable cause to believe is incompetent to
operate the vehicle in a safe and lawful manner.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than
$100 nor more than $500.



(R.C. § 4519.45)



§ 75.31  ACCIDENT REPORTS.



   (A)   The operator of a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or
all-purpose vehicle involved in any accident resulting in bodily injury to or
death of any person or damage to the property of any person in excess of $100
shall report the accident within 48 hours to the Chief of Police, and within
30 days shall forward a written report of the accident to the Ohio Registrar
of Motor Vehicles on a form prescribed by the Registrar.  If the operator is
physically incapable of making the reports and there is another participant
in the accident not so incapacitated, the participant shall make the
reports.  In the event there is no other participant, and the operator is
other than the owner, the owner, within the prescribed periods of time, shall
make the reports.



   (B)   Any law enforcement officer or other person authorized by R.C.
§§ 4519.42 and 4519.43 who investigates or receives information of an
accident involving a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose
vehicle shall forward to the Registrar a written report of the accident
within 48 hours.



(R.C. § 4519.46)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 75.32  IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLE.



   (A)   Whenever a person is found guilty of operating a snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle in violation of any rule
authorized to be adopted under R.C. § 4519.21 or 4519.42, the trial judge of
any court of record, in addition to or independent of any other penalties
provided by law, may impound for not less than 60 days the certificate of
registration and license plate, if applicable, of that snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle. The court shall send the
impounded certificate of registration and license plate, if applicable, to
the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, who shall retain the certificate of
registration and license plate, if applicable, until the expiration of the
period of impoundment.



   (B)   If a court impounds the certificate of registration and
license plate of an all-purpose vehicle pursuant to R.C. § 2911.21, the
court shall send the impounded certificate of registration and license plate
to the Registrar, who shall retain them until the expiration of the period of
impoundment.



(R.C. § 4519.47)



§ 75.33  LOCAL CONTROL WITHIN POLICE POWER.



   Nothing contained in this subchapter shall prevent the municipality
from regulating the operation of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycle, and
all-purpose vehicles on streets and highways and other public property under
municipal jurisdiction, and within the reasonable exercise of the police
power, except that no registration or licensing of any snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle required to be registered or
titled under R.C. Chapter 4519 shall be required.



(R.C. § 4519.48)



§ 75.34  REGISTRATION OF VEHICLES.



   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B), (C) and (D) of
this section, no person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle,
or all-purpose vehicle within this municipality unless the snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle is registered and numbered in
accordance with R.C. §§ 4519.03 and 4519.04.



      (2)   Except as provided in R.C. § 4511.215 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, no registration is required for
a mini-truck that is operated within this state. A mini-truck may be operated
only in accordance with R.C. § 4511.215 and R.C. § 4519.401, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (B)   (1)   No registration is required for a snowmobile or
off-highway motorcycle that is operated exclusively upon lands owned by the
owner of the snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle, or on lands to which the
owner of the snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle has a contractual right.



      (2)   No registration is required for an all-purpose vehicle
that is used primarily for agricultural purposes when the owner qualifies for
the current agricultural use valuation tax credit, unless it is to be used on
any public land, trail, or right-of-way.



      (3)   Any all-purpose vehicle exempted from registration under
division (B)(2) of this section and operated for agricultural purposes may
use public roads and rights-of-way when traveling from one farm field to
another, when such use does not violate R.C. § 4519.41.



      (4)   No registration is required for a snowmobile or
all-purpose vehicle that is operated on a state highway as authorized by R.C.
§ 4519.41(F).



   (C)   No registration is required for a snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this state by a resident
of another state whenever that state has in effect a registration law similar
to R.C. Chapter 4519 and the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or
all-purpose vehicle is properly registered under that state's law. Any
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in
this state by a resident of a state not having a registration law similar to
R.C. Chapter 4519 shall comply with R.C. § 4519.09.



   (D)   No registration is required for a snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this municipality by the
United States, another state or a political subdivision thereof, but the
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle shall display the
name of the owner thereon.



   (E)   The owner or operator of any all-purpose vehicle operated or
used upon the waters in this municipality shall comply with R.C. Chapter 1547
and R.C. Chapter 1548 relative to the operation of watercraft.



   (F)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section shall be fined
not less than $50 nor more than $100.



(R.C. § 4519.02)  Penalty, see § 70.99



Statutory reference:



   Destruction or disposal of vehicle; transfer of ownership; change of
address; loss of certificate, see R.C. § 4519.05



   Registration of emergency vehicles, see R.C. § 4519.08



   Registration procedure, see R.C. § 4519.03



   Temporary license placards and fees, see R.C. § 4519.10



   Temporary operating permit for certain nonresidents, see R.C. § 4519.09



§ 75.35  CERTIFICATE OF TITLE; PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Operate in this state an off-highway motorcycle or
all-purpose vehicle without having a certificate of title for the off-highway
motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle if such a certificate is required by R.C.
Chapter 4519 to be issued for the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle, or, if a physical certificate of title has not been issued for it,
operate an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle knowing that the
ownership information related to the motorcycle or vehicle has not been
entered into the automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas.



      (2)   Operate in this municipality an off-highway motorcycle
or all-purpose vehicle is a certificate of title to the off-highway
motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle has been issued and then has been canceled.



      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title upon
cancellation of it by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles and notice of the
cancellation as prescribed in R.C. Chapter 4519.



      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of
a Court of Common Pleas as provided in R.C. Chapter 4519, in case of the
destruction or dismantling of, or change in, the off-highway motorcycle or
all-purpose vehicle described in the certificate of title.



      (5)   Violate any provision of R.C. §§ 4519.51 to 4519.70
for which no penalty is otherwise provided or any lawful rules adopted
pursuant to those sections.



      (6)   Operate in this state an off-highway motorcycle or
all-purpose vehicle knowing that the certificate of title to or ownership of
the motorcycle or vehicle as otherwise reflected in the automated title
processing system has been canceled.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not more than
$200, imprisoned not more than 90 days, or both.



(R.C. § 4519.66)



Statutory reference:



   Certificate of title: rules and procedures, see R.C. §§ 4519.51 et
seq.



   Stolen vehicles and restrictions on sale or transfer, felony
provisions, see R.C. § 4519.67



CHAPTER 76: PARKING REGULATIONS



Section



   76.01   Prohibition against parking on highways



   76.02   Continuous parking in same location



   76.03   Condition when motor vehicle left unattended



   76.04   Police may remove illegally parked vehicle



   76.05   Parking prohibitions



   76.06   Parking near curb; privileges for handicapped



   76.07   Standing or parking vehicle for sale, advertising or washing



   76.08   Vehicles left on street or private property without consent



   76.09   Impounding of vehicles



   76.10   Fire lanes



 



   76.99   Penalty



§ 76.01  PROHIBITION AGAINST PARKING ON HIGHWAYS.



   (A)   (1)   Upon Ridge Road, Section Road, Galbraith Road, or the
Cross-County Highway, no person shall stop, park, or leave standing any
vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or main traveled part
of the highway if it is practicable to stop, park, or so leave such vehicle
off the paved or main traveled part of the highway. In every event a clear
and unobstructed portion of the highway opposite such standing vehicle shall
be left for the free passage of other vehicles, and a clear view of such
stopped vehicle shall be available from a distance of 200 feet in each
direction upon such highway.



      (2)   This section does not apply to the driver of any vehicle
which is disabled while on the paved or improved or main traveled portion of
a highway in such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid
stopping and temporarily leaving the disabled vehicle in such position.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.66)  ('69 Code, § 75.04)  (Ord. C-123, passed 12-8-58) 
Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 76.02  CONTINUOUS PARKING IN SAME LOCATION.



   No person who is the owner, agent, operator, or other person in charge
of any vehicle shall permit such vehicle to remain parked, standing, or
abandoned upon any street for a continuous period longer than 72 hours,
including Sundays and holidays.  This section shall not be construed as
affecting any other parking regulation now in effect or that may hereafter
become effective but shall be construed as an additional parking
limitation.  The purpose of this section is to prohibit continuous long-time
parking and the storage of vehicles on the street of the municipality.



('69 Code, § 75.03)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 76.03  CONDITION WHEN MOTOR VEHICLE LEFT UNATTENDED.



   (A)   (1)   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle
shall permit it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine,
locking the ignition, removing the key from the ignition, effectively setting
the parking brake, and, when the motor vehicle is standing upon any grade,
turning the front wheels to the curb or side of the highway.



('69 Code, § 75.02)



      (2)   The requirements of this section relating to the
stopping of the engine, locking of the ignition, and removing the key from
the ignition of a motor vehicle do not apply to any of the following:



         (a)   A motor vehicle that is parked on residential
property;



         (b)   A motor vehicle that is locked, regardless of
where it is parked;



         (c)   An emergency vehicle ;



         (d)   A public safety vehicle. 



('69 Code, § 72.33) (Ord. C-164, passed 9-12-60)



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year
of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one
year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or
more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.661)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 76.04  POLICE MAY REMOVE ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLE.



   (A)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a
highway in violation of R.C. § 4511.66 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, such officer may move such vehicle, or require the
driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a
position off the paved or improved or main traveled part of such highway.



   (B)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon
any highway, bridge, or causeway, or in any tunnel, where such vehicles
constitutes an obstruction to traffic, such officer may provide for the
removal of such vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety.



(R.C. § 4511.67)



      (1)   Such officer shall provide for the removal of such
vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety.



('69 Code, § 75.05)



      (2)   Such officer shall remove such vehicle to the parking
lot at the administration building, or cause such vehicle to be removed by a
private tow truck operator to the parking lot behind the administration
building or to a private garage or parking lot.  The vehicle shall then be
released to the owner thereof upon the payment of towing charges.



('69 Code, § 72.42)  (Ord. C-123, passed 12-8-58; Am. Ord. C-491, passed
11-12-79)



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 76.05  PARKING PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   No person shall stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary
to avoid conflict with other traffic or to comply with the provisions of this
title, or while obeying the directions of a police officer or a
traffic-control device, in any of the following places:



      (1)   On a sidewalk, except as provided in division (C) of
this section;



      (2)   In front of a public or private driveway;



      (3)   Within an intersection;



      (4)   Within ten feet of a fire hydrant;



      (5)   On a crosswalk;



      (6)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;



      (7)   Within 30 feet of, and upon the approach to, any
flashing beacon, stop sign, or traffic-control device;



      (8)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30
feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone,
unless a different length is indicated by a traffic-control device;



      (9)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad
crossing;



      (10)   Within 20 feet of a driveway entrance to any fire
station and, on the side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire
station, within 75 feet of the entrance when it is properly posted with signs;



      (11)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or
obstruction when such standing or parking would obstruct traffic;



      (12)   Alongside any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or
curb of a street;



      (13)   Upon any bridge or elevated structure upon a highway,
or within a highway tunnel;



      (14)   At any place where signs prohibit stopping;



      (15)   Within one foot of another parked vehicle;



      (16)   On the roadway portion of a freeway, expressway, or
thruway.



(R.C. § 4511.68(A))



   (B)   (1)   No person shall stand, or park a vehicle, on village
property where a permit is required as posted unless said vehicle displays an
Amberley Village Vehicle Identification Sticker or other designated parking
permit authorized by Village Council.



      (2)   Parking permits are required for the Amberley Green
parking lot located at 7801 Ridge Road. Permits are valid from the date of
issuance and expire on December 31 of the same calendar year in which the
permit was issued. Applicants must provide the village with a valid name,
current address, phone number, and email address before a permit or sticker
will be issued. The replacement fee for a lost or damaged permit or sticker
is $10. The Village Manager may revoke the privileges granted herein at any
time for a violation of any village rule, policy, or procedure relating to
use of Amberley Green.



(Ord. 2009-15, passed 9-14-09; Am. Ord. 2012-04, passed 7-9-12; Am. Ord.
2014-03, passed 2-10-14)



   (C)   A person shall be permitted, without charge or restriction, to
stand or park on a sidewalk a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter that has an
engine not larger than 150 cubic centimeters, or a bicycle, provided that the
motor-driven cycle, motor scooter, or bicycle does not impede the normal flow
of pedestrian traffic. This division does not authorize any person to operate
a vehicle in violation of R.C. § 4511.711, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.



   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4511.68(B), (C)) ('69 Code, § 75.01) (Ord. C-123, passed 12-8-58)
Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 76.06  PARKING NEAR CURB; PRIVILEGES FOR HANDICAPPED.



   (A)   Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there is
an adjacent curb shall be stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of the
vehicle parallel with and not more than 12 inches from the right-hand curb,
unless it is impossible to approach so close to the curb; in such case the
stop shall be made as close to the curb as possible and only for the time
necessary to discharge and receive passengers or to load or unload
merchandise. Local authorities by ordinance may permit angle parking on any
roadway under their jurisdiction, except that angle parking shall not be
permitted on a state route within the municipality unless an unoccupied
roadway width of not less than 25 feet is available for free-moving traffic.



   (B)   Local authorities by ordinance may permit parking of vehicles
with the left-hand wheels adjacent to and within 12 inches of the left-hand
curb of a one-way roadway.



   (C)   (1)   (a)   Except as provided in division (C)(1)(b) of
this section, no vehicle shall be stopped or parked on a road or highway with
the vehicle facing in a direction other than the direction of travel on that
side of the road or highway.



('69 Code, § 75.06(B))



         (b)   The operator of a motorcycle may back the
motorcycle into an angled parking space so that when the motorcycle is parked
it is facing in a direction other than the direction of travel on the side of
the road or highway.



      (2)   The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle
into a parking space that is located on the side of, and parallel to, a road
or highway. The motorcycle may face any direction when so parked. Not more
than two motorcycles at a time shall be parked in a parking space as
described in division (C)(2) of this section irrespective of whether or not
the space is metered.



   (D)   Notwithstanding any statute or any rule, regulation,
resolution, or ordinance, air compressors, tractors, trucks, and other
equipment, while being used in the construction, reconstruction,
installation, repair, or removal of facilities near, on, over, or under a
street or highway, may stop, stand, or park where necessary in order to
perform such work, provided a flagperson is on duty or warning signs or
lights are displayed as may be prescribed by the Director of Transportation.



('69 Code, § 75.06(C))



   (E)   Special parking locations and privileges for persons with
disabilities that limit or impair the ability to walk, also known as
handicapped parking spaces or disability parking spaces, shall be provided
and designated by all political subdivisions and by the state and all
agencies and instrumentalities thereof at all offices and facilities where
parking is provided, whether owned, rented, or leased, and at all publicly
owned parking garages. The locations shall be designated through the posting
of an elevated sign, whether permanently affixed or movable, imprinted with
the international symbol of access and shall be reasonably close to exits,
entrances, elevators, and ramps. All elevated signs posted in accordance with
this division and R.C. § 3781.111(C) shall be mounted on a fixed or movable
post, and the distance from the ground to the bottom edge of the sign shall
measure not less than five feet. If a new sign or a replacement sign
designating a special parking location is posted on or after October 14,
1999, there also shall be affixed upon the surface of that sign or affixed
next to the designating sign a notice that states the fine applicable for the
offense of parking a motor vehicle in the special designated parking location
if the motor vehicle is not legally entitled to be parked in that location.



   (F)   (1)   (a)   No person shall stop, stand, or park any
motor vehicle at special parking locations provided under division (E) of
this section, or at special clearly marked parking locations provided in or
on privately owned parking lots, parking garages, or other parking areas and
designated in accordance with that division, unless one of the following
applies:



            1.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for
the transport of a person with a disability that limits or impairs the
ability to walk and is displaying a valid removable windshield placard or
special license plates; or



            2.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for
the transport of a handicapped person and is displaying a parking card or
special handicapped license plates.



         (b)   Any motor vehicle that is parked in a special
marked parking location in violation of division (F)(1)(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2.
of this section may be towed or otherwise removed from the parking location
by the law enforcement agency of the municipality. A motor vehicle that is so
towed or removed shall not be released to its owner until the owner presents
proof of ownership of the motor vehicle and pays all towing and storage fees
normally imposed by the municipality for towing and storing motor vehicles.
If the motor vehicle is a leased vehicle, it shall not be released to the
lessee until the lessee presents proof that that person is the lessee of the
motor vehicle and pays all towing and storage fees normally imposed by the
municipality for towing and storing motor vehicles.



         (c)   If a person is charged with a violation of
division (F)(1)(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. of this section, it is an affirmative
defense to the charge that the person suffered an injury not more than 72
hours prior to the time the person was issued the ticket or citation and
that, because of the injury, the person meets at least one of the criteria
contained in R.C. § 4503.44(A)(1).



      (2)    No person shall stop, stand, or park any motor vehicle
in an area that is commonly known as an access aisle, which area is marked by
diagonal stripes and is located immediately adjacent to a special parking
location provided under division (E) of this section or at a special clearly
marked parking location provided in or on a privately owned parking lot,
parking garage, or other parking area and designated in accordance with that
division.



   (G)   When a motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport
of a person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and
is displaying a removable windshield placard or a temporary removable
windshield placard or special license plates, or when a motor vehicle is
being operated by or for the transport of a handicapped person, and is
displaying a parking card or special handicapped license plates, the motor
vehicle is permitted to park for a period of two hours in excess of the legal
parking period permitted by local authorities, except where local ordinances
or police rules provide otherwise or where the vehicle is parked in such a
manner as to be clearly a traffic hazard.



   (H)   No owner of an office, facility, or parking garage where
special parking locations are required to be designated in accordance with
division (E) of this section shall fail to properly mark the special parking
locations in accordance with that division or fail to maintain the markings
of the special locations, including the erection and maintenance of the fixed
or movable signs.



   (I)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require a person
or organization to apply for a removable windshield placard or special
license plates if the parking card or special license plates issued to the
person or organization under prior law have not expired or been surrendered
or revoked.



   (J)   As used in this section:



      HANDICAPPED PERSON means any person who has lost the use of one
or both legs or one or both arms, who is blind, deaf, or so severely
handicapped as to be unable to move without the aid of crutches or a
wheelchair, or whose mobility is restricted by a permanent cardiovascular,
pulmonary, or other handicapping condition.



      PERSON WITH A DISABILITY THAT LIMITS OR IMPAIRS THE ABILITY TO
WALK has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4503.44.



      SPECIAL LICENSE PLATES and REMOVABLE WINDSHIELD PLACARD mean any
license plates or removable windshield placard or temporary removable
windshield placard issued under R.C. §§ 4503.41 or 4503.44, and also mean
any substantially equivalent license plates or removable windshield placard
or temporary removable windshield placard issued by a state, district,
country, or sovereignty.



   (K)   Penalty.



      (1)   Whoever violates division (A) or (C) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (F)(1)(a)1. or
(F)(1)(a)2. of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished
as provided in division (K)(2)(a) and (b) of this section.  Except as
otherwise provided in division (K)(2)(a) of this section, an offender who
violates division (F)(1)(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. of this section shall be fined
not less than $250 nor more than $500. An offender who violates division
(F)(1)(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. of this section shall be fined not more than $100
if the offender, prior to sentencing, proves either of the following to the
satisfaction of the court:



            1.   At the time of the violation of division
(F)(1)(a)1. of this section, the offender or the person for whose transport
the motor vehicle was being operated had been issued a removable windshield
placard that then was valid or special license plates that then were valid
but the offender or the person neglected to display the placard or license
plates as described in division (F)(1)(a) of this section.



            2.   At the time of the violation of division
(F)(1)(a)2. of this section, the offender or the person for whose transport
the motor vehicle was being operated had been issued a parking card that then
was valid or special handicapped license plates that then were valid but the
offender or the person neglected to display the card or license plates as
described in division (F)(1)(a)2. of this section.



         (b)   In no case shall an offender who violates division
(F)(1)(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. be sentenced to any term of imprisonment.



         (c)   An arrest or conviction for a violation of
division (F)(1)(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. of this section does not constitute a
criminal record and need not be reported by the person so arrested or
convicted in response to any inquiries contained in any application for
employment, license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with
the person’s appearance as a witness.



         (d)   The clerk of the court shall pay every fine
collected under divisions (K)(2) and (K)(3) of this section to the
municipality. Except as provided in division (K)(2) of this section, the
municipality shall use the fine moneys it receives under divisions (K)(2) and
(K)(3) of this section to pay the expenses it incurs in complying with the
signage and notice requirements contained in division (E) of this section.
The municipality may use up to 50% of each fine it receives under divisions
(K)(2) and (K)(3) of this section to pay the costs of educational, advocacy,
support, and assistive technology programs for persons with disabilities, and
for public improvements within the municipality that benefit or assist
persons with disabilities, if governmental agencies or nonprofit
organizations offer the programs.



      (3)   Whoever violates division (F)(2) of this section shall
be fined not less than $250 nor more than $500. In no case shall an offender
who violates division (F)(2) of this section be sentenced to any term of
imprisonment. An arrest or conviction for a



violation of division (F)(2) of this section does not constitute a criminal
record and need not be reported by the person so arrested or convicted in
response to any inquiries contained in any application for employment,
license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the
person’s appearance as a witness.



      (4)   Whoever violates division (H) of this section shall be
punished as follows:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (K)(4) of
this section, the offender shall be issued a warning.



(R.C. § 4511.69(A) - (J)(3)(a), (K))



         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (H) of this section or of a
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to that division, the
offender shall not be issued a warning but shall be punished pursuant to §
70.99.



(Am. Ord. 2011-17, passed 12-12-11)



Statutory reference:



   Buildings, access for disabled persons, see R.C. § 3781.111



§ 76.07  STANDING OR PARKING VEHICLE FOR SALE, ADVERTISING OR WASHING.



   No person shall stand or park a vehicle upon any highway right-of-way
for the principal purpose of:



   (A)   Displaying it for sale;



   (B)   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs
necessitated by an emergency; or



   (C)   Advertising.



('69 Code, § 75.07)  Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 76.08  VEHICLES LEFT ON STREET OR PRIVATE PROPERTY WITHOUT CONSENT.



   No person shall leave any operable, wrecked, junked, partially
dismantled or non-operating vehicle on any street or highway within this
village nor leave the same on any property within the village without first
obtaining the consent of said owner or the person in charge or control
thereof and the approval of the appropriate village authority, if required.



('69 Code § 75.09)  (Ord. C-307, passed 4-13-70)  Penalty, see § 76.99



§ 76.09  IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLES.



   The Chief of Police or any member of his Department designated by him
is hereby authorized to remove or have removed any vehicle left in any place
within the village in violation of this chapter.  Such vehicles shall be
impounded until lawfully claimed or disposed of in accordance with the
provisions of R.C. §§ 737.32, 737.33, 737.331.  Any person desiring to
redeem such impounded vehicle shall first pay to the village a basic charge
of $10 plus $l per day for the time the impounded vehicle is in storage, and
may be assessed a cost for towing services other than those described above,
and in addition thereto, shall pay for any services performed by the village
in order to properly maintain the impounded vehicle.



('69 Code, § 75.10)  (Ord. C-307, passed 4-13-70)



§ 76.10  FIRE LANES.



   (A)   Fire lanes, designation. The Fire Chief may require and
designate public or private fire lanes as deemed necessary for the efficient
and effective use of fire apparatus. Fire lanes may be required by the Fire
Chief to extend on any or all sides of the building perimeter. All required
fire lanes shall meet the following requirements:



      (1)   (a)    Required access for fire apparatus: all
premises which the Fire Department may be called upon to protect in case of
fire which are not readily accessible from public roads shall be provided
with suitable gates, access roads, and fire lanes so that all portions of all
buildings on the premises are accessible to fire apparatus and public safety
vehicles, as may be required by the Fire Chief.



         (b)   Fire lanes shall be provided for all buildings
which are set back more than 50 feet from a public road or exceed 30 feet in
height.



         (c)   Fire lanes shall be at least 20 feet in width with
the road edge closest to the building at least ten feet from the buildings.
Any dead-end road more than 300 feet long shall be provided with a
turn-around at the closed end at least 90 feet in diameter.



         (d)   The designation and maintenance of fire lanes on
private property shall be accomplished as specified by the Fire Chief.



      (2)   Shall be capable of supporting apparatus weights of
75,000 pounds minimum.



      (3)   Turning radius shall be a minimum of 45 feet inside
measurement.



      (4)   It shall be the responsibility of the property owner for
the posting of “No Parking Fire Lane” signs, or signs with words
otherwise authorized by the Fire Chief, with the approved lettering as
required by the Fire Chief in conformance with the Ohio Revised Code.



   (B)   Obstructions. Designated fire lanes shall be maintained free
of obstructions and vehicles and marked in a manner prescribed by the Fire
Chief.



   (C)   Parking prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to
park a motor vehicle on, or otherwise obstruct, any fire lanes, fire
hydrants, fire department connections or other fire suppression equipment.



(Ord. 2011-17, passed 12-12-11)  Penalty, see § 76.99



Cross-reference:



   Fire Code provisions, see F-311.1



§ 76.99  PENALTY.



   Unless otherwise specified, whoever violates a provision of this
chapter shall be fined and/or sentenced pursuant to § 70.99. Each day of
violation shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such.



('69 Code, § 75.99) (Ord. C-307, passed 4-13-70; Am. Ord. 2011-17, passed
12-12-11)



CHAPTER 77: TRAFFIC SCHEDULES



Section



   77.01   Parking prohibited



   77.02   Through traffic



   77.03   Heavy vehicles prohibited



   77.04   Left turns prohibited



§ 77.01  PARKING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall park any vehicle of any kind on the fire lane
(side of street where fire hydrants are located) of the following streets:



   Elbrook Avenue



   Meadowridge Lane



   Bluegrass Lane



('69 Code, Ch. 76, Sch. I)  (Ord. C-172, passed 3-13-61; Am. Ord. C-453,
passed 2-13-78)



   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 77.02  THROUGH TRAFFIC.



   (A)   Between 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 a.m. and between 4:00 p.m. and 6:00
p.m., it shall be unlawful for through traffic to pass over the following
streets:



   Springvalley Drive



   Fairhaven Lane



   Longmeadow Lane



('69 Code, Ch. 76, Sch. II)  (Ord. C-146, passed 9-14-59)



   (B)   It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any motor
vehicle over the service drive in Beechlands Acres Subdivision in traveling
in either direction between the termini of Section Road and Ridge Road in the
village.



('69 Code, Ch. 76, Sch. II)  (Ord. C-197, passed 7-9-59)



   (C)   Whoever violates any provision of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 77.03  HEAVY VEHICLES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful to operate a tractor, semi-trailer or
trailer, or any vehicle which, together with its load, weighs in excess of
20,000 pounds, over the following roadways within the corporate limits of the
village.



   Section Road



   Elbrook Avenue



   (B)   Division (A) above shall not be construed so as to prohibit
pickup from or delivery to places in the village to which there are no other
streets or access.



('69 Code, Ch. 76, Sch. III)  (Ord. C-123, passed 12-8-58)



   (C)   Whoever violates any provision of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.



Penalty, see § 70.99



§ 77.04  LEFT TURNS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No operator of any motor vehicle seeking to enter or exit from
property on the south side of Section Road from its intersection with Knoll
Road to a point 1,000 feet east of said intersection, shall make a left turn
in entering or exiting from said property.



('69 Code, Ch. 76, Sch. IV)  (Ord. C-221, passed 3-30-64)



   (B)   Whoever violates any provision of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.



Penalty, see § 70.99



TITLE IX: GENERAL REGULATIONS



      Chapter




         90.   ANIMALS





         91.   BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEMS





         92.   FIREWORKS, EXPLOSIVES, FIRE PREVENTION





         93.   INCOME TAX, EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 1971 THROUGH
DECEMBER 31, 2015





         94.   INTOXICATING LIQUORS





         95.   NUISANCES





         96.   SANITATION, HEALTH, AND SAFETY





         97.   STREETS AND SIDEWALKS





         98.   POOLS AND VILLAGE-OWNED TENNIS COURTS





         99.   CABLE TELEVISION RATES REGULATIONS





         100.   TREES





         101.   INCOME TAX, EFFECTIVE BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2016





         102.   HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION; DIVERSITY AND INCLUSION




CHAPTER 90: ANIMALS



Section



Animals Running at Large



   90.01   Definition



   90.02   Animals running at large; nuisance, dangerous or vicious
dogs; hearings



   90.03   (Reserved)



Offenses Relating to Domestic Animals



   90.15   Abandoning animals



   90.16   Enticing dogs



   90.17   Injuring animals



   90.18   Poisoning animals



   90.19   Cruelty to animals; cruelty to companion animals



   90.20   Animal fights



   90.21   Trapshooting



   90.22   Loud dogs



   90.23   Hunting and trapping



   90.24   Sexual conduct with an animal



Rabies Control



   90.40   Inoculation required



   90.41   Metal tag required



   90.42   Certificate of inoculation



   90.43   Refusal to show certificate



   90.44   Exposure to rabies



Deer Management Program



   90.50   Culling; management of deer population



 



   90.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



    Chickens, zoning regulations, see § 154.54



Statutory reference:



    Possession of dangerous wild animals and restricted snakes,
requirements and licensing, see R.C. Chapter 935



    Rabies: report of dog bite, confinement of animal, report of suspected
rabid animal, see O.A.C. §§ 3701-3-28 et seq.



ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE



§ 90.01  DEFINITION.



   For purposes of this chapter the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   DOG OWNER or DOG HARBORER. Any person who permits any dog to habitually
remain or to be lodged or fed within his residence, or appurtenant buildings
on his property, shall be considered the owner or harborer of the dog.



('69 Code, § 90.01)  (Ord. C-165, passed 11-14-60)



§ 90.02  ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE; NUISANCE, DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS DOGS;
HEARINGS.



   (A)   Animals running at large.



      (1)   No person, who is the owner or keeper of horses, mules,
cattle, bison, sheep, goats, swine, llamas, alpacas, or poultry, shall permit
them to run at large in the public road, highway, street, lane, or alley, or
upon unenclosed land, or cause the animals to be herded, kept, or detained
for the purpose of grazing on premises other than those owned or lawfully
occupied by the owner or keeper of the animals.



(R.C. § 951.02)



      (2)   Whoever recklessly violates division (A)(1) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 951.99)



      (3)   The owner or keeper of an animal described in division
(A)(1) of this section who negligently permits it to run at large in
violation of division (A)(1) of this section is liable for all damages
resulting from injury, death, or loss to person or property caused by the
animal in any of the places specified in division (A)(1) of this section or
upon the premises of another without reference to the fence that may enclose
the premises.



      (4)   The running at large of any animal specified in division
(A)(1) of this section in or upon any of the places specified in division
(A)(1) of this section is prima facie evidence in a civil action for damages
under division (A)(3) of this section that the owner or keeper of the animal
negligently permitted the animal to run at large in violation of division
(A)(1) of this section.



(R.C. § 951.10)



   (B)   Dogs running at large; dangerous dogs; debarked or surgically
silenced dangerous dogs.



      (1)   As used in this division (B), DANGEROUS DOG has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 955.11.



      (2)   No owner, keeper, or harborer of any female dog shall
permit it to go beyond the premises of the owner, keeper, or harborer at any
time the dog is in heat unless the dog is properly in leash.



      (3)   Except when a dog is lawfully engaged in hunting and
accompanied by the owner, keeper, harborer, or handler of the dog, no owner,
keeper, or harborer of any dog shall fail at any time to do either of the
following:



         (a)   Keep the dog physically confined or restrained
upon the premises of the owner, keeper, or harborer by a leash, tether,
adequate fence, supervision, or secure enclosure to prevent escape;



         (b)   Keep the dog under the reasonable control of some
person.



      (4)   Except when a dangerous dog is lawfully engaged in
hunting or training for the purpose of hunting and is accompanied by the
owner, keeper, harborer, or handler of the dog, no owner, keeper, or harborer
of a dangerous dog shall fail to do either of the following:



         (a)   While the dog is on the premises of the owner,
keeper, or harborer, securely confine it at all times in a locked pen that
has a top, locked fenced yard, or other locked enclosure that has a top.



         (b)   While the dog is off the premises of the owner,
keeper, or harborer, keep that dog on a chain-link leash or tether that is
not more than six feet in length and additionally do at least one of the
following: keep the dog in a locked pen that has a top, locked fenced yard,
or other locked enclosure that has a top; have the leash or tether controlled
by a person who is of suitable age and discretion or securely attach, tie, or
affix the leash or tether to the ground or a stationary object or fixture so
that the dog is adequately restrained and station a person in close enough
proximity to that dog so as to prevent it from causing injury to any person;
or muzzle that dog.



      (5)   No person who has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
three or more violations of division (B)(3) of this section involving the
same dog and no owner, keeper, or harborer of a dangerous dog shall fail to
do the following:



         (a)   Obtain liability insurance with an insurer
authorized to write liability insurance in this state providing coverage in
each occurrence because of damage or bodily injury to or death of a person
caused by the dangerous dog if so ordered by a court and provide proof of
that liability insurance upon request to any law enforcement officer, county
dog warden, or public health official charged with enforcing this section;



         (b)   Obtain a dangerous dog registration certificate
from the County Auditor pursuant to division (B)(9) of this section, affix a
tag that identifies the dog as a dangerous dog to the dog’s collar, and
ensure that the dog wears the collar and tag at all times;



         (c)   Notify the local dog warden immediately if any of
the following occurs:



            1.   The dog is loose or unconfined.



            2.   The dog bites a person, unless the dog is on
the property of the owner of the dog, and the person who is bitten is
unlawfully trespassing or committing a criminal act within the boundaries of
that property.



            3.   The dog attacks another animal while the dog
is off the property of the owner of the dog.



         (d)   If the dog is sold, given to another person, or
dies, notify the County Auditor within ten days of the sale, transfer, or
death.



      (6)   No person shall do any of the following:



         (a)   Debark or surgically silence a dog that the person
knows or has reason to believe is a dangerous dog;



         (b)   Possess a dangerous dog if the person knows or has
reason to believe that the dog has been debarked or surgically silenced;



         (c)   Falsely attest on a waiver form provided by the
veterinarian under division (B)(7) of this section that the person’s dog is
not a dangerous dog or otherwise provide false information on that written
waiver form.



      (7)   Before a veterinarian debarks or surgically silences a
dog, the veterinarian may give the owner of the dog a written waiver form
that attests that the dog is not a dangerous dog. The written waiver form
shall include all of the following:



         (a)   The veterinarian’s license number and current
business address;



         (b)   The number of the license of the dog if the dog is
licensed;



         (c)   A reasonable description of the age, coloring, and
gender of the dog as well as any notable markings on the dog;



         (d)   The signature of the owner of the dog attesting
that the owner’s dog is not a dangerous dog;



         (e)   A statement that R.C. § 955.22(F) prohibits any
person from doing any of the following:



            1.   Debarking or surgically silencing a dog that
the person knows or has reason to believe is a dangerous dog;



            2.   Possessing a dangerous dog if the person
knows or has reason to believe that the dog has been debarked or surgically
silenced;



            3.   Falsely attesting on a waiver form provided
by the veterinarian under R.C. § 955.22(G) that the person’s dog is not a
dangerous dog or otherwise provide false information on that written waiver
form.



      (8)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of a violation
of division (B)(6) of this section that the veterinarian who is charged with
the violation obtained, prior to debarking or surgically silencing the dog, a
written waiver form that complies with division (B)(7) of this section and
that attests that the dog is not a dangerous dog.



      (9)   (a)   The County Auditor shall issue a dangerous dog
registration certificate to a person who is the owner of a dog, who is 18
years of age or older, and who provides the following to the County Auditor:



            1.   A fee of $50;



            2.   The person’s address, phone number, and
other appropriate means for the local dog warden or County Auditor to contact
the person;



            3.   With respect to the person and the dog for
which the registration is sought, all of the following:



               a.   Either satisfactory evidence of the
dog’s current rabies vaccination or a statement from a licensed
veterinarian that a rabies vaccination is medically contraindicated for the
dog;



               b.    Either satisfactory evidence of the
fact that the dog has been neutered or spayed or a statement from a licensed
veterinarian that neutering or spaying of the dog is medically
contraindicated;



               c.   Satisfactory evidence of the fact that
the person has posted and will continue to post clearly visible signs at the
person’s residence warning both minors and adults of the presence of a
dangerous dog on the property;



               d.   Satisfactory evidence of the fact that
the dog has been permanently identified by means of a microchip and the
dog’s microchip number.



         (b)   Upon the issuance of a dangerous dog registration
certificate to the owner of a dog, the County Auditor shall provide the owner
with a uniformly designed tag that identifies the animal as a dangerous dog.
The owner shall renew the certificate annually for the same fee and in the
same manner as the initial certificate was obtained. If a certificate holder
relocates to a new county, the certificate holder shall follow the procedure
in division (B)(9)(c)2. of this section and, upon the expiration of the
certificate issued in the original county, shall renew the certificate in the
new county.



         (c)   1.   If the owner of a dangerous dog for whom a
registration certificate has previously been obtained relocates to a new
address within the same county, the owner shall provide notice of the new
address to the County Auditor within ten days of relocating to the new
address.



            2.   If the owner of a dangerous dog for whom a
registration certificate has previously been obtained relocates to a new
address within another county, the owner shall do both of the following
within ten days of relocating to the new address:



               a.   Provide written notice of the new
address and a copy of the original dangerous dog registration certificate to
the County Auditor of the new county;



               b.   Provide written notice of the new
address to the County Auditor of the county where the owner previously
resided.



         (d)   The owner of a dangerous dog shall present the
dangerous dog registration certificate upon being requested to do so by any
law enforcement officer, dog warden, or public health official charged with
enforcing this section.



(R.C. § 955.22)



   (C)   Hearing.



      (1)   The municipal court or county court that has territorial
jurisdiction over the residence of the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog
shall conduct any hearing concerning the designation of the dog as a nuisance
dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog.



      (2)   If a person who is authorized to enforce this chapter
has reasonable cause to believe that a dog in the person’s jurisdiction is
a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog, the person shall notify the
owner, keeper, or harborer of that dog, by certified mail or in person, of
both of the following:



         (a)   That the person has designated the dog a nuisance
dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog, as applicable;



         (b)   That the owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog may
request a hearing regarding the designation in accordance with this division
(C). The notice shall include instructions for filing a request for a hearing
in the county in which the dog’s owner, keeper, or harborer resides.



      (3)   If the owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog disagrees
with the designation of the dog as a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious
dog, as applicable, the owner, keeper, or harborer, not later than ten days
after receiving notification of the designation, may request a hearing
regarding the determination. The request for a hearing shall be in writing
and shall be filed with the municipal court or county court that has
territorial jurisdiction over the residence of the dog’s owner, keeper, or
harborer. At the hearing, the person who designated the dog as a nuisance
dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog has the burden of proving, by clear and
convincing evidence, that the dog is a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or
vicious dog. The owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog or the person who
designated the dog as a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog may
appeal the court’s final determination as in any other case filed in that
court.



      (4)   A court, upon motion of an owner, keeper, or harborer or
an attorney representing the owner, keeper, or harborer, may order that the
dog designated as a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog be held in
the possession of the owner, keeper, or harborer until the court makes a
final determination under this section or during the pendency of an appeal,
as applicable. Until the court makes a final determination and during the
pendency of any appeal, the dog shall be confined or restrained in accordance
with the provisions of division (B)(4) that apply to dangerous dogs
regardless of whether the dog has been designated as a vicious dog or a
nuisance dog rather than a dangerous dog. The owner, keeper, or harborer of
the dog shall not be required to comply with any other requirements
established in this Code or the Ohio Revised Code that concern a nuisance
dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog, as applicable, until the court makes a
final determination and during the pendency of any appeal.



      (5)   If a dog is finally determined under this division (C),
or on appeal as described in this division (C), to be a vicious dog, §
90.28(D) and divisions (B)(4) to (B)(9) of this section apply with respect to
the dog and the owner, keeper, or harborer of the dog as if the dog were a
dangerous dog, and § 90.36 applies with respect to the dog as if it were a
dangerous dog, and the court shall issue an order that specifies that those
provisions apply with respect to the dog and the owner, keeper, or harborer
in that manner. As part of the order, the court shall require the owner,
keeper, or harborer to obtain the liability insurance required under division
(B)(5)(a) in an amount described in division (D)(4)(b) of this section.



      (6)   As used in this division (C), NUISANCE DOG, DANGEROUS
DOG, and VICIOUS DOG have the same meanings as in R.C. § 955.11.



(R.C. § 955.222)



   (D)   Penalty.



      (1)   (a)   Whoever violates division (B)(2) of this
section or commits a violation of division (B)(3) of this section that
involves a dog that is not a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or vicious dog
shall be fined not less than $25 or more than $100 on a first offense, and on
each subsequent offense shall be fined not less than $75 or more than $250
and may be imprisoned for not more than 30 days.



         (b)   In addition to the penalties prescribed in
division (D)(1)(a) of this section, if the offender is guilty of a violation
of division (B)(2) of this section or a violation of division (B)(3) of this
section that involves a dog that is not a nuisance dog, dangerous dog, or
vicious dog, the court may order the offender to personally supervise the dog
that the offender owns, keeps, or harbors, to cause that dog to complete dog
obedience training, or to do both.



(R.C. § 955.99(E))



      (2)   (a)   Whoever commits a violation of division (B)(3)
of this section that involves a nuisance dog is guilty of a minor misdemeanor
on the first offense and of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on each
subsequent offense involving the same dog. Upon a person being convicted of
or pleading guilty to a third violation of division (B)(3) of this section
involving the same dog, the court shall require the offender to register the
involved dog as a dangerous dog.



         (b)   In addition to the penalties prescribed in
division (D)(2)(a) of this section, if a violation of division (B)(3) of this
section involves a nuisance dog, the court may order the offender to
personally supervise the nuisance dog that the offender owns, keeps, or
harbors, to cause that dog to complete dog obedience training, or to do both.



(R.C. § 955.99(F))



      (3)   Whoever commits a violation of division (B)(3) of this
section that involves a dangerous dog, or a violation of division (B)(4) of
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first
offense and of a misdemeanor of the third degree on each subsequent offense.
Additionally, the court may order the offender to personally supervise the
dangerous dog that the offender owns, keeps, or harbors, to cause that dog to
complete dog obedience training, or to do both, and the court may order the
offender to obtain liability insurance pursuant to division (B)(5) of this
section. The court, in the alternative, may order the dangerous dog to be
humanely destroyed by a licensed veterinarian, the county dog warden, or the
county humane society at the owner’s expense. With respect to a violation
of division (B)(3) of this section that involves a dangerous dog, until the
court makes a final determination and during the pendency of any appeal of a
violation of that division and at the discretion of the dog warden, the dog
shall be confined or restrained in accordance with division (B)(4) of this
section or at the county dog pound at the owner’s expense.



(R.C. § 955.99(G))



      (4)   (a)   Whoever commits a violation of division (B)(3)
of this section that involves a vicious dog is guilty of one of the following:



            1.   A felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law if the dog kills or seriously injures a person. Additionally, the
court shall order that the vicious dog be humanely destroyed by a licensed
veterinarian, the county dog warden, or the county humane society at the
owner’s expense.



            2.   A misdemeanor of the first degree if the dog
causes serious injury to a person. Additionally, the court may order the
vicious dog to be humanely destroyed by a licensed veterinarian, the county
dog warden, or the county humane society at the owner’s expense.



         (b)   If the court does not order the vicious dog to be
destroyed under division (D)(4)(a)2. of this section, the court shall issue
an order that specifies that § 90.28(D) and divisions (B)(4) to (B)(9) of
this section apply with respect to the dog and the owner, keeper, or harborer
of the dog as if the dog were a dangerous dog and that § 90.36 applies with
respect to the dog as if it were a dangerous dog. As part of the order, the
court shall order the offender to obtain the liability insurance required
under division (B)(5)(a) of this section in an amount, exclusive of interest
and costs, that equals or exceeds $100,000. Until the court makes a final
determination and during the pendency of any appeal of a violation of
division (B)(3) of this section and at the discretion of the dog warden, the
dog shall be confined or restrained in accordance with the provisions
described in division (B)(4) of this section or at the county dog pound at
the owner’s expense.



(R.C. § 955.99(H))



      (5)   Whoever violates division (B)(5)(b) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 955.99(J))



      (6)   Whoever violates division (B)(6)(a), (B)(6)(b), or
(B)(6)(c) of this section is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. Additionally, the court shall order that the dog
involved in the violation be humanely destroyed by a licensed veterinarian,
the county dog warden, or the county humane society. Until the court makes a
final determination and during the pendency of any appeal of a violation of
division (B)(6)(a), (B)(6)(b), or (B)(6)(c) of this section and at the
discretion of the dog warden, the dog shall be confined or restrained in
accordance with the provisions of division (B)(4) of this section or at the
county dog pound at the owner’s expense.



(R.C. § 955.99(L))



      (7)   Whoever violates division (B)(5)(a), (B)(5)(c), or
(B)(5)(d) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 955.99(M))



      (8)   Whoever violates division (B)(9)(d) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 955.99(N))



      (9)   (a)   If a dog is confined at the county dog pound
pursuant to division (D)(3), (D)(4), or (D)(6) of this section, the county
dog warden shall give written notice of the confinement to the owner of the
dog. If the county dog warden is unable to give the notice to the owner of
the dog, the county dog warden shall post the notice on the door of the
residence of the owner of the dog or in another conspicuous place on the
premises at which the dog was seized. The notice shall include a statement
that a security in the amount of $100 is due to the county dog warden within
ten days to secure payment of all reasonable expenses, including medical care
and boarding of the dog for 60 days, expected to be incurred by the county
dog pound in caring for the dog pending the determination. The county dog
warden may draw from the security any actual costs incurred in caring for the
dog.



         (b)   If the person ordered to post security under
division (D)(9)(a) of this section does not do so within ten days of the
confinement of the animal, the dog is forfeited, and the county dog warden
may determine the disposition of the dog unless the court issues an order
that specifies otherwise.



         (c)   Not more than ten days after the court makes a
final determination under division (D)(3), (D)(4), or (D)(6) of this section,
the county dog warden shall provide the owner of the dog with the actual cost
of the confinement of the dog. If the county dog warden finds that the
security provided under division (D)(9)(a) of this section is less than the
actual cost of confinement of the dog, the owner shall remit the difference
between the security provided and the actual cost to the county dog warden
within 30 days after the court’s determination. If the county dog warden
finds that the security provided under division (D)(9)(a) of this section is
greater than that actual cost, the county dog warden shall remit the
difference between the security provided and the actual cost to the owner
within 30 days after the court’s determination.



(R.C. § 955.99(P))



      (10)   As used in this division (D), NUISANCE DOG, DANGEROUS
DOG, and VICIOUS DOG have the same meanings as in R.C. § 955.11.



(R.C. § 955.99(Q))



Statutory reference:



   Power of municipality to regulate animals running at large, see R.C.
§§ 715.23 and 955.221



Cross-reference:



   Damage to gardens and lawns by animals, see § 95.51



§ 90.03  (RESERVED)



OFFENSES RELATING TO DOMESTIC ANIMALS



§ 90.15  ABANDONING ANIMALS.



   (A)   No owner or keeper of a dog, cat, or other domestic animal
shall abandon the animal.



(R.C. § 959.01)



   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree on a first offense and a misdemeanor of the
first degree on each subsequent offense.



(R.C. § 959.99(E)(2))



§ 90.16  ENTICING DOGS.



   No person shall entice any dog from the premises of the person owning
or harboring the same, with the intent to deprive the owner of the possession
of the animal.



('69 Code, § 90.09)  (Ord. C-139, passed 4-13-59)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.17  INJURING ANIMALS.



   (A)   No person shall maliciously, or willfully and without the
consent of the owner, kill or injure a horse, mare, foal, filly, jack, mule,
sheep, goat, cow, steer, bull, heifer, ass, ox, swine, dog, cat, or other
domestic animal that is the property of another.  This section does not
apply to a licensed veterinarian acting in an official capacity.



(R.C. § 959.02) 



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
second degree.  If the value of the animal killed or the injury done amounts
to $300 or more, whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 959.99(B))



§ 90.18  POISONING ANIMALS.



   (A)   No person shall maliciously, or willfully and without the
consent of the owner, administer poison, except a licensed veterinarian
acting in such capacity, to a horse, mare, foal, filly, jack, mule, sheep,
goat, cow, steer, bull, heifer, ass, ox, swine, dog, cat, poultry, or any
other domestic animal that is the property of another; and no person shall,
willfully and without the consent of the owner, place any poisoned food where
it may be easily found and eaten by any of these animals, either upon his own
lands or the lands of another.



(R.C. § 959.03)  ('69 Code, § 90.10) (Ord. C-139, passed 4-13-59) 



   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 959.99(C))



§ 90.19  CRUELTY TO ANIMALS; CRUELTY TO COMPANION ANIMALS.



   (A)   No person shall:



      (1)   Torture an animal, deprive one of necessary sustenance,
unnecessarily or cruelly beat, needlessly mutilate or kill, or impound or
confine an animal without supplying it during the confinement with a
sufficient quantity of good wholesome food and water;



      (2)   Impound or confine an animal without affording it,
during the confinement, access to shelter from wind, rain, snow, or excessive
direct sunlight, if it can reasonably be expected that the animal would
otherwise become sick or in some other way suffer. This division does not
apply to animals impounded or confined prior to slaughter. For the purpose of
this section, SHELTER means an artificial enclosure, windbreak, sunshade, or
natural windbreak or sunshade that is developed from the earth's contour,
tree development, or vegetation;



      (3)   Carry or convey an animal in a cruel or inhuman manner;



      (4)   Keep animals other than cattle, poultry or fowl, swine,
sheep, or goats in an enclosure without wholesome exercise and change of air,
nor feed cows on food that produces impure or unwholesome milk;



      (5)   Detain livestock in railroad cars or compartments longer
than 28 hours after they are so placed without supplying them with necessary
food, water, and attention, nor permit the stock to be so crowded as to
overlie, crush, wound, or kill each other.



   (B)   Upon the written request of the owner or person in custody of
any particular shipment of livestock, which written request shall be separate
and apart from any printed bill of lading or other railroad form, the length
of time in which the livestock may be detained in any cars or compartment
without food, water, and attention may be extended to 36 hours without
penalty therefor. Division (A) of this section does not prevent the dehorning
of cattle.



   (C)   All fines collected for violations of division (A) of this
section shall be paid to the society or association for the prevention of
cruelty to animals, if there is one in the municipality; otherwise, all fines
shall be paid to the general fund.



(R.C. § 959.13)  ('69 Code, § 90.08)  (Ord. C-139, passed 4-13-59)



   (D)   Cruelty to companion animals.



      (1)   As used in this section:



         BOARDING KENNEL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 956.01.



         CAPTIVE WHITE-TAILED DEER. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 1531.01.



         COMPANION ANIMAL. Means any animal that is kept inside a
residential dwelling and any dog or cat regardless of where it is kept,
including a pet store as defined in R.C. § 956.01. COMPANION ANIMAL does not
include livestock or any wild animal.



         CRUELTY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1717.01.



         DOG KENNEL. Means an animal rescue for dogs that is
registered under R.C. § 956.06, a boarding kennel, or a training kennel.



         FEDERAL ANIMAL WELFARE ACT. Means the “Laboratory Animal
Act of 1966,” Pub. L. No. 89-544, 80 Stat. 350 (1966), 7 U.S.C. §§ 2131
et seq., as amended by the “Animal Welfare Act of 1970,” Pub. L. No.
91-579, 84 Stat. 1560 (1970), the “Animal Welfare Act Amendments of
1976,” Pub. L. No. 94-279, 90 Stat. 417 (1976), and the “Food Security
Act of 1985,” Pub. L. No. 99-198, 99 Stat. 1354 (1985), and as it may be
subsequently amended.



         LIVESTOCK. Means horses, mules, and other equidae; cattle,
sheep, goats, and other bovidae; swine and other suidae; poultry; alpacas;
llamas; captive white-tailed deer; and any other animal that is raised or
maintained domestically for food or fiber.



         PRACTICE OF VETERINARY MEDICINE. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 4741.01.



         RESIDENTIAL DWELLING. Means a structure or shelter or the
portion of a structure or shelter that is used by one or more humans for the
purpose of a habitation.



         SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM. Means any of the following:



            1.   Physical harm that carries an unnecessary or
unjustifiable substantial risk of death;



            2.   Physical harm that involves either partial or
total permanent incapacity;



            3.   Physical harm that involves acute pain of a
duration that results in substantial suffering or that involves any degree of
prolonged or intractable pain;



            4.   Physical harm that results from a person who
confines or who is the custodian or caretaker of a companion animal depriving
the companion animal of good, wholesome food and water that proximately
causes the death of the companion animal.



         TORMENT and TORTURE.  Have the same meanings as in R.C. §
1717.01.



         TRAINING KENNEL. Means an establishment operating for
profit that keeps, houses, and maintains dogs for the purpose of training the
dogs in return for a fee or other consideration.



         WILD ANIMAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1531.01.



      (2)   No person shall knowingly torture, torment, needlessly
mutilate or maim, cruelly beat, poison, needlessly kill, or commit an act of
cruelty against a companion animal.



      (3)   No person shall knowingly cause serious physical harm to
a companion animal.



      (4)   No person who confines or who is the custodian or
caretaker of a companion animal shall negligently do any of the following:



         (a)   Torture, torment, or commit an act of cruelty
against the companion animal;



         (b)   Deprive the companion animal of necessary
sustenance or confine the companion animal without supplying it during the
confinement with sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if
it can reasonably be expected that the companion animal would become sick or
suffer in any other way as a result of or due to the deprivation or
confinement;



         (c)   Impound or confine the companion animal without
affording it, during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter
from heat, cold, wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it can
reasonably be expected that the companion animal would become sick or suffer
in any other way as a result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.



      (5)   No owner, manager, or employee of a dog kennel who
confines or is the custodian or caretaker of a companion animal shall
knowingly do any of the following:



         (a)   Torture, torment, needlessly mutilate or maim,
cruelly beat, poison, needlessly kill, or commit an act of cruelty against
the companion animal;



         (b)   Deprive the companion animal of necessary
sustenance or confine the companion animal without supplying it during the
confinement with sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if
it is reasonably expected that the companion animal would die or experience
unnecessary or unjustifiable pain or suffering as a result of the deprivation
or confinement;



         (c)   Impound or confine the companion animal without
affording it, during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter
from heat, cold, wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it is
reasonably expected that the companion animal would die or experience
unnecessary or unjustifiable pain or suffering as a result of or due to the
lack of adequate shelter.



      (6)   No owner, manager, or employee of a dog kennel who
confines or is the custodian or caretaker of a companion animal shall
negligently do any of the following:



         (a)   Torture, torment, or commit an act of cruelty
against the companion animal;



         (b)   Deprive the companion animal of necessary
sustenance or confine the companion animal without supplying it during the
confinement with sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if
it can reasonably be expected that the companion animal would become sick or
suffer in any other way as a result of or due to the deprivation or
confinement;



         (c)   Impound or confine the companion animal without
affording it, during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter
from heat, cold, wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it can
reasonably be expected that the companion animal would become sick or suffer
in any other way as a result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.



      (7)   Divisions (D)(2), (D)(3), (D)(4), (D)(5), and (D)(6) of
this section do not apply to any of the following:



         (a)   A companion animal used in scientific research
conducted by an institution in accordance with the federal animal welfare act
and related regulations;



         (b)   The lawful practice of veterinary medicine by a
person who has been issued a license, temporary permit, or registration
certificate to do so under R.C. Chapter 4741;



         (c)   Dogs being used or intended for use for hunting or
field trial purposes, provided that the dogs are being treated in accordance
with usual and commonly accepted practices for the care of hunting dogs;



         (d)   The use of common training devices, if the
companion animal is being treated in accordance with usual and commonly
accepted practices for the training of animals;



         (e)   The administering of medicine to a companion
animal that was properly prescribed by a person who has been issued a
license, temporary permit, or registration certificate under R.C. Chapter
4741.



      (8)   Notwithstanding any section of the Ohio Revised Code
that otherwise provides for the distribution of fine moneys, the Clerk of
Court shall forward all fines the Clerk collects that are so imposed for any
violation of this division (D) to the Treasurer of the municipality, whose
county humane society or law enforcement agency is to be paid the fine money
as determined under this division. The Treasurer shall pay the fine moneys to
the county humane society or the county, township, municipal corporation, or
state law enforcement agency in this state that primarily was responsible for
or involved in the investigation and prosecution of the violation. If a
county humane society receives any fine moneys under this division, the
county humane society shall use the fine moneys either to provide the
training that is required for humane agents under section R.C. § 1717.06 or
to provide additional training for humane agents.



(R.C. § 959.131)



   (E)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree. In addition, the court may order the
offender to forfeit the animal or livestock and may provide for its
disposition including, but not limited to, the sale of the animal or
livestock. If an animal or livestock is forfeited and sold pursuant to this
division, the proceeds from the sale first shall be applied to pay the
expenses incurred with regard to the care of the animal from the time it was
taken from the custody of the former owner. The balance of the proceeds from
the sale, if any, shall be paid to the former owner of the animal.



(R.C. § 959.99(D))



   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (D)(2) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense and a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (D)(3) of this section is
guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (3)   Whoever violates division (D)(4) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree on a first offense and a
misdemeanor of the first degree on each subsequent offense.



      (4)   Whoever violates division (D)(5) of this section is
guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (5)   Whoever violates division (D)(6) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (6)   (a)   A court may order a person who is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a violation of division (D) of this section to forfeit to
an impounding agency, as defined in R.C. § 959.132, any or all of the
companion animals in that person’s ownership or care. The court also may
prohibit or place limitations on the person’s ability to own or care for
any companion animals for a specified or indefinite period of time.



         (b)   A court may order a person who is convicted of or
pleads guilty to a violation of division (D) of this section to reimburse an
impounding agency for the reasonably necessary costs incurred by the agency
for the care of a companion animal that the agency impounded as a result of
the investigation or prosecution of the violation, provided that the costs
were not otherwise paid under R.C. § 959.132.



      (7)   If a court has reason to believe that a person who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (D) of this section
suffers from a mental or emotional disorder that contributed to the
violation, the court may impose as a community control sanction or as a
condition of probation a requirement that the offender undergo psychological
evaluation or counseling. The court shall order the offender to pay the costs
of the evaluation or counseling.



(R.C. § 959.99(E)) 



Statutory reference:



   Impoundment of companion animals; notice and hearing, see R.C. §
959.132



§ 90.20  ANIMAL FIGHTS.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly do either of the following:



      (1)   Engage in cockfighting, bearbaiting, or pitting an
animal against another;



      (2)   Use, train, or possess any animal for seizing,
detaining, or maltreating a domestic animal.



   (B)   No person shall knowingly do either of the following:



      (1)   Be employed at cockfighting, bearbaiting, or pitting an
animal against another;



      (2)   Do any of the following regarding an event involving
cockfighting, bearbaiting, or pitting an animal against another:



         (a)   Wager money or anything else of value on the
results of the event;



         (b)   Pay money or give anything else of value in
exchange for admission to or being present at the event;



         (c)   Receive money or anything else of value in
exchange for the admission of another person to the event or for another
person to be present at the event;



         (d)   Use, possess, or permit or cause to be present at
the event any device or substance intended to enhance an animal’s ability
to fight or to inflict injury on another animal;



         (e)   Permit or cause a minor to be present at the event
if any person present at or involved with the event is conducting any of the
activities described in division (B)(1) or (B)(2)(a), (B)(2)(b), (B)(2)(c),
or (B)(2)(d) of this section.



   (C)   A person who knowingly witnesses cockfighting, bearbaiting, or
an event in which one animal is pitted against another when a violation of
division (B) of this section is occurring at the cockfighting, bearbaiting,
or event is an aider and abettor and has committed a violation of this
division.



(R.C. § 959.15)



   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) or (C) of this section is
guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. §  959.99(C), (I))



Statutory reference:



   Dogfighting, felony provisions, see R.C. § 959.16



§ 90.21  TRAPSHOOTING.



   (A)   Live birds or fowl shall not be used as targets in
trapshooting.



(R.C. § 959.17)



   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 959.99(C)) 



§ 90.22  LOUD DOGS.



   (A)   No person shall own, harbor or keep in custody a dog which
disturbs the peace by barking, yelping, howling or making other loud noises
to the annoyance and/or discomfort of any person. Continuous barking,
yelping, howling and/or making other loud noises for 15 consecutive minutes
by such dog, whether confined inside a residence or building or to the
outside area, shall be deemed to have disturbed the peace and to have caused
the annoyance and discomfort of persons; provided, that at the time of the
complaint, no person or persons were trespassing or threatening to trespass
upon the private property of the owner, and provided that the dog was not
being teased or provoked in any manner.



   (B)   Any person who shall allow any dog habitually to remain, be
lodged or fed within any dwelling, building, yard or enclosure owned or
occupied by such person shall be considered as harboring or keeping such dog.



   (C)   Upon an initial complaint, an enforcement officer shall warn
the person in writing of the violation. Upon a second such complaint within
30 days, the enforcement officer shall charge the person with a violation of
this section.



   (D)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to owners,
operators or employees of licensed veterinary hospitals, licensed kennels, or
licensed animal boarding establishments, nor does this section apply to
blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility impaired persons when the dog
serves as an assistance dog.



   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



('69 Code, § 90.04)  (Ord. C-139, passed 4-13-59)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.23  HUNTING AND TRAPPING.



   (A)   Definitions.  Unless otherwise provided in this chapter, the
terms used in this chapter have the same meaning as set forth in R.C. §§
1531.01 and 1531.40.



   (B)   Hunting prohibited without a license.



      (1)   No person shall engage in hunting of any kind within the
village.  This section does not apply to an individual who is hired or
appointed by the village and who performs nuisance wild animal removal or
control services as part of the individual’s duties on public property, or
on private property with the property owner’s consent.  This section does
not apply to predatory animals which present an immediate danger to persons
or pets to the extent permitted by federal and state law.



      (2)   PREDATORY ANIMAL means an animal of any kind or species
that regularly preys on other animals, including but not limited to coyotes,
wolves, bears, badgers, foxes, snakes, raccoons, and wild cats.



      (3)   Trapping animals is permitted in accordance with state
law, including but not limited to R.C. § 1531.40 and O.A.C. 1501:31-15-03.



('69 Code, § 92.01)  (Ord. C-124, passed 12-8-58; Am. Ord. 2014-01, passed
1-13-14)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.24  SEXUAL CONDUCT WITH AN ANIMAL.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      ANIMAL. Means a nonhuman mammal, bird, reptile, or amphibian,
either dead or alive.



      OFFENSE. Means a violation of this section or an attempt, in
violation of R.C. § 2923.02, to violate this section.



      OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 959.132.



      SEXUAL CONDUCT. Means either of the following committed for the
purpose of sexual gratification:



         (a)   Any act done between a person and animal that
involves contact of the penis of one and the vulva of the other, the penis of
one and the penis of the other, the penis of one and the anus of the other,
the mouth of one and the penis of the other, the mouth of one and the anus of
the other, the vulva of one and the vulva of the other, the mouth of one and
the vulva of the other, any other contact between a reproductive organ of one
and a reproductive organ of the other, or any other insertion of a
reproductive organ of one into an orifice of the other;



         (b)   Without a bona fide veterinary or animal husbandry
purpose to do so, the insertion, however slight, of any part of a person's
body or any instrument, apparatus, or other object into the vaginal, anal, or
reproductive opening of an animal.



   (B)   No person shall knowingly engage in sexual conduct with an
animal or knowingly possess, sell, or purchase an animal with the intent that
it be subjected to sexual conduct.



   (C)   No person shall knowingly organize, promote, aid, or abet in
the conduct of an act involving any sexual conduct with an animal.



   (D)   An officer may seize and cause to be impounded at an
impounding agency an animal that the officer has probable cause to believe is
the subject of an offense. With respect to an animal so seized and impounded,
all procedures and requirements that are established in R.C. § 959.132, and
all other provisions of that section, apply to the seizure, impoundment, and
disposition of the animal. References in R.C. § 959.132 to “section
959.131 of the Revised Code”, “companion animal”, and “offense”
shall be construed, respectively, as being references to “§ 90.24 of this
Code” and to “animal” and “offense” as defined in this section, for
purposes of application under this section only.



(R.C. § 959.21)



   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree. In addition, the court may order the
offender to forfeit the animal or livestock and may provide for its
disposition including but not limited to the sale of the animal or livestock.
If an animal or livestock is forfeited and sold pursuant to this division,
the proceeds from the sale first shall be applied to pay the expenses
incurred with regard to the care of the animal from the time it was taken
from the custody of the former owner. The balance of the proceeds from the
sale, if any, shall be paid to the former owner of the animal.



(R.C. § 959.99(D))



      (2)   If a court has reason to believe that a person who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section suffers from a
mental or emotional disorder that contributed to the violation, the court may
impose as a community control sanction or as a condition of probation a
requirement that the offender undergo psychological evaluation or counseling.
The court shall order the offender to pay the costs of the evaluation or
counseling.



(R.C. § 959.99(E)(7))



RABIES CONTROL



§ 90.40  INOCULATION REQUIRED.



   No person shall harbor a dog over three months of age within the
village, unless the dog has, within three years previously, been inoculated
against rabies with chick-embryo rabies vaccine by a regularly licensed and
practicing veterinarian.



('69 Code, § 90.11)  (Ord. C-139, passed 4-13-59)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.41  METAL TAG REQUIRED.



   No person shall permit or suffer any dog owned or harbored by him to
run at large within the village, upon or off the premises of such owner or
harborer, without a collar on the dog bearing a metal tag showing that the
dog has been, within a period of three years previously, inoculated against
rabies, as provided in § 90.40.



('69 Code, § 90.12)  (Ord. C-158, passed 2-8-60)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.42  CERTIFICATE OF INOCULATION.



   No person shall own or harbor any dog over three months of age within
the village without having in his possession a certificate of a regularly
licensed and practicing veterinarian, showing that each dog owned or harbored
by him has been, within three-year  period previously, inoculated against
rabies, as required in § 90.40.



('69 Code, § 90.13)  (Ord. C-158, passed 2-8-60)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.43  REFUSAL TO SHOW CERTIFICATE.



   No person owning or harboring a dog over three months of age shall fail
or refuse to exhibit to the Chief of Police, or any police officer, a
certificate of a regularly licensed and practicing veterinarian, showing each
dog owned or harbored by him has been within a three-year period previously,
inoculated against rabies, as provided in § 90.40.



('69 Code, § 90.14)  (Ord. C-158, passed 2-8-60)  Penalty, see § 90.99



§ 90.44  EXPOSURE TO RABIES.



   No person shall own or harbor a dog, within the village, with knowledge
that the dog has been exposed to rabies, unless the dog has been inoculated
against rabies by a regularly licensed and practicing veterinarian, or, if
the dog has not been inoculated, unless the owner or harborer immediately has
the dog treated by a licensed veterinarian as a dog exposed to rabies. 
During such treatment, the dog must be isolated and securely penned up.



('69 Code, § 90.15)  (Ord. C-158, passed 2-8-60)  Penalty, see § 90.99



DEER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM



§ 90.50  CULLING; MANAGEMENT OF DEER POPULATION.



   (A)   The village will conduct a deer count by thermal imaging
technology every third year. In order to control costs, the Village Manager
may enter into an agreement to share costs with the City of Cincinnati, which
owns and operates French Park within Amberley Village, as both jurisdictions
benefit from a reduced deer herd in this area, or other neighboring
jurisdictions.



   (B)   The village is permitted to cull up to 50 deer per calendar
year without additional approval by Council. If the Village Police Department
determines that, due to increased complaints of property damage or an
increase in deer vehicle accidents, a higher number of deer should be culled,
the Police Department may make a request to the Health, Education, & Welfare
Committee to increase the number of deer culled.



   (C)   Deer culling shall only be conducted by members of the Village
Police Department as authorized by the Police Chief. Culling shall be
achieved by trained sharpshooters or crossbows.



   (D)   Prior to culling, notices shall be posted around the culling
area warning persons of the activity, and all culling areas shall be closed
to the public. Culling may not be performed on private property without
written permission from the owner and a release from legal liability approved
by the Solicitor. Any such permission granted shall continue in perpetuity
until withdrawn by the owner.



   (E)   The management of the deer population shall include a
monitoring program which includes, but is not necessarily limited to, the
following:



      (1)   Deer vehicle accidents (DVA).  Village Police will
continue to monitor the number of reported and unreported DVAs occurring
within Amberley Village, and will monitor reports of injured deer and deer
carcasses collected in the village. The village will collect and maintain
records of deer vehicle accidents and property damage complaints via an
online form accessible on the village website. Residents may self-report
incidents on the web form. Information collected by the village will be
reviewed by the Health, Education, & Welfare Committee once per calendar year
in September, in order to assess whether appropriate records are being
maintained.



      (2)   Citizen complaints.  Residential complaints received by
the village will be entered into a database to be utilized in monitoring
progress of selected control methods and providing guidance in recommending
modifications. Complaints of deer damage or traffic related issues can be
made directly to the administration office or by utilizing the Deer Damage
Report on the village's website. This information will be provided to Ohio
Department of Natural Resources Division of Wildlife personnel.



      (3)   Harvested animal inventory.  If required by the Ohio
Division of Natural Resources, pertinent data such as sex of deer, age
(estimated), and weight should be logged on each animal harvested or removed
by other means. Date, time and location should also be included if the
information is available.



      (4)   Public opinion surveys.  Village staff will establish a
form for residents to access online in order to self-report property damage,
injured deer sightings, and unreported DVAs. Additionally, the Health,
Education, and Welfare Committee will survey residents by any available
online survey in order to gauge resident feedback regarding deer management.



      (5)   All data collected by the village will be periodically
reviewed by the Health, Education, & Welfare Committee not less than once per
calendar year. Any changes or amendments to the village deer management
program shall be made and brought before Council's regularly scheduled
October meeting, if necessary.



(Res. 2017-35, passed 10-9-17)



§ 90.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which another
penalty is not specifically provided shall be subject to the penalty as
provided in § 10.99.



CHAPTER 91: BURGLAR ALARM SYSTEMS



Section



   91.01   Definitions



   91.02   Registration of alarm installation firms



   91.03   Investigation of alarm agents



   91.04   Installation by non-registered agent prohibited



   91.05   Installation permit required



   91.06   Non-liability of village



   91.07   Installer to ascertain that permit has been obtained



   91.08   Telephone alarm systems



   91.09   Installation of power indication



   91.10   Control mechanisms to be accessible to police



   91.11   Removal of devices in violation



   91.12   Fees for false alarms



 



   91.99   Penalty



§ 91.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALARM AGENT.  Any person who is employed by an alarm business, either
directly or indirectly, whose duties include any of the following:  selling,
maintaining, leasing, servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, or
installing any alarm system on any building, place, or premises.



   ALARM BUSINESS.  Any person engaged in selling, leasing, maintaining,
servicing, repairing, altering, replacing, moving, or installing any alarm
system or causing to be sold, maintained, serviced, repaired, altered,
replaced, moved, or installed an alarm system in or on any building, place,
or premises.



   ALARM SYSTEM.  Any device designed for the detection of a fire or an
unauthorized entry on premises or for alerting others of the commission of an
unlawful act or both, and which when activated emits a sound, or transmits a
signal or message.



   AUDIBLE ALARM.  A device designed for the detection of fire or an
unauthorized entry on premises, and which when activated, generates an
audible sound on the premises.



   FALSE ALARM. An alarm signal necessitating response by the Village
Police Department where an emergency situation does not exist.



   PROPRIETOR ALARM.  An alarm which is not owned or serviced by an alarm
business.



   SUBSCRIBER.  A person contracting with an alarm business for the
leasing, servicing, or maintaining of an alarm system.



('69 Code, § 98.02)  (Ords. C-352, C-353, passed 8-14-72)



§ 91.02  REGISTRATION OF ALARM INSTALLATION FIRMS.



   It shall be unlawful for any individual or business entity to engage in
the business of installing burglary, fire, or other emergency alarm systems
in residences and other structures within the corporate limits of the village
without first registering in the office of the Village Manager on a form to
be furnished by the village, which shall provide the following information:



   (A)   Name and address of applicant;



   (B)   Full local address of applicant;



   (C)   The name, address, and other necessary pertinent information
of all alarm agents sought to be used in connection with any installation
made in the village.



('69 Code, § 98.03)  (Ord. C-352, passed 8-14-72)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.03  INVESTIGATION OF ALARM AGENTS.



   (A)   Upon receipt of the registration required in § 91.02, the
Village Manager shall forward a copy thereof to the Chief of Police, who
shall cause such investigation of the moral character of all individuals
named therein to be made as he determines necessary for the public good.



   (B)   The Chief of Police is authorized to prohibit access to the
police station to any person who, upon investigation, is found to be, in the
judgment of the Chief of Police, a security risk to the village.



   (C)   The Village Manager shall keep a permanent record of all
persons investigated and the results of such investigations.  The record
shall be privileged and not available for public inspection.  No employee of
the village shall divulge any information obtained in connection with the
investigation of any person indicated on the registration form.  Any breach
of this rule shall be cause for dismissal of the employee.



('69 Code, § 98.04)  (Ord. C-352, passed 8-14-72)



§ 91.04  INSTALLATION BY NON-REGISTERED AGENT PROHIBITED.



   It shall be unlawful for any individual or business entity engaged in
the installation of alarm systems in this village to undertake the
installation of any system through the use of any employee not previously
registered with the Village Manager in accordance with § 91.02.



('69 Code, § 98.05)  (Ord. C-352, passed 8-14-72)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.05  INSTALLATION PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No burglar alarm or other emergency alarm installation in any
residence or other structures in this village shall be undertaken until a
permit for such installation is issued to the subscriber and/or property
owner by the Village Manager.



   (B)   This permit requirement shall also apply to installations
presently installed and terminating at the police station.



   (C)   Application for such permit, to be made by the subscriber
and/or property owner, shall contain the following information:



      (1)   The name and address of the property owner.



      (2)   The location of all alarmed doors, windows, pressure
pads, or other devices which would trigger the alarm system.



      (3)   The location of all alarm consoles and operation
instructions for each alarm location.



      (4)   The name of the company installing the system.



      (5)   The make and model number of the equipment installed.



      (6)   An agreement to deposit a key to the alarm system used
in the residence and to provide access to the main control panel.



      (7)   Agreement to use an assigned code number for the
installation.



   (D)   There shall be a $25 installation and maintenance charge for
all burglar alarm installations terminating at the police station.



('69 Code, §§ 98.06, 98.10)  (Ord. C-353, passed 8-14-72; Am. Ord. C-360,
passed 2-12-73)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.06  NON-LIABILITY OF VILLAGE.



   The village shall not assume any liability whatsoever because of the
issuance or denial of any permit in accordance with this chapter.



('69 Code, § 98.14)  (Ord. C-353, passed 8-14-72)



§ 91.07  INSTALLER TO ASCERTAIN THAT PERMIT HAS BEEN OBTAINED.



   It shall be unlawful for any individual or business entity to engage in
the business of installing burglary, fire, or other emergency alarm systems
in residences or other structures within the corporate limits of the village
without ascertaining that the record property owner has first obtained a
permit therefor in compliance with the provisions of this chapter.



('69 Code, § 98.08)  (Ord. C-353, passed 8-14-72)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.08  TELEPHONE ALARM SYSTEMS.



   No person, firm, or corporation shall use or cause to be used any
electrical or mechanical device or attachment to any telephone in any
burglary, fire, or other emergency alarm system which automatically selects
or dials a telephone or telephone trunk line used by or assigned to the
village for telephone service, which system then transmits over the line a
report or alarm concerning a burglary, fire, or other police emergency.



('69 Code, § 98.07)  (Ords. C-352, C-353, passed 8-14-72)  Penalty, see §
91.99



§ 91.09  INSTALLATION OF POWER INDICATION.



   No burglary or other emergency alarm system terminating at the police
station which utilizes the telephone system serving the Police Department
will be permitted without the installation of power indication at the station
console.



('69 Code, § 98.09)  (Ord. C-353, passed 8-14-72)  Penalty, see § 91.99



§ 91.10  CONTROL MECHANISMS TO BE ACCESSIBLE TO POLICE.



   The Chief of Police shall order disconnected any unit presently
installed in the police station of this village unless the control mechanisms
installed in the residence of the owner are, in the sole judgment of the
Chief of Police, accessible to the Police Department in the event of
emergency.



('69 Code, § 98.13)  (Ord. C-353, passed 8-14-72)



§ 91.11  REMOVAL OF DEVICES IN VIOLATION.



   In addition to all other remedies provided by law, the Chief of Police,
whenever he shall have knowledge of the use of any electrical or mechanical
device or attachment or system for emergency alarms not operated or
maintained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter or the rules and
regulations provided hereunder, shall order the removal of such mechanical
device or attachment.



('69 Code, § 98.12)  (Ord. C-353, passed 8-14-72)



§ 91.12  FEES FOR FALSE ALARMS.



   (A)   There shall be levied against the record property owner a fee
of $15 for each false alarm as defined in § 91.01, except that no fee shall
be imposed for false alarms occurring during the first 30 days of operation
of an alarm installation or during the first 30 days of the occupancy of a
dwelling by a new resident of the village.



   (B)   The Chief of Police shall keep an accurate record of all false
alarms and shall submit a monthly report to the Village Manager for each
alarm installation.  Failure of the owner of property served by a burglar
alarm system to pay the fee imposed by this section within 30 days after
citation shall result in the revocation of the alarm installation permit.



('69 Code, § 98.11)  (Ord. C-353, passed 8-14-72)  Penalty, see § 91.99



Cross-reference:



   Making false alarms, see § 132.09



§ 91.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction,
be punished by a fine not to exceed $150 for each offense.



('69 Code, § 98.99)  (Ords. C-352, C-353, passed 8-14-72; Am. Ord. 2004-17,
passed 7-12-04)



CHAPTER 92: FIREWORKS, EXPLOSIVES, FIRE PREVENTION



Section



Fire Prevention



   92.01   Adoption of Fire Prevention Code



   92.02   Fire inspection



   92.03   Duties and enforcement



   92.04   Definitions



   92.05   Modifications



   92.06   Reports; orders



   92.07   Compliance with orders



   92.08   Civil liability



   92.09   Removal of inflammables; order



   92.10   Protective appliances



   92.11   Districts in which storage of explosives and blasting agents
is prohibited



   92.12   (Reserved)



   92.13   Limits in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gases is
restricted



   92.14   Motor vehicle routes for vehicles transporting flammable and
combustible liquids, hazardous chemicals, and other dangerous articles



   92.15   Placarding buildings or areas



   92.16   (Reserved)



   92.17   Fire bombs prohibited



   92.18   Open burning



   92.19   Deletions from Unified Fire Prevention Code



   92.20   Sections modified or amended



   92.21   Burning buildings for fire fighting instruction



Fireworks and Explosives



   92.30   Definitions



   92.31   Possession, sale and use of fireworks



   92.32   Permit to use fireworks



   92.33   Storage of explosives



   92.34   Blasting permit



 



   92.99   Penalty



FIRE PREVENTION



§ 92.01  ADOPTION OF FIRE PREVENTION CODE.



   There is adopted for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing
conditions hazardous to life and property from fire or explosion, that
certain code known as the Unified Fire Code of Hamilton County, recommended
by the Hamilton County Fire Chief's Association, save and except such
portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified, or amended by the Council,
which code is now filed in the office of the Clerk, made a part hereof, and
is adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein.  From
the date on which this chapter shall take effect, the provisions thereof
shall be controlling within the limits of the village.



('69 Code, § 91.01)  (Ord. C-525, passed 11-9-81)



§ 92.02  FIRE INSPECTION.



   The Chief of Police or any police officer acting under his direction,
shall be authorized, at any and all reasonable times, to enter upon and into
any premises, building or structure within the village limits for the purpose
of examining and inspecting the same, to ascertain the condition thereof with
regard to the presence, arrangement or deposit of any articles, materials,
substances, goods, wares, or merchandise which may have a tendency to create
danger in case of fire on or in the same, or personal injury to or loss of
life of the occupants of or persons on or in the premises, building or
structure.  The inspecting official may also act with regard to condition,
size, arrangement, and efficiency of any and all appliances for protection
against fire on or in the premises.



('69 Code, § 91.02)  (Ord. C-163, passed 8-11-60; Am. Ord. C-525, passed
11-9-81)



Cross-reference:



   Fire Department, see Ch. 36



§ 92.03  DUTIES AND ENFORCEMENT.



   (A)   The Fire Prevention Code shall be enforced by the members of
the Police Department as set forth in Chapter 36 and in § 92.02.



   (B)   The Chief of Police may detail such members of the Police
Department as fire inspectors as shall from time to time be necessary. The
Chief of Police shall also recommend any amendments to the code which, in his
judgment, shall be desirable.



   (C)   It shall be the duty of the members of the Police and Fire
Departments to cause the correction of hazardous conditions, issue warning
notices, citations, or cause the arrest of any person or persons violating
the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code, the Ohio Revised Code, and the
village ordinances, and to prosecute such offenders before the proper courts.



('69 Code, § 91.03)  (Ord. C-525, passed 11-9-81)



§ 92.04  DEFINITIONS.



   Whenever the following terms and words are used in the Fire Prevention
Code, the definitions below shall apply unless the context clearly indicates
or requires a different meaning.



   BOARD OF APPEALS.  The village Board of Zoning Appeals as set forth in
§ 154.62 in this code of ordinances.



   BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION.  The village Police Department and its
members.



   CHIEF OF THE FIRE DEPARTMENT or CHIEF OF FIRE PREVENTION. The Chief of
Police of the village.



   CORPORATION COUNSEL.  The Solicitor for the village.



   FIRE OFFICIAL.  The Chief of Police of the village or his designated
representative.



   MUNICIPALITY, CORPORATION, or JURISDICTION. The Village of Amberley
Village, Ohio.



   PENALTY.  Section 10.99 of this code of ordinances.



('69 Code, § 91.04)  (Ord. C-525, passed 11-9-81)



§ 92.05  MODIFICATIONS.



   The Chief of Police or his designated representative shall have the
power to modify any of the provisions of the Fire Prevention Code upon
application in writing by the owner or lessee, or his duly authorized agent,
when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict
letter of the code, provided that the spirit of the code shall be observed,
public safety secured, and substantial justice done.  The particulars of
such modification when granted or allowed and the decision of the Chief of
Police or his representative thereon shall be entered upon the records of the
Police Department and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant.



('69 Code, § 91.05)  (Ord. C-525, passed 11-9-81)



§ 92.06  REPORTS; ORDERS.



   Police force officers appointed to make the inspections provided for in
this chapter shall report the results of their inspection in writing to the
Chief of Police.  Should any owner, lessee, or occupant of any premises,
building, or structure, or the owner or person in control of any materials,
goods, wares, or merchandise, consider himself aggrieved by the order of any
subordinate member of the police force, he may, within 24 hours after the
order has been served on him, appeal to the Chief of Police who shall
thereupon make the order as he deems right and reasonable, and the order
shall be final.



('69 Code, § 91.06)  (Ord. C-525, passed 11-9-81)



§ 92.07  COMPLIANCE WITH ORDERS.



   When an order, as provided in § 92.06 has been directed to the owner,
lessee, or occupant of any premises, building, or structure, or to the person
or owner in control of the articles, materials, goods, wares, or merchandise
referred to in the order, it shall be the duty of such person in control, or
the owner, lessee, or occupant, to comply with the order with reasonable
dispatch and diligence.



('69 Code, § 91.07)  (Ord. C-163, passed 8-11-60; Am. Ord. C-525, passed
11-9-81)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.08  CIVIL LIABILITY.



   In the event of fire resulting directly or indirectly from any omission
or neglect to properly comply with any written order of the Chief of Police
or his authorized subordinate as provided in this chapter, any such owner,
lessee, occupant, or person culpable or negligent in respect thereto shall be
liable to the village for the payment of all costs and expenses of the
village incurred in and about the use of employees, apparatus, and materials
in the extinguishment of any fire resulting from such cause.  The amount of
such costs and expenses shall be fixed by the Village Manager and shall be
collected by him in a civil action wherein the village shall be plaintiff and
the culpable or negligent party shall be defendant.



('69 Code, § 91.08)  (Ord. C-163, passed 8-11-60; Am. Ord. C-525, passed
11-9-81)



§ 92.09  REMOVAL OF INFLAMMABLES; ORDER.



   If the Chief of Police, or his authorized subordinate, discovers any
situations, as listed in divisions (A) and (B) below, upon inspection of the
premises, building, or structure, he may order, in writing, the removal or
re-arrangement of rubbish, debris, waste, or any inflammable or combustible
materials from the premises.  The disposal of or arrangement on or in the
premises will serve to remove the danger of fire.  An order may be issued if:



   (A)   The articles, materials, goods, wares, and merchandise on or
in the premises, building, or structure are so arranged and disposed that the
occupants thereof, because of such arrangement and disposition, would not be
afforded reasonable access to the exits of the premises in case of fire or an
emergency.



   (B)   The members of the police force would, by reason of
arrangement and disposition of the goods, materials, wares, or merchandise on
or in the premises, be unnecessarily and unreasonably interfered with in the
exercise of their duties in case of fire or an emergency.



('69 Code, § 91.09)  (Ord. C-163, passed 8-11-60; Am. Ord. C-525, passed
11-9-81)



§ 92.10  PROTECTIVE APPLIANCES.



   (A)   If the Chief of Police, or his authorized subordinate, finds
that the appliances on or in any premises, building, or structure for
protection against fire are not in proper condition, or are of insufficient
size and number, or are otherwise insufficient for the purposes for which
they are designed and intended, or if he finds that certain appliances are
reasonably necessary for the protection of the premises and are wholly
wanting, he shall order, in the case of improper condition or insufficiency,
that such appliances be placed in proper condition and rendered reasonable
sufficient to afford protection against fire.



   (B)   In case of an absence of appliances necessary for protection
against fire, he shall order the installation of appliances sufficient to
afford reasonable protection to the premises or its occupants, in case of
fire.



('69 Code, § 91.10)  (Ord. C-163, passed 8-11-60; Am. Ord. C-525, passed
11-9-81)



§ 92.11  DISTRICTS IN WHICH STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES AND BLASTING AGENTS IS
PROHIBITED.



   The limits referred to in Sections F-2700.2.l, F-2701.2, and F-2703.0
of the Fire Prevention Code, in which the storage of explosives and blasting
agents is prohibited, are hereby established as follows:  "Prohibited
throughout the entire Village of Amberley Village, Ohio."



('69 Code, § 91.11)  (Ord. C-525, passed 11-9-81)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.12  (RESERVED).



§ 92.13  LIMITS IN WHICH BULK STORAGE OF LIQUEFIED PETROLEUM GASES IS
RESTRICTED.



   (A)   The limits referred to in Section F-3102.l of the Fire
Prevention Code, in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is
restricted, are hereby established as follows: "Prohibited throughout the
entire Village".  The capacity limit may be altered at the discretion of the
Chief of Police after special consideration, of bulk storage for heating
purposes and for heavy industrial use.



   (B)   Underground liquefied petroleum tanks are prohibited
throughout the entire village.



   (C)   Manufacturing, storage, distribution plants, wholesale and
retail sales plants or stations are prohibited throughout the entire village.



   (D)   Bulk storage referred to in this section shall mean any single
or multiple container installation with a total water capacity of 1,000
gallons or more.



   (E)   Section F-3100.2, Permit Required.  Permits referred to in
this section shall be required for all containers regardless of size.



   (F)   All single and multiple container or tank installations shall
be protected with posts or barriers from being damaged by motor vehicles, and
all such containers or tanks shall be protected or safeguarded, due to their
location in an area that may be subjected to flooding or high water that may
cause them to become buoyant, and shall be in compliance with N.F.P.A. 58 and
O.B.B.C.



('69 Code, § 91.13)  (Ord. C-525, passed 11-9-81)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.14  MOTOR VEHICLE ROUTES FOR VEHICLES TRANSPORTING FLAMMABLE AND
COMBUSTIBLE LIQUIDS, HAZARDOUS CHEMICALS, AND OTHER DANGEROUS ARTICLES.



   (A)   Vehicles mentioned and those not mentioned in Article 25
Compressed Gases, Article 26 Cryogenic Liquids, Article 27 Explosives,
Ammunition and Blasting Agents, Article 28 Fireworks, Article 29 Flammable
and Combustible Liquids, Article 30 Hazardous Materials and Chemicals, and
Article 31 Liquefied Petroleum Gases, and used for transporting Flammable
Liquids, Hazardous Chemicals and other Dangerous Articles shall travel on
state and interstate highways, and avoid all congested commercial areas,
residential areas, and any otherwise heavily populated areas.



   (B)   Vehicles making deliveries within the village shall travel the
shortest and nearest routes provided, to and from the place of delivery.



('69 Code, § 91.14)  (Ord. C-525, passed 11-9-81)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.15  PLACARDING BUILDINGS OR AREAS.



   (A)   The Chief of Police or any police officer acting under his
direction shall be authorized to placard any building or area declared unsafe
and cause any building or part thereof to be vacated.



   (B)   Trespassing in a building or area placarded, or damage or
removal of such notices or signs shall be considered a violation of this code
and violators shall be subject to penalties in § 10.99.



('69 Code, § 91.15)  (Ord. C-525, passed 11-9-81)



§ 92.16  (RESERVED)



§ 92.17  FIRE BOMBS PROHIBITED.



   No person shall possess a fire bomb.  For the purpose of this section,
a FIRE BOMB is a breakable container containing a flammable liquid with a
flash point of 150°F. or less, having an integral wick or similar device
capable of being ignited or any other mechanical device capable of ignition,
but no device commercially manufactured primarily for the purpose of
illuminating shall be deemed to be a fire bomb for the purpose of this
section.



('69 Code, § 91.17)  (Ord. C-525, passed 11-9-81)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.18  OPEN BURNING.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   GARBAGE.  Any matter resulting from the handling, processing,
preparation, cooking, and consumption of food or food products.



   LANDSCAPE WASTE.  Any vegetable or plant matter except garbage,
including trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds, leaves,
grass, shrubbery, yard trimmings and crop residues.



   OPEN BURNING.  The burning of any materials wherein air contaminants
resulting from combustion are emitted directly into the air, without passing
through a stack or chimney from an enclosed chamber.  For purposes of this
definition, an enclosed chamber is one which has only those ducts, stacks, or
chimneys necessary to provide combustion air and to permit the escape of
exhaust gas.  The burning of any materials in metal cans, barrels,
containers, wire baskets, or any home-made device is open burning.  The
burning of materials in incinerators is governed by Ohio Environmental
Protection Agency Regulation AP-3-10.



   (B)   Compliance required:  No person shall cause or allow open
burning within the village except as provided in the following subsections: 
18(C), 18(D), and 18(E).



   (C)   Burning permitted for certain purposes:



      (1)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes:



         (a)   Cooking food for human consumption on a grill or
similar device.



         (b)   Heating tar, welding, acetylene torches, highway
safety flares, heating for warmth of outdoor workers, smudge pots, and
similar occupational needs.



      (2)   Fires allowed by this section shall be so confined in a
device so designed for that specific use so intended and the fire to be
contained within.  Fire allowed by this section shall not be used to burn
garbage, landscape waste, or any other waste material and shall be of minimum
size sufficient for their intended purpose.  The fuel used shall be a clean
fuel, that is, a fuel chosen to minimize the generation and emission of air
contaminants.



   (D)   Permission with prior notice to village and state.



      (1)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes
with prior notification to both the Village Police Department, the Village
Manager, and the Southwestern Ohio Air Pollution Control District, as
provided by Ohio Environmental Protection Agency Regulation EP-12-05:



         (a)   Prevention or control of disease or pests.



         (b)   Ceremonial purposes; ceremonial fires shall be
less than five feet by five feet and shall burn no longer than two hours.



      (2)   Fires allowed by this section shall not be used to burn
garbage, landscape waste, or any other waste material.  The fuel used shall
be a clean fuel, that is, a fuel chosen to minimize the generation of
emission of air contaminants.



   (E)   Permission by written state permit.



      (1)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes
upon receipt of written permission from the Southwestern Ohio Air Pollution
Control District provided that any conditions specified in the permit are
followed.



         (a)   Disposal of hazardous or toxic materials where the
Ohio Environmental Protection Agency determines that there is no practical
alternate method of disposal.



         (b)   Instruction in method of fire fighting or for
research in the control of fire.



         (c)   In emergency or other extraordinary circumstances
for any purpose determined to be necessary by the Ohio Environmental
Protection Agency.



      (2)   Receipt of written permission shall be obtained as
provided by Ohio Environmental Protection Agency Regulation EP-12-05.



('69 Code, § 91.18)  (Ord. C-525, passed 11-9-81)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.19  DELETIONS FROM UNIFIED FIRE PREVENTION CODE.



   The following provisions shall be deleted from the Fire Prevention Code:



   F-102.9, F-102.9.1, F-103.8, F-104.1, F-104.1., F-104.2, F-105.6,
F-105.7, F-301.0, F-301.2, F-301.3, and F-301.4.



('69 Code, § 91.19)  (Ord. C-525, passed 11-9-81)



§ 92.20  SECTIONS MODIFIED OR AMENDED.



   (A)   F-104.l, F-104.1.1 (May appeal the decision to the Village
Board of Appeals as defined in § 154.64 and § 92.04 of the code of
ordinances of the village).



      (1)   The Police Chief or his designate shall serve as
professional advisor during such hearings pertaining to the Fire Prevention
Code.



      (2)   Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person
aggrieved by any decision or interpretation by the fire official made under
the provision of the code.



      (3)   Application in writing must be submitted to the Board
within seven days of the date of notice order of the fire official.



   (B)   F-105.1 add to this section the following to be known as
paragraph (11).



      (1)   The parking of motor vehicles inside of building is
prohibited in all places of assembly, mercantile, places of business, storage
and warehouse buildings and certain industrial buildings where parking areas
are not designed by code.  Fork lifts included.



   (C)   F-106 to include Country Clubs and places of assembly.



   (D)   F-407.2.3 to include Country Clubs and other places of
assembly.



   (E)   F-407.2.1 to include places of assembly equipped with a stage
area or motion picture booth.



   (F)   F-2902.1 shall comply with section F-2903.1 with no exceptions.



   (G)   F-2905.4 and Table F-2905.4 inside storage:  The storage of
flammable and combustible liquids in containers, tanks, drums, and portable
tanks shall be prohibited in basements and cellars.



   (H)   F-2905.4.2.1, F-2905.4.2.2, and F-2905.4.2.3 storage in excess
of five gallons of flammable liquids or ten gallons of combustible liquids
shall be prohibited.  Temporary storage for painting or other purpose may be
authorized by the Chief of Police of his designate, where increase on these
quantities will not increase hazard to life or property.  All containers for
flammable and combustible liquids shall be approved safety cans.



   (I)   F-301.5 and F-301.6 bonfires and open burning referred to in
these sections must first conform with Section 18 of the Fire Prevention Code
and the subsection regulating open burning.



   (J)   F-2700.2.1, F-2701.2, and F-2703.0 amended in Section 11.
F-2902.1, F-2905.4 and Table F-2905.4, F-2905.4.2.1, F-2905.4.2.2,
F-2905.4.2.3 amended in Section 12.  F-3100.1 and F-3100.2 amended in
Section 13.



   (K)   F-3101.2, F-3101.2.1, and F-3101.2.2 buried LP gas tanks not
permitted.



   (L)   F-3102.1 amended in Section 13.



   (M)   Articles 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30, and 31 amended in Section 14.



   (N)   It is the intent of this chapter that all articles and
sections modified, amended, or deleted from the Fire Prevention Code be in
conformity with, and not less than, the regulations and requirements as set
forth in the Ohio Revised Code and the Ohio Fire Code.



('69 Code, § 91.20)  (Ord. C-525, passed 11-9-81)  Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.21  BURNING BUILDINGS FOR FIRE FIGHTING INSTRUCTION.



   No building that contains asbestos shall be burned for the purpose of
instruction in the methods of fire fighting or research in the control of
fires.



(R.C. § 3737.14(B))



FIREWORKS AND EXPLOSIVES



§ 92.30  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.



   1.3G FIREWORKS.  Display fireworks consistent with regulations of the
United States Department of Transportation as expressed using the designation
"Division 1.3" in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations.



   1.4G FIREWORKS.  Consumer fireworks consistent with regulations of the
United States Department of Transportation as expressed using the designation
"Division 1.4" in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations.



   BEER and INTOXICATING LIQUOR.  Have the same meaning as in R.C. §
4301.01.



   BOOBY TRAP.  A small tube that has a string protruding from both ends
that has a friction-sensitive composition and that is ignited by pulling the
ends of the string.



   CIGARETTE LOAD.  A small wooden peg that is coated with a small
quantity of explosive composition and that is ignited in a cigarette.



   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.



   DISCHARGE SITE. An area immediately surrounding the mortars used to
fire aerial shells.



   EXPLOSIVE.  Any chemical compound, mixture, or device, the primary or
common purpose of which is to function by explosion. The term includes all
materials that have been classified as division 1.1, division 1.2, division
1.3, or division 1.4 explosives by the United States Department of
Transportation in its regulations and includes but is not limited to
dynamite, black powder, pellet powders, initiating explosives, blasting caps,
electric blasting caps, safety fuses, fuse igniters, squibs, cordeau detonant
fuses, instantaneous fuses, and igniter cords and igniters. The term does not
include "fireworks", as defined in R.C. § 3743.01, or any substance or
material otherwise meeting the definition of explosive set forth in this
section that is manufactured, sold, possessed, transported, stored, or used
in any activity described in R.C. § 3743.80, provided the activity is
conducted in accordance with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations,
including but not limited to the provisions of R.C. § 3743.80 and the rules
of the Fire Marshal adopted pursuant to R.C. § 3737.82.



(R.C. § 2923.11(M))



   FIREWORKS.  Any composition or device prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or
detonation, except ordinary matches and except as provided in R.C. § 3743.80.



   FIREWORKS INCIDENT.  Any action or omission that occurs at a fireworks
exhibition that results in injury or death, or a substantial risk of injury
or death, to any person, and that involves either of the following:



      (1)   The handling or other use, or the results of the
handling or other use, of fireworks or associated equipment or other
materials;



      (2)   The failure of any person to comply with any applicable
requirement imposed by this chapter or R.C. Chapter 3743, or any applicable
rule adopted under this chapter or R.C. Chapter 3743.



   FIREWORKS INCIDENT SITE.  A discharge site or other location at a
fireworks exhibition where a fireworks incident occurs, a location where an
injury or death associated with a fireworks incident occurs, or a location
where evidence of a fireworks incident or an injury or death associated with
a fireworks incident is found.



   FIREWORKS PLANT.  All buildings and other structures in which the
manufacturing of fireworks, or the storage or sale of manufactured fireworks
by a manufacturer, takes place.



   HIGHWAY.  Any public street, road, alley, way, lane or other public
thoroughfare.



   LICENSED BUILDING.  A building on the licensed premises of a licensed
manufacturer or wholesaler of fireworks that is approved for occupancy by the
building official having jurisdiction.



   LICENSED EXHIBITOR OF FIREWORKS or LICENSED EXHIBITOR.  A person
licensed pursuant to R.C. §§ 3743.50 through 3743.55.



   LICENSED MANUFACTURER OF FIREWORKS or LICENSED MANUFACTURER.  A person
licensed pursuant to R.C. §§ 3743.02 through 3743.08.



   LICENSED PREMISES.  The real estate upon which a licensed manufacturer
or wholesaler of fireworks conducts business.



   LICENSED WHOLESALER OF FIREWORKS or LICENSED WHOLESALER.  A person
licensed pursuant to R.C. §§ 3743.15 through 3743.21.



   MANUFACTURING OF FIREWORKS.  The making of fireworks from raw
materials, none of which in and of themselves constitute fireworks, or the
processing of fireworks.



   NOVELTIES and TRICK NOISEMAKERS.



      (1)   Devices that produce a small report intended to surprise
the user, including but not limited to booby traps, cigarette loads, party
poppers, and snappers;



      (2)   Snakes or glow worms;



      (3)   Smoke devices;



      (4)   Trick matches.



   PARTY POPPER.  A small plastic or paper item that contains not more
than 16 milligrams of friction-sensitive explosive composition that is
ignited by pulling a string protruding from the item, and from which paper
streamers are expelled when the item is ignited.



   PROCESSING OF FIREWORKS.  The making of fireworks from materials all
or part of which in and of themselves constitute fireworks, but does not
include the mere packaging or repackaging of fireworks.



   RAILROAD.  Any railway or railroad that carries freight or passengers
for hire, but does not include auxiliary tracks, spurs, and sidings installed
and primarily used in serving a mine, quarry or plant.



   RETAIL SALE or SELL AT RETAIL.  A sale of fireworks to a purchaser who
intends to use the fireworks and not to resell them.



   SMOKE DEVICE.  A tube or sphere that contains pyrotechnic composition
that, upon ignition, produces white or colored smoke as the primary effect.



   SNAKE or GLOW WORM.  A device that consists of a pressed pellet of
pyrotechnic composition that produces a large snake-like ash upon burning,
which ash expands in length as the pellet burns.



   SNAPPER.  A small paper-wrapped item that contains a minute quantity
of explosive composition coated on small bits of sand and that, when dropped,
implodes.



   STORAGE LOCATION. A single parcel or contiguous parcels of real estate
approved by the Fire Marshal pursuant to R.C. § 3743.04(I) or R.C. §
3743.17(G) that are separate from a licensed premises containing a retail
showroom, and which parcel or parcels a licensed manufacturer or wholesaler
of fireworks may use only for the distribution, possession, and storage of
fireworks in accordance with this chapter.



   TRICK MATCH.  A kitchen or book match that is coated with a small
quantity of explosive composition and that, upon ignition, produces a small
report or a shower of sparks.



   WHOLESALE SALE or SELL AT WHOLE- SALE.  A sale of fireworks to a
purchaser who intends to resell the fireworks so purchased.



   WIRE SPARKLER.  A sparkler consisting of a wire or stick coated with a
nonexplosive pyrotechnic mixture that produces a shower of sparks upon
ignition and that contains no more than 100 grams of this mixture.



(R.C. § 3743.01)



§ 92.31  POSSESSION, SALE, AND USE OF FIREWORKS.



   (A)   No person shall possess fireworks in this municipality or
shall possess for sale or sell fireworks in this municipality, except a
licensed manufacturer of fireworks as authorized by R.C. §§ 3743.02 through
3743.08, a licensed wholesaler of fireworks as authorized by R.C. §§
3743.15 through 3743.21, a shipping permit holder as authorized by R.C.



§ 3743.40, an out-of-state resident as authorized by R.C. § 3743.44, a
resident of this state as authorized by R.C. § 3743.45, or a licensed
exhibitor of fireworks as authorized by R.C. §§ 3743.50 through 3743.55, or
as authorized by any municipal ordinance that is substantially similar to any
of these statutes, and except as provided in R.C. § 3743.80 or a
substantially similar municipal ordinance.



   (B)   Except as provided in R.C. § 3743.80 or a substantially
similar municipal ordinance, and except for licensed exhibitors of fireworks
authorized to conduct a fireworks exhibition pursuant to R.C. §§ 3743.50
through 3743.55 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance, no person
shall discharge, ignite, or explode any fireworks in this municipality.



   (C)   No person shall use in a theater or public hall what is
technically known as fireworks showers, or a mixture containing potassium
chlorate and sulphur.



   (D)   No person shall sell fireworks of any kind to a person under
18 years of age.  No person under 18 years of age shall enter a fireworks
sales showroom unless that person is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian,
or other responsible adult. No person under 18 years of age shall touch or
possess fireworks on a licensed premises without the consent of the licensee.
A licensee may eject any person from a licensed premises that is in any way
disruptive to the safe operation of the premises.



   (E)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 3743.44, no person,
other than a licensed manufacturer, licensed wholesaler, licensed exhibitor,
or shipping permit holder shall possess 1.3G fireworks in this municipality.



(R.C. § 3743.65(A) - (E))  Penalty, see § 92.99



Statutory reference:



   Felony offense for disabling a fire suppression system, see R.C. §
3743.65(F)



§ 92.32  PERMIT TO USE FIREWORKS.



   (A)   An exhibitor of fireworks licensed under R.C. §§ 3743.50
through 3743.55 who wishes to conduct a public fireworks exhibition shall
apply for approval to conduct the exhibition to the Fire Chief or fire
prevention officer and to the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police Chief or other similar
chief law enforcement officer, having jurisdiction over the premises.



   (B)   The approval required by division (A) of this section shall be
evidenced by the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and by the Police
Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of the
Police Chief or similar chief law enforcement officer, signing a permit for
the exhibition.  Any exhibitor of fireworks who wishes to conduct a public
fireworks exhibition may obtain a copy of the form from the State Fire
Marshal or, if available, from the Fire Chief, a fire prevention officer, the
Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or a designee of
the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer.



   (C)   Before a permit is signed and issued to a licensed exhibitor
of fireworks, the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in consultation with
the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the
designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
shall inspect the premises on which the exhibition will take place and shall
determine that, in fact, the applicant for the permit is a licensed exhibitor
of fireworks.  Each applicant shall show his or her license as an exhibitor
of fireworks to the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer.



   (D)   The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and the Police Chief
or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police
Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, shall give approval to
conduct a public fireworks exhibition only if satisfied, based on the
inspection, that the premises on which the exhibition will be conducted allow
the exhibitor to comply with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal
pursuant to R.C. § 3743.53(B) and (E) and that the applicant is, in fact, a
licensed exhibitor of fireworks.  The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer,
in consultation with the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement
officer or with the designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, may inspect the premises immediately prior to the
exhibition to determine if the exhibitor has complied with the rules, and may
revoke a permit for noncompliance with the rules.



   (E)   If the Legislative Authority has prescribed a fee for the
issuance of a permit for a public fireworks exhibition, the Fire Chief or
fire prevention officer and Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, or their designee, shall not issue a permit until the
exhibitor pays the requisite fee.



   (F)   Each exhibitor shall provide an indemnity bond in the amount
of at least one million dollars with surety satisfactory to the Fire Chief or
fire prevention officer and to the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police Chief or other similar
chief law enforcement officer, conditioned for the payment of all final
judgments that may be rendered against the exhibitor on account of injury,
death, or loss to person or property emanating from the fireworks exhibitor,
or proof of insurance coverage of at least one million dollars for liability
arising from injury, death, or loss of persons or property emanating from the
fireworks exhibition.  The Legislative Authority may require the exhibitor
to provide an indemnity bond or proof of insurance coverage in amounts
greater than those required by this division.  The Fire Chief or fire
prevention officer and Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement
officer, or their designee, shall not issue a permit until the exhibitor
provides the bond or proof of the insurance coverage required by this
division or by the Legislative Authority.



   (G)   Each permit for a fireworks exhibition issued by the Fire
Chief or fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief or other similar
chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, shall contain a distinct number,
designate the municipality, and identify the certified fire safety inspector,
Fire Chief, or fire prevention officer who will be present before, during and
after the exhibition, where appropriate.  A copy of each permit issued shall
be forwarded by the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and by the Police
Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or designee of the
Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, issuing it to
the State Fire Marshal.  A permit is not transferable or assignable.



   (H)   The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and Police Chief or
other similar chief law enforcement officer, or designee of the Police Chief
or other similar chief law enforcement officer, shall keep a record of issued
permits for fireworks exhibitions.  In this list, the Fire Chief, fire
prevention officer, Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement
officer, or designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, shall list the name of the exhibitor, his or her license
number, the premises on which the exhibition will be conducted, the date and
time of the exhibition, and the number and political subdivision designation
of the permit issued to the exhibitor for the exhibition.



   (I)   The Legislative Authority shall require that a certified fire
safety inspector, Fire Chief or fire prevention officer be present before,
during and after the exhibition, and shall require the certified fire safety
inspector, Fire Chief or fire prevention officer to inspect the premises
where the exhibition is to take place and determine whether the exhibition is
in compliance with this chapter and R.C. Chapter 3743.



(R.C. § 3743.54)  Penalty, see § 92.99



Statutory reference:



   Notice of fireworks incident, see R.C. § 3743.541



§ 92.33  STORAGE OF EXPLOSIVES.



   It shall be unlawful to store at any time within the village limits a
quantity of gunpowder or other similar explosive weighing in excess of 25
pounds.



Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.34  BLASTING PERMIT.



   No person shall cause a blast to occur within the village without
making application in writing beforehand, setting forth the exact nature of
the intended operation, and receiving a permit to blast from the Mayor.  The
Mayor or other proper administrative officer before granting such permit may
require the applicant to provide a bond to indemnify the village and all
other persons against injury or damages which might result from the proposed
blasting.



Penalty, see § 92.99



§ 92.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter or of
the code hereby adopted or fails to comply therewith, or violates or fails to
comply with any order made thereunder, or builds in violation of any detailed
statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or
any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has
been taken, or fails to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by
Council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time affixed
herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance
respectively, be guilty of a minor misdemeanor except where otherwise
specified.  The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse
the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be
required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable
time.  When not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited
conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense.



   (B)   The application of the above penalty shall not be held to
prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.  The reason for such
emergency is the immediate need to provide greater fire protection in the
village.



('69 Code, § 91.22)  (Ord. C-525, passed 11-9-81)



CHAPTER 93: INCOME TAX, EFFECTIVE JANUARY 1, 1971 THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2015



Section



   93.01   Purpose



   93.02   Definitions



   93.03   Imposition of tax



   93.04   Effective period



   93.05   Return and payment of tax



   93.06   Collection at source



   93.07   Declarations



   93.08   Duties of the administrator



   93.09   Investigative power of administrator; penalty for divulging
confidential information



   93.10   Interest and penalties on unpaid taxes



   93.11   Collection of unpaid taxes; refunds of over-payments



   93.12   Board of Review



   93.13   Allocation of funds



   93.14   Credit for tax paid to another municipality



   93.15   Extension of effective period



   93.16   Proceeds from 401(a) plans and other deferred compensation
plans



 



   93.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Income Tax Regulations Effective January 1, 2016, see Ch. 101



§ 93.01  PURPOSE.



   To provide funds for adequate general municipal operations, projected
capital improvements and the establishment of adequate reserves for the
normal operations of the village, there shall be, and is hereby, levied a tax
on salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation, and on net profits as
hereinafter provided.



('69 Code, § 97.01)  (Ord. C-320, passed 10-12-70)



§ 93.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires or indicates a different meaning.



   ADMINISTRATOR.  The individual designated by this chapter and
appointed by the Village Manager to administer and enforce the provisions of
this chapter.



   ASSOCIATION.  A partnership, limited partnership, or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned by two or more persons.



   BOARD OF REVIEW.  The Board created by and constituted as provided in
§ 93.12.



   BUSINESS.  An enterprise, activity, profession, or undertaking of any
nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for profit, whether by an
individual, partnership, association, corporation or any other entity.



   COMPENSATION.  Includes, but is not limited to, salaries, wages,
vacation pay, sick pay, commissions, bonuses, tips, severance pay,
supplemental unemployment pay, or any other form of remuneration that is paid
to or constructively received by the taxpayer, and whether paid in cash or
other form of property. That portion of gross wages which may be deferred
under a federally recognized plan is subject to taxation and to withholding.



   CORPORATION.  A corporation or joint stock association organized under
the laws of the United States, the State of Ohio, or any other state,
territory, or foreign country or dependency.



   EMPLOYEE.  One who works for wages, salary, commission, or other type
of compensation in the service of an employer.



   EMPLOYER.  An individual, partnership, association, corporation,
governmental body, unit or agency, or any other entity, whether or not
organized for profit, who or that employs one or more persons on a salary,
wage, commission, or other compensation basis.



   FISCAL YEAR.  An accounting period of 12 months or less ending on a
day other than December 31.



   FULL-YEAR RESIDENT.  A person who owns or rents a dwelling unit within
the village or lives in a dwelling unit owned or rented by another, and
resides within the village for six months or more during the taxable year;
except that a person who, after the first of the taxable year, moves into and
establishes domicile in the village or, before the end of the taxable year,
moves from and establishes domicile outside the village, shall be considered,
and taxed as, a part year resident.



   GROSS RECEIPTS.  The total income from any source whatsoever.



   NET PROFITS.  A net gain from the operation of a business, profession,
enterprise or other activity after provision for all ordinary and necessary
expenses either paid or accrued in accordance with the accounting system used
by the taxpayer for federal income tax purposes, without deduction of taxes
imposed by this chapter, federal, state, and other taxes based on income; and
in the case of an association, without deduction of salaries paid to partners
and other owners; and otherwise adjusted to the requirements of this chapter.



   NON-RESIDENT.  A person who resides and has legal domicile in another
jurisdiction throughout the taxable year, but who receives earnings from work
or service in the village during the taxable year.



   NON-RESIDENT UNINCORPORATED BUSINESS ENTITY.  An unincorporated
business entity not having an office or place of business within the village.



   PART-YEAR RESIDENT.  A person who resides in the village for a part of
the taxable year as a result of having moved into or out of the village
during the taxable year; or a person who during the taxable year owns or
rents a dwelling unit in the village or resides in a dwelling unit owned or
rented by another, but who resides in the village for less than six months
during the taxable year and has established legal domicile in another
jurisdiction.



   PERSON.  Every natural person, partnership, fiduciary, association, or
corporation.  Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a
penalty, the term "person" as applied to any unincorporated entity, shall
mean the partners or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the
officers thereof.



   PLACE OF BUSINESS.  Any bona fide office (other than a mere statutory
office), factory, warehouse or other space which is occupied and used by the
taxpayer in carrying on any business activity individually or through one or
more of his regular employees regularly in attendance.



   RESIDENT UNINCORPORATED BUSINESS ENTITY.  An unincorporated business
entity having an office or place of business within the village.



   TAXABLE INCOME.



      (1)   Wages, salaries, and other compensation paid by an
employer or employers before any deductions, and/or the net profit from the
operation of a business, profession or other enterprise or activity adjusted
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; and shall include, but not
be limited to, the following:



         (a)   Bonuses;



         (b)   Compensation paid in property or the use thereof
at fair market value to the same extent as taxable under the Federal Internal
Revenue Code and so indicated on the form W-2;



         (c)   Contributions made by an employer on behalf of
employees to a cafeteria plan;



         (d)   Contributions made by an employer on behalf of
employees to a qualified or nonqualified deferred compensation plan taxed in
year earned; deferral not permitted;



         (e)   Contributions made by an employer on behalf of
employees to a tax deferred annuity or stock purchase plan (including plan in
which employee has the option not to defer);



         (f)   Cost of group term life insurance over $50,000;



         (g)   Corporation director's fees;



         (h)   Disability pay if received as a benefit of
employment (includes third party plan);



         (i)   Golden parachute payments;



         (j)   Income from guaranteed annual wage contracts;



         (k)   Income from wage-continuation plans (including
retirement incentive plans and buy-outs);



         (l)   Income received as a result of a covenant or
agreement not to compete will be deemed as received in Amberley Village;



         (m)   Imputed interest on below market loans;



         (n)   Reimbursed moving expenses;



         (o)   Ordinary income as declared on Internal Revenue
Service Form 4797;



         (p)   Pre-retirement distributions from retirement plans
(except previously taxed income from deferred plans);



         (q)   Prizes, awards and gifts attributable to
taxpayer's employment;



         (r)   Compensation attributable to profit sharing;



         (s)   Compensation attributable to royalties, patents
and/or copyrights;



         (t)   Severance pay;



         (u)   Sick pay and vacation pay;



         (v)   Stock bonus incentive plans;



         (w)   Stock options-taxed when exercised on amount
indicated on Internal Revenue Service Form W-2;



         (x)   Supplemental unemployment paid by employer;



         (y)   Taxes paid by employer on behalf of taxpayer;



         (z)   Tips;



         (aa)   Union Steward's fees or other form of
compensation;



         (bb)   Lottery winnings; or



         (cc)   Gambling winnings (which may not be offset by
gambling losses);



      (2)   Net profits from the following are not included as
taxable income:



         (a)   Alimony;



         (b)   Annuities at time of distribution;



         (c)   Capital gains;



         (d)   Dividends and interest;



         (e)   Government allotments;



         (f)   Housing for clergy;



         (g)   Income from foster parent programs;



         (h)   Income of religious, fraternal, charitable,
scientific, literary or educational institutions to the extent that such
income is derived from tax-exempt real estate, tax-exempt tangible or
intangible property, or tax-exempt activities;



         (i)   Insurance proceeds, unless connected with
employment;



         (j)   Meals and lodging required on premises;



         (k)   The military pay or allowance of members of the
armed forces of the U.S. and members of their reserve components, including
the Ohio National Guard;



         (l)   Pension income, including lump sum distributions;



         (m)   Prizes, unless connected with employment;



         (n)   Salaries of the mentally retarded or
developmentally disabled while working in a government funded workshop for
less than minimum wage;



         (o)   Social Security benefits;



         (p)   State unemployment benefits;



         (q)   Welfare payments; or



         (r)   Workers' Compensation.



   TAXABLE YEAR.  The calendar year or the fiscal year upon the basis of
which net profits are to be computed under this chapter, and, in the case of
a return for a fractional part of a year, the period for which such return is
required to be made.



   TAXPAYER.  A person, whether an individual, partnership, association,
or any corporation or other entity, required hereunder to file a return or
pay a tax.



('69 Code, § 97.02)  (Ord. C-320, passed 10-12-70; Am. Ord. C-625, passed
11-9-87; Am. Ord. 1999-13, passed 5-10-99; Am. Ord. 2001-20, passed 10-9-01;
Am. Ord. 2007-02, passed 4-9-07; Am. Ord. 2009-02, passed 4-13-09)



§ 93.03  IMPOSITION OF TAX.



   (A)   Tax rate.  An annual tax for the purposes specified in §
93.01 shall be imposed on and after January l, 1989, at the rate of 2% per
annum upon the following:



      (1)   Full-year resident.  On all taxable income wherever
earned or received during the taxable year.



      (2)   Non-resident.  On all taxable income earned or received
during the taxable year for work done or services performed or rendered in
the village.



      (3)   Part-year resident.  On all taxable income wherever
earned or received during the part of the taxable year that such person
resides in the village.



      (4)   Resident unincorporated business entity.  On the net
profits earned during the taxable year.



      (5)   Non-resident unincorporated business entity.  On the
portion attributable to the village of the net profits earned during the
effective period of this chapter of all non-resident unincorporated business,
professions or other entities, derived from sales made, work done, or
services performed or rendered and business or other activities conducted in
Amberley Village, Ohio, whether or not such corporations have an office or
place of business in Amberley Village.



      (6)   Corporation.



         (a)   On the net profits attributable to an office or
place of business in Amberley Village earned during the taxable year.



         (b)   On the net profits of a corporation with no office
or place of business in the village which are attributable to sales made,
work done, or services performed or rendered in the village during the
taxable year.



   (B)   Allocation formula.  The portion of the net profits
attributable to Amberley Village, Ohio, of a taxpayer conducting a business,
profession or other activity both within and without the boundaries of the
village, shall be determined as provided in R.C. § 718.02 and in accordance
with the rules and regulations adopted by the administrator pursuant to this
chapter.



   (C)   Operating loss carry-forward.



      (1)   The portion of a net operating loss sustained in any
taxable year subsequent to January l, 1971, allocable to the village, may be
applied against the portion of the profit of succeeding year(s) allocated to
the village until exhausted, but in no event for more than five taxable
years.  No portion of a net operating loss shall be carried back against net
profits for any prior year.



      (2)   The portion of a net operating loss sustained shall be
allocated to the village, in the same manner as provided herein for
allocating net profits to the village.



      (3)   The administrator shall provide by rules and regulations
the manner in which net operating loss carry-forward shall be determined.



   (D)   Consolidated returns.



      (1)   Filing of consolidated returns may be permitted or
required in accordance with rules and regulations prescribed by the
administrator.



      (2)   In the case of a corporation that carried on
transactions with its stockholders or with other corporations related by
stock ownership, interlocking directorates, or some other method, or in case
any person operates a division, branch, factory, office, laboratory or
activity within the village, constituting a portion only of its total
business, the administrator shall require such additional information as he
may deem necessary to ascertain whether net profits are properly allocated to
the village.  If the Administrator finds net profits are not properly
allocated to the village, by reason of transactions with stockholders or with
other corporations related by stock ownership, interlocking directorates, or
transactions with such division, branch, factory, office, laboratory or
activity or by some other method, he shall make allocation as he deems
appropriate to produce a fair and proper allocation of net profits to the
village.



   (E)   Exception.  The tax provided for herein shall not be levied
upon the military pay or allowance of members of the armed forces of the
United States, or upon the net profits of any civic, charitable, religious,
fraternal or other organization specified in R.C. § 718.01 to the extent
that such net profits are exempted from municipal income taxes under that
section.



('69 Code, § 97.03)  (Ord. C-320, passed 10-12-70; Am. Ord. C-625, passed
11-9-87; Am. Ord. C-641, passed 7-11-88; Am. Ord. 1999-13, passed 5-10-99)



§ 93.04  EFFECTIVE PERIOD.



   The tax provided for under this chapter shall be levied, collected and
paid with respect to the salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation,
and with respect to the net profits of businesses, professions, and other
activities, earned from January 1, 1971 through December 31, 2015, until
repealed by action of Council.



(‘69 Code, § 97.04)  (Ord. C-320, passed 10-12-70; Am. Ord. 2015-12,
passed 11-9-15)



§ 93.05  RETURN AND PAYMENT OF TAX.



   (A)   Returns. Each taxpayer, except as otherwise provided herein,
and whether or not a tax be due thereon, shall make and file a return for
each calendar year on or before April 15 of the following calendar year. 
When the return is made for a fiscal year or other period different from the
calendar year, the return shall be filed by the 15th day of the fourth month
following the end of such fiscal year or period.  The administrator is
hereby authorized to provide by regulation that the return of an employer or
employers, showing the amount of tax deducted by the employer or employers
from the salaries, wages, commissions or other compensation of a non-resident
employee, and paid by him or them to the administrator shall be accepted as
the return required of any employee whose sole income, subject to tax under
this chapter, is such salary, wages, commissions, or other compensation.



   (B)   Returns and contents thereof.  The return shall be filed with
the administrator on a form or forms furnished by or obtainable upon request
from the administrator and shall set forth:



      (1)   The net profits or the taxable income reduced by
allowable expenses incurred in the acquisition of net profits or taxable
income earned or received during the preceding year and subject to the tax.



      (2)   The amount of the tax imposed by this chapter on such
earnings and profits.



      (3)   Such other pertinent statements, information returns, or
other information as the administrator may require.



   (C)   Extensions.  The administrator, with approval of the Village
Manager, may extend the time for filing of the annual return upon the request
of the taxpayer for a period of not to exceed six months, or one month beyond
any extension requested of or granted by the Internal Revenue Service for the
filing of the taxpayer's federal income tax return, whichever first occurs. 
The request for extension must be filed by the date the return is normally
due, accompanied by an estimate of the tax which is due and payment of the
estimated amount. Interest shall apply to any unpaid tax during the period of
extension at the rate set out by § 93.10(A), but no penalty shall be
assessed in those cases in which the return is filed and the final tax and
interest paid within the period as extended.



   (D)   Payment with returns.



      (1)   The taxpayer making a return shall, at the time of the
filing thereof, pay to the administrator the amount of taxes shown as due
thereon; provided, however, that where any portion of the tax so due shall
have been deducted at the source pursuant to the provisions of § 93.06 or
where any portion of the tax shall have been paid by the taxpayer pursuant to
the provisions of § 93.07 or where an income tax has been paid to another
municipality, credit for the amount so paid in accordance with § 93.14,
shall be deducted from the amount shown to be due and only the balance, if
any, shall be due and payable at the time of filing the return.



      (2)   Overpayments and refunds.  A taxpayer who has overpaid
the amount of tax to which the village is entitled under the provisions of
this chapter may have such overpayment applied against any subsequent
liability hereunder or, at his election indicated on the return, such
overpayment (or part thereof) shall be refunded.  No additional taxes or
refunds of less than $l shall be collected or refunded.



   (E)   Amended returns.



      (1)   Where necessary an amended return must be filed in order
to report additional income and pay any additional tax due, or claim a refund
of tax overpaid, subject to the requirements and/or limitations contained in
§ 93.11 and 93.14.  The amended returns shall be on a form obtained on
request from the administrator.  A taxpayer may not change the method of
accounting or apportionment of net profits after the due date for filing the
original return.



      (2)   Within three months from the final determination of any
federal tax liability affecting the taxpayer's village tax liability,
taxpayer shall make and file an amended village return showing income subject
to the village tax based upon such final determination of federal tax
liability, and pay any additional tax shown due thereon or make claim for
refund of any overpayment.



('69 Code, § 97.05)  (Ord. C-320, passed 10-12-70; Am. Ord. C-625, passed
11-9-87; Am. Ord. 2005-15, passed 9-12-05; Am. Ord. 2009-02, passed 4-13-09)



§ 93.06  COLLECTION AT SOURCE.



   (A)   Withholding by employer. 



      (1)   In accordance with rules and regulations prescribed by
the administrator, each employer within or doing business within the village
shall deduct at the time of the payment of such salary, wage, commission or
other compensation the tax of 2% of the gross salaries, wages, commissions or
other compensation due by the employer to the employee and, except as
provided in subsection (2), shall, on or before the last day of the month
following the close of each calendar quarter make a return and pay to the
administrator the amount of taxes so deducted. 



      (2)   Employers of household employees, such as domestic help,
casual employees, secretaries, administrative assistants and other
individuals who perform their services in the employer's home, shall, on or
before April 15 of each year, make a return, and pay to the administrator the
amount of taxes so deducted, for the preceding year.



      (3)   The return shall be on a form or forms prescribed by or
acceptable to the administrator and shall be subject to the rules and
regulations prescribed therefor by the administrator. 



      (4)   The employer shall be liable for the payment of the
taxes required to be deducted and withheld, whether or not the taxes have in
fact been withheld.



   (B)   Employer considered as trustee.  The employer in collecting
the tax shall be deemed to hold the same, until payment is made by such
employer to the village, as a trustee for the benefit of the village, and any
tax collected by the employer from his employees shall, until the same is
paid to the village, be deemed a trust fund in the hands of the employer.



('69 Code, § 97.06)  (Ord. C-320, passed 10-12-70; Am. Ord. 1998-19, passed
10-15-98; Am. Ord. 2009-02, passed 4-13-09)



§ 93.07  DECLARATIONS.



   (A)   Requirements for filing.  Every person who anticipates any
taxable income which is not subject to § 93.06, or who engages in any
business, profession, enterprise, or activity subject to the tax imposed by
§ 93.03 shall file a declaration setting forth such estimated income or the
estimated profit or loss from such business activity, together with the
estimated tax due thereon, if any, provided, however, if a person's income is
wholly from wages from which the tax will be withheld and remitted to the
village in accordance with § 93.06, such person need not file a declaration.



   (B)   Calendar dates for filing.



      (1)   Such declaration shall be filed on or before April 15 of
each year during the life of this chapter, or within four months of the date
the taxpayer becomes subject to tax for the first time.



      (2)   Fiscal dates for filing.  Those taxpayers reporting on
a fiscal year basis shall file a declaration by the 15th day of the fourth
month following the beginning of such fiscal year or period.



   (C)   Forms; credit for tax withheld or paid to another.



      (1)   Such declaration shall be filed upon a form furnished
by, or obtainable from the administrator; provided, however, credit shall be
taken in said declaration for the Amberley Village tax to be withheld from
any portion of such income.  In accordance with the provisions of § 93.14,
credit may be taken for tax to be paid to or to be withheld and remitted to
another taxing municipality.



      (2)   Amended declarations.  The original declaration (or any
subsequent amendment thereof) may be increased or decreased on or before any
subsequent quarterly payment date as provided for herein.



   (D)   Payments with declarations.  Such declaration of estimated
tax to be paid to the village, shall be accompanied by a payment of at least
¼ of the estimated annual tax and at least a similar amount shall be paid on
or before the last day of the sixth, ninth and twelfth months after the
beginning of the taxable year.  Provided, however, that in case an amended
declaration has been filed, the unpaid balance shown due thereon shall be
paid in equal installments on or before the remaining payment dates.



   (E)   Annual return required.  By the 15th day of the fourth month
following the beginning of such fiscal year or period of the year following
that for which such declaration or amended declaration was filed, an annual
return shall be filed and any balance which may be due the village shall be
paid therewith in accordance with the provisions of § 93.05.



('69 Code, § 97.07)  (Ord. C-320, passed 10-20-70; Am. Ord. 2009-02, passed
4-13-09)



§ 93.08  DUTIES OF THE ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   Collection.



      (1)   It shall be the duty of the tax administrator to receive
from the taxpayers the tax imposed by this chapter in the manner prescribed
herein to keep an accurate record thereof, and to report all monies so
received.



      (2)   Maintenance of records.  It shall be the duty of the
administrator to enforce payment of all taxes owing the village, to keep
accurate records for a minimum of five years showing the amount due from each
taxpayer required to file a declaration and/or make any return, including
taxes withheld, and to show the dates and amounts of payments thereof.



   (B)   Enforcement.  The administrator is hereby charged with the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter, and is hereby empowered
subject to the approval of the Board of Review, to adopt and promulgate and
to enforce rules and regulations relating to any matter or thing pertaining
to the collection of taxes and the administration and enforcement of the
provisions of this chapter, including provisions for the reexamination and
correction of returns.



   (C)   Determination of amount of taxes.  In any case where a
tax-payer has failed to file a return or has filed a return which does not
show the proper amount of tax due, the administrator may determine the amount
of tax appearing to be due the village from the taxpayer and shall send to
the taxpayer a written statement showing the amount of tax so determined,
together with interest and penalties thereon, if any.



   (D)   Abatement of penalty, interest, or both. Subject to approval
by the Village Manager, the administrator shall have the power to compromise
any interest, penalty, or both, imposed by § 93.10.



   (E)   Immunity from prosecution.  Should a taxpayer refuse to
submit taxpayer's books, records, copies of federal tax returns and other
information required by the administrator to be produced as set forth in this
chapter, by claiming the taxpayer's Fifth Amendment right against
self-incrimination, the administrator, with the approval of the Village
Manager, may grant to such taxpayer immunity from any prosecution by the
village for violation of any tax laws which is based on the information
personally provided by the taxpayer.



('69 Code, § 97.08)  (Ord. C-320, passed 10-20-70; Am. Ord. C-625, passed
11-9-87; Am. Ord. C-743, passed 12-14-92)



§ 93.09  INVESTIGATIVE POWER OF ADMINISTRATOR; PENALTY FOR DIVULGING
CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION.



   (A)   Examination of records.  The administrator or any authorized
employee is hereby authorized to examine the books, papers, records and
federal income tax returns of any employer or of any taxpayer or person
subject to, or whom the administrator believes is subject to the provisions
of this chapter, for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made
or, if no return was made, to ascertain the tax due under this chapter. 
Every such employer, supposed employer, taxpayer or supposed taxpayer is
hereby directed and required to furnish upon written request by the
administrator, or his duly authorized agent or employee, the means,
facilities, and opportunity for making such examinations and investigation as
are hereby authorized.



   (B)   Power to order appearance of taxpayer.  The administrator is
hereby authorized to order any person presumed to have knowledge of the facts
to appear before him and may examine such person under oath concerning any
income which was or should have been returned for taxation or any transaction
tending to affect such income, and for this purpose may compel the production
of books, papers, records and federal income tax returns and the attendance
of all persons before him, whether as parties or witnesses, whenever he
believes such persons have knowledge of such income or information pertinent
to such inquiry.



   (C)   Failure to submit information required by administrator. The
refusal to produce books, papers, records and federal income tax returns, or
the refusal by any employer or person subject or presumed to be subject to
the tax or by any officer, agent or employee of a person subject to the tax
or required to withhold tax to submit to such examination or the failure of
any person to comply with the provisions of this section or with an order or
subpoena issued by the administrator and authorized hereunder shall be deemed
a violation of this chapter, punishable as provided in § 93.99.



   (D)   Confidential nature of information; penalty for disclosure.



      (1)   Any information gained as the result of any returns,
investigations, hearings or verifications required or authorized by this
chapter shall be confidential, except for official purposes, or except in
accordance with the proper judicial order.  Any person divulging such
information in violation of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be
deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to a fine or penalty of
not more than $500 or imprisoned for not more than six months, or both. 
Each disclosure shall constitute a separate offense.



      (2)   In addition to the above penalty, any employee of the
village who violates the provisions of this section relative to the
disclosure of confidential information shall be guilty of an offense
punishable by immediate dismissal.



   (E)   Retention of records.  Each and every taxpayer shall retain
all records necessary to compute his tax liability for a period of five years
from the date his return is filed, or the withholding taxes are paid.



('69 Code, § 97.09)  (Ord. C-320, passed 10-20-70)



§ 93.10  INTEREST AND PENALTIES ON UNPAID TAXES.



   (A)   (1)   Paying and filing late.  All taxes imposed under the
provisions of this chapter remaining unpaid after they become due shall bear
interest and penalty, and all taxpayers filing a return late shall incur a
penalty, at the same rates for the period of such late payment and late
filing as the rates then being charged by the United States Department of
Treasury, Internal Revenue Service for late payment of taxes and late filing
of returns.



      (2)   Should a taxpayer, upon the late filing of any tax
return, be found to owe no taxes, or owes minimal taxes generating penalty
and interest of less than $25, such taxpayer shall nevertheless be required
to pay a fine of $25 upon a first violation, $50 upon a second violation, and
$100 upon a third violation and any subsequent violation.



   (B)   Underpayment of estimated tax.



      (1)   In addition to interest, a penalty is imposed on
underpaid estimated tax when the total of estimated tax payments made on time
by the end of the taxable year is as follows:



         (a)   Less than 90% of the tax shown on the tax return
for that year; or



         (b)   Less than 100% of the tax for the prior year,
whichever is less.



      (2)   Interest is charged on late payment of estimated tax and
on total estimated tax which is as follows:



         (a)   Less than 90% of the tax shown on the tax return
for that year; or



         (b)   Less than 100% of the tax for the prior year,
whichever is less.



      (3)   The penalty rate and the interest rate shall be the same
rates for the period of such underpayment as the rates then being charged by
the United States Department of Treasury, Internal Revenue Service.



      (4)   For failure to remit taxes withheld from employees when
due, a penalty shall be imposed of 3% per month or a fraction thereof.



   (C)   Exceptions.  A penalty shall not be assessed on an additional
tax assessment made by the administrator when a return has been filed in good
faith and the tax paid thereon within the time prescribed by the
administrator; and provided further that in the absence of fraud, neither
penalty nor interest shall be assessed on any additional tax assessment
resulting from a federal audit, providing an amended return is filed and the
additional tax is paid within three months after a final determination of the
federal tax liability.



   (D)   Abatement of penalty, interest, or both.  Upon recommendation
of the administrator and approval by the Village Manager, or upon appeal from
the refusal of the administrator to so recommend, the Board of Review may
abate penalty or interest or both.



('69 Code, § 97.10)  (Ord. C-320, passed 10-20-70; Am. Ord. C-625, passed
11-9-87; Am. Ord. 2009-19, passed 11-9-09)



§ 93.11  COLLECTION OF UNPAID TAXES; REFUNDS OF OVER-PAYMENTS.



   (A)   Limitation on actions.  All taxes imposed by this chapter
shall be collectable, together with any interest and penalties thereon, by
suit, as other debts of like amount are recoverable. Except in the case of
fraud, omission of a substantial portion of income subject to this tax, or
failure to file a return, an additional assessment shall not be made after
three years from the time the tax was due or the return was filed, whichever
was later, provided, however, in those cases in which the commissioner of
internal revenue and the taxpayer have executed a waiver of the federal
statute of limitations, the period in which an additional assessment may be
made by the administrator shall be one year from the time of the final
determination of the federal tax liability.



   (B)   Refunds.



      (1)   Time limitation on refunds.  Taxes erroneously paid
shall not be refunded unless a claim for refund is made within three years
from the time the tax was due or the return was filed, whichever is later, or
within three months after final determination of the federal tax liability,
whichever is later.



      (2)   Interest on refunds.  Interest shall be allowed and
paid on any overpayment by a taxpayer of any village income tax obligation
from the date of the overpayment until the date of the refund of the
overpayment, except that if any overpayment is refunded within 90 days after
the final filing date of the annual return or 90 days after the complete
return is filed, whichever is later, no interest shall be allowed on the
refunded overpayment.  For purposes of computing the payment of interest on
overpayments, no amount of tax for any taxable year shall be treated as
having been paid before the date on which the tax return for that year was
due without regard to any extension of time for filing that return.  The
interest shall be paid at the rate of interest prescribed by R.C. §
5703.47. 



(R.C. § 718.12(D)



   (C)   Minimum amount of tax to be collected. Amounts of less than $1
shall not be collected or refunded.



('69 Code, § 97.11)  (Ord. C-320, passed 10-20-70)



§ 93.12  BOARD OF REVIEW.



   (A)   Procedures.  A Board of Review consisting of a chairman and
two other individuals, who may be officials of the village, but not members
of Council, each to be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of Council,
is hereby created.  The members of the Board of Review shall hold office
during the term of the Council approving them, and until their successors
have been appointed and approved.  A majority of the members of the Board
shall constitute a quorum.  The Board shall adopt its own procedural rules
and shall keep a record of its proceedings.  Any hearing by the Board may be
conducted privately, and the provisions of § 93.09 with reference to the
confidential character of information required to be disclosed by the chapter
shall apply to such matters as may be heard before the Board of Review.



   (B)   Powers of Board.  All rules and regulations and amendments or
changes thereto, which are adopted by the administrator under the authority
conferred by this chapter, must be approved by the Board of Review before the
same become effective.  The Board shall hear and pass on appeals from any
ruling or decision of the administrator, and at the request of the taxpayer
or administrator, is empowered to substitute alternate methods of
allocation.  The Board, on hearing, has jurisdiction to affirm, reverse or
modify any ruling or decision of the administrator or any part thereof.



   (C)   Time limitation for appeals.  Any person dissatisfied with
any ruling or decision of the administrator which is made under the authority
conferred under this chapter may appeal therefrom to the Board of Review
within 30 days from the announcement of such ruling or decision by the
administrator, and the Board shall, on hearing, have jurisdiction to affirm,
reverse, or modify any such ruling or decision, or any part thereof.



('69 Code, § 97.12)  (Ord. C-320, passed 10-20-70)



§ 93.13  ALLOCATION OF FUNDS.



   The funds to be derived from the enforcement of this chapter shall be
allocated in accordance with the determination of the Council by ordinances
passed from time to time.



('69 Code, § 97.13)  (Ord. C-320, passed 10-20-70)



§ 93.14  CREDIT FOR TAX PAID TO ANOTHER MUNICIPALITY.



   (A)   Limitation on amount paid.  Where a resident of the village
is subject to a municipal income tax in another municipality by reason of
that municipality being the situs of his employment, he shall not pay a total
municipal income tax on the same income greater than the tax imposed at the
higher rate.



   (B)   Credits and limitations.  Every resident who earns or
receives taxable income for work done or services performed or rendered
outside of the village, if he has paid a municipal income tax on the same
income taxable under this chapter to another municipality, shall be allowed a
credit against the tax imposed by this chapter of the amount so paid by him
or in his behalf to such other municipality for taxes paid in the same tax
year.  The credit shall not exceed the tax assessed by this chapter in the
same tax year on such income earned in such other municipality or
municipalities where the tax is paid.  Credits may not be carried forward to
future years



   (C)   Claim for credit or refund.  A claim for credit or refund
shall be made in such a manner as the administrator may provide by regulation.



('69 Code, § 97.14)  (Ord. C-320, passed 10-20-70; Am. Ord. C-625, passed
11-9-87; Am. Ord. 2009-02, passed 4-13-09)



§ 93.15  EXTENSION OF EFFECTIVE PERIOD.



   (A)   This chapter shall be effective insofar as the collection of
taxes levied and actions or proceedings under this chapter are concerned,
until all said taxes are fully paid and any and all suits and prosecutions
for the collection of the taxes or for the punishment of violations of the
provisions of this chapter have been fully terminated, provided said actions
are taken in accordance with the limitations previously set forth herein.



   (B)   Time of filing annual returns.  Annual returns due for all or
any part of the term of this chapter shall be due on the date provided in
§§ 93.05 and 93.07 as though the same were continuing.



('69 Code, § 97.15)  (Ord. C-320, passed 10-20-70)



§ 93.16  PROCEEDS FROM 401(a) PLANS AND OTHER DEFERRED COMPENSATION PLANS.



   Proceeds from employer financed pension and profit sharing plans and
trusts which are qualified under § 401(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, as
well as proceeds from nonqualified plans, are not subject to tax.  The
receipt of previously deferred compensation, whether qualified under §
401(a) or nonqualified, is not taxed at the time of distribution; rather it
is taxed at the time of such deferral in accordance with the provisions of §
93.02(1)(d).



(Ord. C-789, passed 12-12-94; Am. Ord. 2009-02, passed 4-13-09)



§ 93.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Enumeration of violations and penalties. Whoever shall do any
of the following is in violation of this chapter:



      (1)   Fail, neglect or refuse to make any return or
declaration required by this chapter;



      (2)   Make any incomplete, false or fraudulent return;



      (3)   Fail, neglect or refuse to pay the tax, penalties, or
interest imposed by this chapter;



      (4)   Fail, neglect or refuse to withhold the tax from his
employees or remit such withholding to the administrator;



      (5)   Refuse to permit the administrator or any duly
authorized agent or employee to examine his books, records, papers and
federal income tax returns relating to the income or net profits of a
taxpayer;



      (6)   Fail to appear before the administrator and to produce
his books, records, papers or federal income tax returns relating to the
income or net profits of a taxpayer upon order or subpoena issued by the
administrator;



      (7)   Refuse to disclose to the administrator any information
with respect to the income or net profits of a taxpayer;



      (8)   Fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter or
any order or subpoena of the administrator authorized hereby;



      (9)   Give to an employer false information as to his true
name, correct social security number and residence address, or fail to
promptly notify an employer of any change in residence address and date
thereof;



      (10)   Fail to use ordinary diligence in maintaining proper
records of employees' residence addresses, total wages paid and village tax
withheld, or to knowingly give the administrator false information; or



      (11)   Attempt to do anything whatever to avoid the payment of
the whole or any part of the tax, penalties or interest imposed by this
chapter.



   (B)   Time limitations on prosecutions.  All prosecutions under
this section shall be commenced within three years after the commission of
the offense, provided that in the case of fraud, failure to file a return, or
the omission of 25% or more of income required to be reported, prosecutions
may be commenced within six years after the commission of the offense.



(R.C. § 718.12(B)



   (C)   Failure to obtain forms not a defense.  The failure of any
employer or person to receive or procure a return, declaration or other
required form shall not excuse him from making any information return, return
or declaration, from filing such form, or from paying the tax.



   (D)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this chapter or
fails to comply therewith is guilty of a minor misdemeanor, except that if
the offender has previously been convicted of a violation of this chapter,
any violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  The
imposition of a penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation nor
permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or
remedy such violation or violations within 30 days, and each 30-day period
following a conviction for which any violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.



('69 Code, § 97.99)   (Ord. C-320, passed 10-20-70; Am. Ord. C-780,
passed 4-11-94)



CHAPTER 94: INTOXICATING LIQUORS



Section



   94.01   Definitions



   94.02   Exemptions from chapter



   94.03   Restrictions applicable to sale of beer or intoxicating
liquor for consumption on the premises



   94.04   Permit required; restrictions on sale of beer and liquor



   94.05   Activities prohibited without permit



   94.06   Illegal transportation prohibited



   94.07   Open container prohibited



   94.08   Underage person shall not purchase intoxicating liquor or
beer



   94.09   Prohibitions; minors under 18 years; low-alcohol beverages



   94.10   Alcohol vaporizing devices prohibited



   94.11   Misrepresentation to obtain alcoholic beverage for a minor
prohibited



   94.12   Misrepresentation by a minor under 21 years



   94.13   Hours of sale or consumption



   94.14   Property owners to prohibit possession and consumption of
beer and intoxicating liquor by minors



   94.15   Parental responsibility



   94.16   Posting of card



   94.17   Good faith acceptances of spurious identification



   94.18   Prohibition against consumption in motor vehicle



   94.19   Obstructing search of premises prohibited



   94.20   Illegal possession of intoxicating liquor prohibited



   94.21   Prohibition against sale or possession of diluted liquor and
refilled containers



   94.22   Sale to underage persons prohibited



   94.23   Keeping place where intoxicating liquors are sold in
violation of law



   94.24   Intoxicating liquors shall not be sold in brothels



   94.25   Use of intoxicating liquor in a public dance hall
prohibited; exceptions



   94.26   Poisonously adulterated liquors



   94.27   Tavern keeper permitting rioting or drunkenness



 



   94.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Driving while intoxicated or drugged, implied consent, see §§ 73.01
and 73.02



Statutory reference:



   Liquor permits, see R.C. Chapter 4303



   Local option elections, see R.C. §§ 4301.32 et seq.



   Use of license to violate liquor laws; suspension; procedures, see R.C.
§ 4510.33



§ 94.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALCOHOL.  Ethyl alcohol, whether rectified or diluted with water or
not, whatever its origin may be, and includes synthetic ethyl alcohol.  The
term does not include denatured alcohol and wood alcohol.



   AT RETAIL.  For use or consumption by the purchaser and not for resale.



   BEER. 



      (1)   Includes all beverages brewed or fermented wholly or in
part from malt products and containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume.



      (2)   Beer, regardless of the percent of alcohol by volume, is
not intoxicating liquor for purposes of this code, the Ohio Revised Code, or
any rules adopted under it.



   CIDER.  All liquids that are fit to use for beverage purposes that
contain 0.5% of alcohol by volume, but not more than 6% of alcohol by weight
that are made through the normal alcoholic fermentation of the juice of
sound, ripe apples, including, without limitation, flavored, sparkling, or
carbonated cider and cider made from pure condensed apple must.



   CLUB.  A corporation or association of individuals organized in good
faith for social, recreational, benevolent, charitable, fraternal, political,
patriotic, or athletic purposes, which is the owner, lessor, or occupant of a
permanent building or part of a permanent building operated solely for such
purposes, membership in which entails the prepayment of regular dues, and
includes the place so operated.



   COMMUNITY FACILITY.  Means either of the following:



      (1)   Any convention, sports or entertainment facility or
complex, or any combination of these, that is used by or accessible to the
general public and that is owned or operated in whole or in part by the
state, a state agency, or a political subdivision of the state or that is
leased from, or located on property owned by or leased from, the state, a
state agency, a political subdivision of the state, or a convention
facilities authority created pursuant to R.C. § 351.02;



      (2)   An area designated as a community entertainment district
pursuant to R.C. § 4301.80.



   CONTROLLED ACCESS ALCOHOL AND BEVERAGE CABINET.  A closed container,
either refrigerated, in whole or in part, or nonrefrigerated, access to the
interior of which is restricted by means of a device that requires the use of
a key, magnetic card, or similar device and from which beer, intoxicating
liquor, other beverages, or food may be sold.



   HOTEL.  The same meaning as in R.C. § 3731.01, subject to the
exceptions mentioned in R.C. § 3731.03.



   INTOXICATING LIQUOR and LIQUOR.   All liquids and compounds, other
than beer, containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume which are fit to use
for beverage purposes, from whatever source and by whatever process produced,
by whatever name called, and whether they are medicated, proprietary, or
patented. INTOXICATING LIQUOR and LIQUOR include cider and alcohol, and all
solids and confections which contain 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume.



   LOW-ALCOHOL BEVERAGE.   Any brewed or fermented malt product or any
product made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits, or other
agricultural products that contains either no alcohol or less than 0.5% of
alcohol by volume.  The beverages described in this definition do not
include a soft drink such as root beer, birch beer, or ginger beer.



   MANUFACTURE.   All processes by which beer or intoxicating liquor is
produced, whether by distillation, rectifying, fortifying, blending,
fermentation, brewing, or in any other manner.



   MANUFACTURER.   Any person engaged in the business of manufacturing
beer or intoxicating liquor.



   MIXED BEVERAGES.   Include bottled and prepared cordials, cocktails,
highballs, and solids and confections that are obtained by mixing any type of
whiskey, neutral spirits, brandy, gin or other distilled spirits with, or
over, carbonated or plain water, pure juices from flowers and plants, and
other flavoring materials.  The completed product shall contain not less
than 0.5% of alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume.



   NIGHTCLUB.  A place habitually operated for profit, where food is
served for consumption on the premises, and one or more forms of amusement
are provided or permitted for a consideration that may be in the form of a
cover charge or may be included in the price of the food and beverages, or
both, purchased by patrons.



   PERSON.  Includes firms and corporations.



   PHARMACY.  An establishment as defined in R.C. § 4729.01, that is
under the management or control of a licensed pharmacist in accordance with
R.C. § 4729.27.



   RESTAURANT.  A place located in a permanent building provided with
space and accommodations wherein, in consideration of the payment of money,
hot meals are habitually prepared, sold, and served at noon and evening, as
the principal business of the place. The term does not include pharmacies,
confectionery stores, lunch stands, nightclubs, and filling stations.



   SALE and SELL.  The exchange, barter, gift, offer for sale, sale,
distribution, and delivery of any kind, and the transfer of title or
possession of beer and intoxicating liquor either by constructive or actual
delivery by any means or devices whatever, including the sale of beer or
intoxicating liquor by means of a controlled access alcohol and beverage
cabinet pursuant to R.C. § 4301.21. Such terms do not include the mere
solicitation of orders for beer or intoxicating liquor from the holders of
permits issued by the Division of Liquor Control authorizing the sale of the
beer or intoxicating liquor, but no solicitor shall solicit any orders until
the solicitor has been registered with the Division pursuant to R.C. §
4303.25.



   SALES AREA OR TERRITORY. An exclusive geographic area or territory that
is assigned to a particular A or B permit holder and that either has one or
more political subdivisions as its boundaries or consists of an area of land
with readily identifiable geographic boundaries. SALES AREA OR TERRITORY does
not include, however, any particular retail location in an exclusive
geographic area or territory that had been assigned to another A or B permit
holder before April 9, 2001.



   SEALED CONTAINER.  Any container having a capacity of not more than
128 fluid ounces, the opening of which is closed to prevent the entrance of
air.



   SPIRITUOUS LIQUOR.  All intoxicating liquors containing more than 21%
of alcohol by volume.



   VEHICLE.  All means of transportation by land, by water, or by air,
and everything made use of in any way for such transportation.



   WHOLESALE DISTRIBUTOR and DISTRIB- UTOR.  A person engaged in the
business of selling to retail dealers for purposes of resale.



   WINE.  All liquids fit to use for beverage purposes containing not
less than 0.5% of alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by
volume, which is made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits, or other
agricultural products. Except as provided in R.C. § 4301.01(B)(3), the term
does not include cider.



(R.C. §§  4301.01, 4301.244)



§ 94.02  EXEMPTIONS FROM CHAPTER.



   The provisions of this chapter do not prevent:



   (A)   The storage of intoxicating liquor in bonded warehouses,
established in accordance with the Acts of Congress and under the regulation
of the United States, located in the municipality, or the transportation of
intoxicating liquor to or from bonded warehouses of the United States
wherever located.



   (B)   A bona fide resident of this state who is the owner of a
warehouse receipt from obtaining or transporting to the resident's residence
for the resident's own consumption and not for resale spirituous liquor
stored in a government bonded warehouse in this state or in another state
prior to December 1933, subject to such terms as are prescribed by the
Division of Liquor Control.



   (C)   The manufacture of cider from fruit for the purpose of making
vinegar, and nonintoxicating cider and fruit juices for use and sale.



   (D)   A licensed physician or dentist from administering or
dispensing intoxicating liquor or alcohol to a patient in good faith in the
actual course of the practice of his or her profession.



   (E)   The sale of alcohol to physicians, dentists, druggists,
veterinary surgeons, manufacturers, hospitals, infirmaries, or medical or
educational institutions using the same for medicinal, mechanical, chemical
or scientific purposes.



   (F)   The sale, gift, or keeping for sale by druggists and others of
any of the medicinal preparations manufactured in accordance with the
formulas prescribed by the United States Pharmacopoeia and National
Formulary, patent or proprietary preparations, and other bona fide medicinal
and technical preparations, which contain no more alcohol than is necessary
to hold the medicinal agents in solution and to preserve the same, which are
manufactured and sold as medicines and not as beverages, are unfit for use
for beverage purposes, and the sale of which does not require the payment of
a United States liquor dealer's tax.



   (G)   The manufacture and sale of tinctures or of toilet, medicinal
and antiseptic preparations and solutions not intended for internal human use
nor to be sold as beverages, and which are unfit for beverage purposes, if
upon the outside of each bottle, box, or package of which there is printed in
English, conspicuously and legibly, the quantity by volume of alcohol in such
preparation or solution.



   (H)   The manufacture and keeping for sale of the food products
known as flavoring extracts when manufactured and sold for cooking, culinary
or flavoring purposes, and which are unfit for use for beverage purposes.



   (I)   The lawful sale of wood alcohol or of ethyl alcohol for
external use when combined with such other substances as to make it unfit for
internal use.



   (J)   The manufacture, sale, and transport of ethanol or ethyl
alcohol for use as fuel.  As used in this division, ETHANOL has the same
meaning as the R.C. § 5733.46.



   (K)   The purchase and importation into the municipality or the
purchase at wholesale from A or B permit holders in this state of beer and
intoxicating liquor for use in manufacturing processes of nonbeverage food
products under such terms as are prescribed by the Department, provided that
the terms prescribed by the Department shall not increase the cost of the
beer or intoxicating liquor to any person, firm or corporation purchasing and
importing the same into this municipality or purchasing it from an A or B
permit holder for that use.



   (L)   Any resident of this state or any member of the armed forces
of the United States who has attained the age of 21 years from bringing into
this municipality for personal use and not for resale not more than one liter
of spirituous liquor, 4.5 liters of wine, or 288 ounces of beer in any 30 day
period, and the same is free of any tax consent fee when such resident or
member of the armed forces physically possesses and accompanies such
spirituous liquor, wine or beer on returning from a foreign country, another
state, or an insular possession of the United States.



   (M)   Persons at least 21 years of age who collect ceramic
commemorative bottles containing spirituous liquor that have unbroken federal
tax stamps thereon from selling or trading such bottles to other collectors.
Such bottles shall originally have been purchased at retail from the
Department, legally imported under division (L) of this section, or legally
imported pursuant to a consent to import issued by the Department. Such sales
shall be for the purpose of exchanging a ceramic commemorative bottle between
private collectors and shall not be for the purpose of selling the spirituous
liquor for personal consumption.  The sale or exchange authorized by this
division shall not occur on the premises of any permit holder, shall not be
made in connection with the business of any permit holder, and shall not be
made in connection with any mercantile business.



   (N)   The sale of beer or intoxicating liquor without a liquor
permit at a private residence, not more than five times per calendar year at
a residence address, at an event that has the following characteristics:



      (1)   The event is for a charitable, benevolent, or political
purpose, but shall not include any event the proceeds of which are for the
profit or gain of any individual;



      (2)   The event has in attendance not more than 50 people;



      (3)   The event shall be for a period not to exceed 12 hours;



      (4)   The sale of beer and intoxicating liquor at the event
shall not take place between 2:30 a.m. and 5:30 a.m.;



      (5)   No person under 21 years of age shall purchase or
consume beer or intoxicating liquor at the event and no beer or intoxicating
liquor shall be sold to any person under 21 years of age at the event; and



      (6)   No person at the event shall sell or furnish beer or
intoxicating liquor to an intoxicated person.



   (O)   The possession or consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor
by a person who is under 21 years of age and who is a student at an
accredited college or university, provided that both of the following apply:



      (1)   The person is required to taste and expectorate the beer
or intoxicating liquor for a culinary, food service, or hospitality course.



      (2)   The person is under the direct supervision of the
instructor of the culinary, food service, or hospitality course.



(R.C. § 4301.20)



§ 94.03  RESTRICTIONS APPLICABLE TO SALE OF BEER OR INTOXICATING LIQUOR FOR
CONSUMPTION ON THE PREMISES.



   (A)   The sale of beer or intoxicating liquor for consumption on the
premises is subject to the following restrictions, in addition to those
imposed by the rules and orders of the Division of Liquor Control:



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C.
Chapter 4301, beer or intoxicating liquor may be served to a person not
seated at a table unless there is reason to believe that the beer or
intoxicating liquor so served will be consumed by a person under 21 years of
age.



      (2)   Beer or intoxicating liquor may be served by a hotel in
the room of a bona fide guest, and may be sold by a hotel holding a D-5a
permit, or a hotel holding a D-3 or D-5 permit that otherwise meets all of
the requirements for holding a D-5a permit, by means of a controlled access
alcohol and beverage cabinet that shall be located only in the hotel room of
a registered guest. A hotel may sell beer or intoxicating liquor as
authorized by its permit to a registered guest by means of a controlled
access alcohol and beverage cabinet in accordance with the following
requirements:



         (a)   Only a person 21 years of age or older who is a
guest registered to stay in a guestroom shall be provided a key, magnetic
card, or other similar device necessary to obtain access to the contents of a
controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet in that guestroom.



         (b)   The hotel shall comply with R.C. § 4301.22, or a
substantially similar municipal ordinance, in connection with the handling,
restocking, and replenishing of the beer and intoxicating liquor in the
controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet.



         (c)   The hotel shall replenish or restock beer and
intoxicating liquor in any controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet
only during the hours during which the hotel may serve or sell beer and
intoxicating liquor.



         (d)   The registered guest shall verify in writing that
the guest has read and understands the language that shall be posted on the
controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet as required by division
(A)(2)(e) of this section.



         (e)   A hotel authorized to sell beer and intoxicating
liquor pursuant to division (A)(2) of this section shall post on the
controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet, in conspicuous language, the
following notice:



"The alcoholic beverages contained in this cabinet shall not be removed from
the premises."



         (f)   The hotel shall maintain a record of each sale of
beer or intoxicating liquor made by the hotel by means of a controlled access
alcohol and beverage cabinet for any period in which the permit holder is
authorized to hold the permit pursuant to R.C. §§ 4303.26 and 4303.27 and
any additional period during which an applicant exercises its right to appeal
a rejection by the Division of Liquor Control to renew a permit pursuant to
R.C. § 4303.271. The records maintained by the hotel shall comply with both
of the following:



            1.   Include the name, address, age, and signature
of each hotel guest who is provided access by the hotel to a controlled
access alcohol and beverage cabinet pursuant to division (A)(2)(a) of this
section;



            2.   Be made available during business hours to
authorized agents of the Division of Liquor Control pursuant to R.C. §
4301.10(A)(6) or to enforcement agents of the Department of Public Safety
pursuant to R.C. §§ 5502.13 to 5502.19.



         (g)   The hotel shall observe all other applicable rules
adopted by the Division of Liquor Control and the Liquor Control Commission.



      (3)   The seller shall not require the purchase of food with
the purchase of beer or intoxicating liquor; nor shall the seller of beer or
intoxicating liquor give away food of any kind in connection with the sale of
beer or intoxicating liquor, except as authorized by rule of the state Liquor
Control Commission.



      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4301.62(B)(8),
the seller shall not permit the purchaser to remove beer or intoxicating
liquor so sold from the premises.



      (5)   A hotel authorized to sell beer and intoxicating liquor
pursuant to division (A)(2) of this section shall provide a registered guest
with the opportunity to refuse to accept a key, magnetic card, or other
similar device necessary to obtain access to the contents of a controlled
access alcohol and beverage cabinet in that guest room. If a registered guest
refuses to accept such key, magnetic card, or other similar device, the hotel
shall not assess any charges on the registered guest for use of the
controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet in that guest room.



(R.C. § 4301.21)



   (B)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) of this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 4301.99(C))  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.04  RESTRICTIONS ON SALE OF BEER AND LIQUOR.



   (A)   Restrictions on sales. Sales of beer and intoxicating liquor
under all classes of permits and from liquor stores are subject to the
following restrictions, in addition to those imposed by the rules or orders
of the state Division of Liquor Control.



      (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or
in R.C. Chapter 4301, no beer or intoxicating liquor shall be sold to any
person under 21 years of age.



         (b)   No low-alcohol beverage shall be sold to any
person under 18 years of age. No permit issued by the Division shall be
suspended, revoked, or cancelled because of a violation of this subdivision
(A)(1)(b).



         (c)   No intoxicating liquor shall be handled by any
person under 21 years of age, except that a person 18 years of age or older
employed by a permit holder may handle or sell beer or intoxicating liquor in
sealed containers in connection with wholesale or retail sales, and any
person 19 years of age or older employed by a permit holder may handle
intoxicating liquor in open containers when acting in the capacity of a
server in a hotel, restaurant, club, or night club, as defined in R.C. §
4301.01, or in the premises of a D-7 permit holder. This section does not
authorize persons under 21 years of age to sell intoxicating liquor across a
bar. Any person employed by a permit holder may handle beer or intoxicating
liquor in sealed containers in connection with manufacturing, storage,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading, and may
handle beer or intoxicating liquor in open containers in connection with
cleaning tables or handling empty bottles or glasses.



      (2)   No permit holder and no agent or employee of a permit
holder shall sell or furnish beer or intoxicating liquor to an intoxicated
person.



      (3)   (a)   No sales of intoxicating liquor shall be made
after 2:30 a.m. on Sunday, except under either of the following circumstances:



            1.   Intoxicating liquor may be sold on Sunday
under authority of a permit that authorizes Sunday sale.



            2.   Spiritous liquor may be sold on Sunday by any
person awarded an agency contract under R.C. § 4301.17 if the sale of
spiritous liquor is authorized in the applicable precinct as the result of an
election on question (B)(1) or (B)(2) of R.C. § 4301.351 and if the agency
contract authorizes the sale of spiritous liquor on Sunday.



         (b)   This section does not prevent the municipality
from adopting a closing hour for the sale of intoxicating liquor earlier than
2:30 a.m. on Sunday or to provide that no intoxicating liquor may be sold
prior to that hour on Sunday.



      (4)   (a)   No holder of a permit shall give away any beer
or intoxicating liquor of any kind at any time in connection with the permit
holder's business. However, with the exception of an A-1-A permit holder that
also has been issued an A-2 or A-2f permit, an A-1-A, A-1c, or D permit
holder may provide to a paying customer not more than a total of four tasting
samples of beer, wine, or spirituous liquor, as authorized by the applicable
permit, in any twenty-four-hour period. The permit holder shall provide the
tasting samples free of charge, at the permit holder’s expense, only to a
person who is 21 years of age or older. The person shall consume the tasting
samples on the premises of the permit holder. A distributor is not
responsible for the costs of providing tasting samples authorized under
division (A)(4) of this section.



         (b)   As used in division (A)(4) of this section:



            TASTING SAMPLE. Means one of the following, as
applicable:



               a.   An amount not to exceed two ounces of
beer;



               b.   An amount not to exceed two ounces of
wine;



               c.   An amount not to exceed a quarter ounce
of spirituous liquor.



            D PERMIT HOLDER. Means a person that has been issued
a D-1, D-2, D-2x, D-3, D-3a, D-3 x, D-4, D-5, D-5a, D-5c, D-5d, D-5e, D-5f,
D-5g, D-5h, D-5i, D-5j, D-5k, D-5l, D-5m, D-5n, D-5o, D-6, or D-7 permit.



      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, no retail
permit holder shall display or permit the display on the outside of any
licensed retail premises, on any lot of ground on which the licensed premises
are situated, or on the exterior of any building of which the licensed
premises are a part, any sign, illustration, or advertisement bearing the
name, brand name, trade name, trademark, designation, or other emblem of, or
indicating the manufacturer, producer, distributor, place of manufacture,
production, or distribution of, any beer or intoxicating liquor. Signs,
illustrations, or advertisements bearing the name, brand name, trade name,
trademark, designation, or other emblem of or indicating the manufacturer,
producer, distributor, place of manufacture, production, or distribution of
beer or intoxicating liquor may be displayed and permitted to be displayed on
the interior or in the show windows of any licensed premises, if the
particular brand or type of product so advertised is actually available for
sale on the premises at the time of that display. The Liquor Control
Commission shall determine by rule the size and character of those signs,
illustrations, or advertisements.



      (6)   No retail permit holder shall possess on the licensed
premises any barrel or other container from which beer is drawn, unless there
is attached to the spigot or other dispensing apparatus the name of the
manufacturer of the product contained in the barrel or other container,
provided that, if the beer is served at a bar, the manufacturer's name or
brand shall appear in full view of the purchaser. The Commission shall
regulate the size and character of the devices provided for in this section.



      (7)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, no sale
of any gift certificate shall be permitted whereby beer or intoxicating
liquor of any kind is to be exchanged for the certificate, unless the gift
certificate can be exchanged only for food, and beer or intoxicating liquor,
for on-premises consumption and the value of the beer or intoxicating liquor
does not exceed more than 30% of the total value of the gift certificate. The
sale of gift certificates for the purchase of beer, wine, or mixed beverages
shall be permitted for the purchase of beer, wine, or mixed beverages for
off-premises consumption. Limitations on the use of a gift certificate for
the purchase of beer, wine, or mixed beverages for off-premises consumption
may be expressed by clearly stamping or typing on the face of the certificate
that the certificate may not be used for the purchase of beer, wine, or mixed
beverages for on-premises consumption.



(R.C. § 4301.22)



   (B)   Division (A)(1) not modified or affected. The provisions of
R.C. §§ 4301.633 through 4301.637, or substantially equivalent municipal
ordinances, shall not be deemed to modify or affect division (A)(1) of this
section or R.C. § 4301.22(A).



(R.C. § 4301.638)



   (C)   Penalties.



      (1)   Whoever violates divisions (A)(1)(b) or (A)(3) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 4301.99(B))



      (2)   Whoever violates divisions (A)(1)(a), (A)(1)(c) or
(A)(2) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 4301.99(D), (H)) Penalty, see § 94.99



Statutory reference:



   Suspension of beer and liquor sales during emergency, see R.C. §
4301.251



§ 94.05  PERMIT REQUIRED; ACTIVITIES PROHIBITED WITHOUT PERMIT.



   (A)   Permit required.



      (1)   No person personally or by the person's clerk, agent, or
employee, shall manufacture, manufacture for sale, offer, keep, or possess
for sale, furnish or sell, or solicit the purchase or sale of any beer or
intoxicating liquor in this state, or transport, import, or cause to be
transported or imported any beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol in or into
this municipality for delivery, use or sale, unless the person has fully
complied with R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303 or is the holder of a permit issued
by the Division of Liquor Control and in force at the time.



      (2)   No manufacturer, supplier, wholesale distributor,
broker, or retailer of beer or intoxicating liquor, or other person shall
employ, retain, or otherwise utilize any person in this state to act as an
employee, agent, solicitor, or salesperson, or act in any other
representative capacity to sell, solicit, take orders, or receive offers to
purchase or expressions of interest to purchase beer or intoxicating liquor
from any person, at any location other than a liquor permit premises, except
as specifically authorized by R.C. Chapter 4301 or R.C. Chapter 4303 or rules
adopted thereunder. No function, event, or party shall take place at any
location other than a liquor permit premises where any person acts in any
manner to sell, solicit, take orders, or receive offers to purchase or
expressions of intent to purchase beer or intoxicating liquor to or from any
person, except as specifically authorized by R.C. Chapter 4301 or R.C.
Chapter 4303 or rules adopted thereunder.



(R.C. § 4303.25)



   (B)   Activities prohibited without permit.



      (1)   No person, personally or by the person's clerk, agent,
or employee, who is not the holder of an A permit issued by the Division of
Liquor Control, in force at the time, and authorizing the manufacture of beer
or intoxicating liquor, or who is not an agent or employee of the Department
authorized to manufacture beer or intoxicating liquor, shall manufacture any
beer or intoxicating liquor for sale, or shall manufacture spirituous liquor.



      (2)   No person, personally or by the person's clerk, agent,
or employee, who is not the holder of an A, B, C, D, E, F, G, I, or S permit
issued by the Department, in force at the time, and authorizing the sale of
beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol, or who is not an agent or employee of
the Department or the Tax Commissioner authorized to sell beer, intoxicating
liquor, or alcohol, shall sell, keep, or possess beer, intoxicating liquor,
or alcohol for sale to any persons other than those authorized by this
chapter and R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303 to purchase any beer or intoxicating
liquor, or sell any alcohol at retail. This division does not apply to or
affect the sale or possession for sale of any low-alcohol beverage.



      (3)   No person, personally or by the person's clerk, agent,
or employee, who is the holder of a permit issued by the Department, shall
sell, keep, or possess for sale any intoxicating liquor not purchased from
the Department or from the holder of a permit issued by the Department
authorizing the sale of intoxicating liquor, unless the same has been
purchased with the special consent of the Department. The Department shall
revoke the permit of any person convicted of a violation of this division.



(R.C. § 4301.58)



   (C)   Penalty. Whoever violates division (B) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 4301.99(C))  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.06  ILLEGAL TRANSPORTATION PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person, who is not the holder of an H permit shall
transport beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol in this municipality. This
section does not apply to the transportation and delivery of beer, alcohol,
or intoxicating liquor purchased or to be purchased from the holder of a
permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control, in force at the time, and
authorizing the sale and delivery of the beer, alcohol, or intoxicating
liquor so transported, or to the transportation and delivery of beer,
intoxicating liquor, or alcohol purchased from the Department or the Tax
Commissioner, or purchased by the holder of an A or B permit outside this
state, and transported within this municipality by them in their own trucks
for the purpose of sale under their permits.



(R.C. § 4301.60)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C. § 4301.99(C))



§ 94.07  OPEN CONTAINER PROHIBITED.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE means a vehicle registered under R.C. §
4503.24.



      STREET, HIGHWAY, and MOTOR VEHICLE have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 4511.01.



   (B)   No person shall have in the person’s his or her possession
an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor in any of the following
circumstances:



      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(1)(e) of this
section, in a state liquor store;



      (2)   Except as provided in division (C) of this section, on
the premises of the holder of any permit issued by the Division of Liquor
Control;



      (3)   In any other public place;



      (4)   Except as provided in division (D) or (E) of this
section, while operating or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on any
street, highway, or other public or private property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking;



      (5)   Except as provided in division (D) or (E) of this
section, while being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on any street,
highway, or other public or private property open to the public for purposes
of vehicular travel or parking.



   (C)   (1)   A person may have in the person's possession an
opened container of any of the following:



         (a)   Beer or intoxicating liquor that has been lawfully
purchased for consumption on the premises where bought from the holder of an
A-1-A, A-2, A-2f, A-3a, D-1, D-2, D-3, D-3a, D-4, D-4a, D-5, D-5a, D-5b,
D-5c, D-5d, D-5e, D-5f, D-5g, D-5h, D-5i, D-5j, D-5k, D-5l, D-5m, D-5n, D-5o,
D-7, D-8, E, F, F-2, F-5, F-7, or F-8 permit;



         (b)   Beer, wine, or mixed beverages served for
consumption on the premises by the holder of an F-3 permit, wine served as a
tasting sample by an A-2 permit holder or S permit holder for consumption on
the premises of a farmers market for which an F-10 permit has been issued, or
wine served for consumption on the premises by the holder of an F-4 or F-6
permit;



         (c)   Beer or intoxicating liquor consumed on the
premises of a convention facility as provided in R.C. § 4303.201;



         (d)   Beer or intoxicating liquor to be consumed during
tastings and samplings approved by rule of the Liquor Control Commission;



         (e)   Spiritous liquor to be consumed for purposes of a
tasting sample, as defined in R.C. § 4301.171.



      (2)   A person may have in the person's possession on an F
liquor permit premises an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
that was not purchased from the holder of the F permit if the premises for
which the F permit is issued is a music festival and the holder of the F
permit grants permission for that possession on the premises during the
period for which the F permit is issued.  As used in this division (C)(2),
MUSIC FESTIVAL means a series of outdoor live musical performances extending
for a period of at least three consecutive days and located on an area of
land of at least 40 acres.



      (3)   (a)   A person may have in the person's possession on
a D-2 liquor permit premises an opened or unopened container of wine that was
not purchased from the holder of the D-2 permit if the premises for which the
D-2 permit is issued is an outdoor performing arts center, the person is
attending an orchestral performance, and the holder of the D-2 permit grants
permission for the possession and consumption of wine in certain
predesignated areas of the premises during the period for which the D-2
permit is issued.



         (b)   As used in division (C)(3)(a) of this section:



            ORCHESTRAL PERFORMANCE means a concert comprised of a
group of not fewer than 40 musicians playing various musical instruments.



            OUTDOOR PERFORMING ARTS CENTER means an outdoor
performing arts center that is located on not less than 150 acres of land and
that is open for performances from the first day of April to the last day of
October of each year.



      (4)   A person may have in the person's possession an opened
or unopened container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location
at which the person is attending an orchestral performance as defined in
division (C)(3)(b) of this section if the person with supervision and control
over the performance grants permission for the possession and consumption of
beer or intoxicating liquor in certain predesignated areas of that outdoor
location.



      (5)   (a)   A person may have in the person’s possession
on an F-9 liquor permit premises an opened or unopened container of beer or
intoxicating liquor that was not purchased from the holder of the F-9 permit
if the person is attending either of the following:



            1.   An orchestral performance and the F-9 permit
holder grants permission for the possession and consumption of beer or
intoxicating liquor in certain predesignated areas of the premises during the
period for which the F-9 permit is issued;



            2.   An outdoor performing arts event or
orchestral performance that is free of charge and the F-9 permit holder
annually hosts not less than 25 other events or performances that are free of
charge on the permit premises.



         (b)   As used in division (C)(5) of this section,
ORCHESTRAL PERFORMANCE has the same meaning as in division (C)(3)(b) of this
section.



      (6)   (a)   A person may have in the person’s possession
on the property of an outdoor motorsports facility an opened or unopened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor that was not purchased from the
owner of the facility if both of the following apply:



            1.   The person is attending a racing event at the
facility; and



            2.   The owner of the facility grants permission
for the possession and consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor on the
property of the facility.



         (b)   As used in division (C)(6)(a) of this section:



            OUTDOOR MOTORSPORTS FACILITY. An outdoor racetrack to
which all of the following apply:



               a.   It is 2.4 miles or more in length.



               b.   It is located on 200 acres or more of
land.



               c.   The primary business of the owner of
the facility is the hosting and promoting of racing events.



               d.   The holder of a D-1, D-2, or D-3 permit
is located on the property of the facility.



            RACING EVENT. A motor vehicle racing event sanctioned
by one or more motor racing sanctioning organizations.



      (7)   (a)   A person may have in the person’s possession
an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location
within an outdoor refreshment area created under R.C. § 4301.82 if the
opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor was purchased from a
qualified permit holder to which both of the following apply:



            1.   The permit holder’s premises is located
within the outdoor refreshment area.



            2.   The permit held by the permit holder has an
outdoor refreshment area designation.



         (b)   Division (C)(7) of this section does not authorize
a person to do either of the following:



            1.   Enter the premises of an establishment within
an outdoor refreshment area while possessing an opened container of beer or
intoxicating liquor acquired elsewhere;



            2.   Possess an opened container of beer or
intoxicating liquor while being in or on a motor vehicle within an outdoor
refreshment area, unless the motor vehicle is stationary and is not being
operated in a lane of vehicular travel or unless the possession is otherwise
authorized under division (D) or (E) of this section.



      (8)   (a)   A person may have in the person’s possession
on the property of a market, within a defined F-8 permit premises, an opened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor that was purchased from a D permit
premises that is located immediately adjacent to the market if both of the
following apply:



            1.   The market grants permission for the
possession and consumption of beer and intoxicating liquor within the defined
F-8 permit premises;



            2.   The market is hosting an event pursuant to an
F-8 permit and the market has notified the division of liquor control about
the event in accordance with R.C. § 4303.208(A)(3).



         (b)   As used in division (C)(8) of this section, MARKET
means a market, for which an F-8 permit is held, that has been in operation
since 1860.



   (D)   This section does not apply to a person who pays all or a
portion of the fee imposed for use of a chauffeured limousine pursuant to a
prearranged contract or the guest of the person, when all of the following
apply:



      (1)   The person or guest is a passenger in the limousine.



      (2)   The person or guest is located in the limousine, but is
not occupying a seat in the front compartment of the limousine where the
operator of the limousine is located.



      (3)   The limousine is located on any street, highway, or
other public or private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking.



   (E)   An opened bottle of wine that was purchased from the holder of
a permit that authorizes the sale of wine for consumption on the premises
where sold is not an opened container for the purposes of this section if
both of the following apply:



      (1)   The opened bottle of wine is securely resealed by the
permit holder or an employee of the permit holder before the bottle is
removed from the premises. The bottle shall be secured in such a manner that
it is visibly apparent if the bottle has been subsequently opened or tampered
with.



      (2)   The opened bottle of wine that is resealed in accordance
with division (E)(1) of this section is stored in the trunk of a motor
vehicle or, if the motor vehicle does not have a trunk, behind the last
upright seat or in an area not normally occupied by the driver or passengers
and not easily accessible by the driver.



   (F)   (1)   Except if an ordinance or resolution is enacted or
adopted under division (F)(2) of this section, this section does not apply to
a person who, pursuant to a prearranged contract, is a passenger riding on a
commercial quadricycle when all of the following apply:



         (a)   The person is not occupying a seat in the front of
the commercial quadricycle where the operator is steering or braking.



         (b)   The commercial quadricycle is being operated on a
street, highway, or other public or private property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking.



         (c)   The person has in their possession on the
commercial quadricycle an opened container of beer or wine.



         (d)   The person has in their possession on the
commercial quadricycle not more than either 36 ounces of beer or 18 ounces of
wine.



      (2)   The Legislative Authority may enact an ordinance or
adopt a resolution, as applicable, that prohibits a passenger riding on a
commercial quadricycle from possessing an opened container of beer or wine.



      (3)   As used in this section, COMMERCIAL QUADRICYCLE means a
vehicle that has fully-operative pedals for propulsion entirely by human
power and that meets all of the following requirements:



         (a)   It has four wheels and is operated in a manner
similar to a bicycle.



         (b)   It has at least five seats for passengers.



         (c)   It is designed to be powered by the pedaling of
the operator and the passengers.



         (d)   It is used for commercial purposes.



         (e)   It is operated by the vehicle owner or an employee
of the owner.



   (G)   (1)   This section does not apply to a person that has in
the person’s possession an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
on the premises of a market if the beer or intoxicating liquor has been
purchased from a D liquor permit holder that is located in the market.



      (2)   As used in division (G) of this section, MARKET means an
establishment that:



         (a)   Leases space in the market to individual vendors,
not less than 50% of which are retail food establishments or food service
operations licensed under R.C. Chapter 3717;



         (b)   Has an indoor sales floor area of not less than
22,000 square feet;



         (c)   Hosts a farmer’s market on each Saturday from
April through December.



(R.C. § 4301.62)



   (H)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4301.99(A))  ('69 Code, § 133.11)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



§ 94.08  UNDERAGE PERSON SHALL NOT PURCHASE INTOXICATING LIQUOR OR BEER.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C.
Chapter 4301, no person under the age of 21 years shall purchase beer or
intoxicating liquor.



(R.C. § 4301.63)  ('69 Code, § 133.15)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) 



   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $25
nor more than $100.  The court imposing a fine for a violation of this
section may order that the fine be paid by the performance of public work at
a reasonable hour rate established by the court.  The court shall designate
the time within which the public work shall be completed.



(R.C. § 4301.99(E))



§ 94.09  PROHIBITIONS; MINOR UNDER 18 YEARS; LOW-ALCOHOL BEVERAGES.



   (A)   As used in this section, UNDERAGE PERSON means a person under
18 years of age.



   (B)   No underage person shall purchase any low-alcohol beverage.



   (C)   No underage person shall order, pay for, share the cost of, or
attempt to purchase any low-alcohol beverage.



   (D)   No person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to
the name, age, or other identification of any underage person for the purpose
of obtaining or with the intent to obtain any low-alcohol beverage for an
underage person, by purchase or as a gift.



   (E)   No underage person shall knowingly show or give false
information concerning his or her name, age, or other identification for the
purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining any low-alcohol beverage in any
place in this municipality.



   (F)   No person shall sell or furnish any low-alcohol beverage to,
or buy any low-alcohol beverage for, an underage person, unless given by a
physician in the regular line of his or her practice or given for established
religious purposes, or unless the underage person is accompanied by a parent,
spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian.



   (G)   (1)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public
or private place shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on
the place while possessing or consuming any low-alcohol beverage, unless the
low-alcohol beverage is given to the person possessing or consuming it by
that person's parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal
guardian, and the parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal
guardian is present when the person possesses or consumes the low-alcohol
beverage.



      (2)   An owner of a public or private place is not liable for
acts or omissions in violation of division (G)(1) that are committed by a
lessee of that place, unless the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the
lessee's acts or omissions.



   (H)   No permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control shall be
suspended, revoked, or cancelled because of a violation of either division
(F) or (G).



   (I)   No underage person shall knowingly possess or consume any
low-alcohol beverage in any public or private place, unless he or she is
accompanied by a parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal
guardian, or unless the low-alcohol beverage is given by a physician in the
regular line of his or her practice or given for established religious
purposes.



   (J)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal
guardian of an underage person shall knowingly permit the underage person to
violate this section.



(R.C. § 4301.631)



   (K)   (1)   Whoever violates any provision of this section for
which no other penalty is provided is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.



(R.C. § 4301.99(B))



      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section shall be
fined not less than $25 nor more than $100. The court imposing a fine for a
violation of division (B) of this section may order that the fine be paid by
the performance of public work at a reasonable hour rate established by the
court. The court shall designate the time within which the public work shall
be completed.



(R.C. § 4301.99(E))  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.10  ALCOHOL VAPORIZING DEVICES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   As used in this section, ALCOHOL VAPORIZING DEVICE means a
machine or other device that mixes beer or intoxicating liquor with pure
oxygen or any other gas to produce a vaporized product for the purpose of
consumption by inhalation.



   (B)   No person shall sell or offer for sale an alcohol vaporizing
device.



   (C)   No person shall purchase or use an alcohol vaporizing device.



(R.C. § 4301.65)



   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is
guilty of misdemeanor of the third degree. For a second or subsequent
violation occurring within a period of five consecutive years after the first
violation, a person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 4301.99(J))



      (2)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty
of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 4301.99(A)) 



§ 94.11  MISREPRESENTATION TO OBTAIN ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE FOR A MINOR
PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C.
Chapter 4301, no person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to
the name, age, or other identification of any person under 21 years of age,
for the purpose of obtaining, or with the intent to obtain, beer or
intoxicating liquor for a person under 21 years of age, by purchase, or as a
gift.



(R.C. § 4301.633)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C. § 4301.99(C))



§ 94.12  MISREPRESENTATION BY A MINOR UNDER 21 YEARS.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C.
Chapter 4301, no person under the age of 21 years shall knowingly show or
give false information concerning his or her name, age, or other
identification for the purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining beer or
intoxicating liquor in any place in this municipality where beer or
intoxicating liquor is sold under a permit issued by the Division of Liquor
Control, or sold by the Division of Liquor Control.



(R.C. § 4301.634)  ('69 Code, § 133.16)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) 



   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If, in committing a first
violation of division (A), the offender presented to the permit holder or his
or her employee or agent a false, fictitious, or altered identification card,
a false or fictitious driver's license purportedly issued by any state, or a
driver's license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than
$250 and not more than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment
of not more than six months.



      (2)   On a second violation in which, for the second time, the
offender presented to the permit holder or his or her employee or agent a
false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a false or fictitious
driver's license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver's license
issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $500 nor
more than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more
than six months. The court also may impose a class seven suspension of the
offender's driver's or commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident
operation privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).



      (3)   On a third or subsequent violation in which, for the
third or subsequent time, the offender presented to the permit holder or his
or her employee or agent a false, fictitious, or altered identification card,
a false or fictitious driver's license purportedly issued by any state, or a
driver's license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than
$500 nor more than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of
not more than six months. Except as provided in this division, the court also
may impose a class six suspension of the offender's driver's or commercial
driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6), and the court may order that the
suspension or denial remain in effect until the offender attains the age of
21 years. The court, in lieu of suspending the offender’s temporary
instruction permit, probationary driver’s license, or driver’s license,
instead may order the offender to perform a determinate number of hours of
community service, with the court determining the actual number of hours and
the nature of the community service the offender shall perform.



(R.C. § 4301.99(F))



§ 94.13  HOURS OF SALE OR CONSUMPTION.



   (A)   This section shall apply to the retail sale of beer, wine,
mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor.



   (B)   No beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor shall be
sold or delivered by an A-1, A-1C, A-2, B-1, B-2, B-4, B-5, C-1, C-2, C-2X,
D-1, D-2, D-2X, D-3 when issued without a D-3A, D-3X, D-4, D-5H, D-5K, D-8,
F, F-1, F-2, F-3, F-4, F-5, F-6, F-7, F-8, F-9, G, or I permit holder:



      (1)   From Monday to Saturday between the hours of 1:00 a.m.
and 5:30 a.m.



      (2)   On Sunday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and Sunday
midnight, unless statutorily authorized otherwise.



      (3)   Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages, or
spirituous liquor is also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises
of the above permit holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer,
wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption.



   (C)   No beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor shall be
sold or delivered by an A-1A, D-3 when issued with a D-3A, D-4A, D-5, D-5A,
D-5B, D-5C, D-5D, D-5E, D-5F, D-5G, D-5I, D-5J, D-5L, D-5M, D-5N, D-5O, or
D-7 permit holder:



      (1)   From Monday to Saturday between the hours of 2:30 a.m.
and 5:30 a.m.



      (2)   On Sunday between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and Sunday
midnight, unless statutorily authorized otherwise.



      (3)   Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages, or
spirituous liquor is also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises
of the above permit holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer,
wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption.



   (D)   Permit holders authorized to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages,
or spirituous liquor at retail who are not specifically identified in
divisions (B) or (C) above shall be subject to the provisions of division
(B), unless statutorily authorized otherwise.



   (E)   The hours on Sunday during which sales, delivery, or
consumption of alcoholic beverages may take place are established by statute,
but in no event shall they begin prior to 5:30 a.m.



(O.A.C. § 4301:1-1-49)



   (F)   No association, corporation, local unit of an association or
corporation, or D permit holder who holds an F-2 permit shall sell beer or
intoxicating liquor beyond the hours of sale allowed by the permit.  This
division imposes strict liability on the holder of such permit and on any
officer, agent or employee of such permit holder.



(R.C. § 4303.202(D)(2))



   (G)   No F-8 permit holder shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor
beyond the hours of sale allowed by the permit.  This division imposes
strict liability on the holder of an F-8 permit and on any officer, agent or
employee of that permit holder.



(R.C. § 4303.208(C))  (Rev. 2008)



   (H)   Whoever violates divisions (F) or (G) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 4303.99(D)) 



§ 94.14  PROPERTY OWNERS TO PROHIBIT POSSESSION AND CONSUMPTION OF BEER AND
INTOXICATING LIQUOR BY MINORS.



   No person being the owner or occupant or otherwise in possession or
control of any residential or other property located within the village shall
allow anyone under the age of 21 years, except for such person's child or
ward, to remain on such property while in the possession of intoxicating
liquor or beer or while consuming intoxicating liquor or beer, except as
provided in § 94.22.



(Ord. C-608, passed 12-8-86; Am. Ord. C-620, passed 5-11-87; Am. Ord. C-659,
passed 6-12-89)  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.15  PARENTAL RESPONSIBILITY.



   No person being the parent or guardian or otherwise having the care,
custody, or control of any minor shall allow the minor to violate any
provision of this chapter or shall aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage, or
contribute to the minor violating any provision of this chapter, including
without limitation, allowing a minor to be in possession or control of
residential or other property located within the village under circumstances
such that a responsible adult should have known that a violation of this
chapter was likely to occur thereon.



(Ord. C-608, passed 12-8-86; Am. Ord. C-620, passed 5-11-87)  Penalty, see
§ 94.99



§ 94.16  POSTING OF CARD.



   (A)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 4301.691,
every place in this municipality where beer, intoxicating liquor, or any
low-alcohol beverage is sold for beverage purposes shall display at all
times, in a prominent place on the premises thereof, a printed card, which
shall be furnished by the Division of Liquor Control and which shall read
substantially as follows:



   WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER AGE



   If you are under the age of 21



Under the statutes of the state of Ohio, if you order, pay for, share the
cost of, or attempt to purchase, or possess or consume beer or intoxicating
liquor in any public place, or furnish false information as to name, age, or
other identification, you are subject to a fine of up to $1,000, or
imprisonment up to 6 months, or both.



   If you are under the age of 18



Under the statutes of the state of Ohio, if you order, pay for, share the
cost of, or attempt to purchase, or posses or consume, any type of beer or
wine that contains either no alcohol or less than one-half of one per cent of
alcohol by volume in any public place, or furnish false information as to the
name, age, or other identification, you are subject to a fine of up to $250
or to imprisonment up to 30 days, or both.



      (2)   No person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution
or any proceedings before the Department or the Liquor Control Commission for
failing to display this card.  No permit issued by the Department shall be
suspended, revoked, or canceled because of the failure of the permit holder
to display this card.



   (B)   (1)   Every place in this municipality for which a D permit
has been issued under R.C. Chapter 4303 shall be issued a printed card by the
Division of Liquor Control that shall read substantially as follows:



   WARNING



   If you are carrying a firearm



Under the statutes of Ohio, if you possess a firearm in any room in which
liquor is being dispensed in premises for which a D permit has been issued
under Chapter 4303 of the Revised Code, you may be guilty of a felony and may
be subjected to a prison term of up to one year.



      (2)   No person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution
or any proceedings before the Division of Liquor Control or the Liquor
Control Commission for failing to display this card.  No permit issued by
the Department shall be suspended, revoked, or canceled because of the
failure of the permit holder to display this card.



(R.C. § 4301.637)



§ 94.17  GOOD FAITH ACCEPTANCES OF SPURIOUS IDENTIFICATION.



   (A)   No permit holder, agent or employee of a permit holder, or any
other person may be found guilty of a violation of any section of this
chapter in which age is any element of the offense, if any court of record
finds all of the following:



      (1)   That the person buying, at the time of so doing,
exhibited to the permit holder, the agent or employee of the permit holder,
or the other person a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an
identification card as defined in R.C. § 4301.61, a military identification
card issued by the United States Department of Defense, or a United States or
foreign passport, that displays a picture of the individual for whom the
license, card, or passport was issued and shows that the person buying was
then at least 21 years of age if the person was buying beer as defined in
R.C. § 4301.01 or intoxicating liquor, or that the person was then at least
18 years of age if the person was buying any low-alcohol beverage;



      (2)   That the permit holder, the agent or employee of the
permit holder, or the other person made a bona fide effort to ascertain the
true age of the person buying by checking the identification presented at the
time of the purchase to ascertain that the description on the identification
compared with the appearance of the buyer and that the identification
presented had not been altered in any way.



      (3)   That the permit holder, the agent or employee of the
permit holder, or the other person had reason to believe that the person
buying was of legal age.



   (B)   The defense provided by division (A) of this section is in
addition to the affirmative defense provided by R.C. § 4301.611.



(R.C. § 4301.639(A), (C))



§ 94.18  PROHIBITION AGAINST CONSUMPTION IN MOTOR VEHICLE.



   (A)   No person shall consume any beer or intoxicating liquor in a
motor vehicle.  This section does not apply to persons described in R.C. §
4301.62(D) or a substantially similar municipal ordinance.



(R.C. § 4301.64)  ('69 Code, § 133.10) 



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree. If an offender who violates this section was under the age
of 18 years at the time of the offense, the court, in addition to any other
penalties it imposes upon the offender, may suspend the offender’s
temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s license or driver’s
license for a period of not less than 6 months and not more than one year. In
lieu of suspending the offender’s temporary instruction permit,
probationary driver’s license, or driver’s license, the court instead may
require the offender to perform community service for a number of hours
determined by the court. If the offender is 15 years and 6 months of age or
older and has not been issued a temporary instruction permit or probationary
driver’s license, the offender shall not be eligible to be issued such a
license or permit for a period of 6 months. If the offender has not attained
the age of 15 years and 6 months, the offender shall not be eligible to be
issued a temporary instruction permit until the offender attains the age of
16 years.



(R.C. § 4301.99(B))



§ 94.19  OBSTRUCTING SEARCH OF PREMISES PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall hinder or obstruct any agent or employee of
the Division of Liquor Control, any enforcement agent of the Department of
Public Safety or any officer of the law from making an inspection or search
of any place, other than a bona fide private residence, where beer or
intoxicating liquor is possessed, kept, sold, or given away.



(R.C. § 4301.66)  ('69 Code, § 133.17)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) 



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C. § 4301.99(C))



   (C)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the
hindrance, obstruction, resistance, or interference alleged consisted of
constitutionally protected speech only.



§ 94.20  ILLEGAL POSSESSION OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall have possession of any spirituous liquor, in
excess of one liter, in one or more containers, which was not purchased at
wholesale or retail from the Department of Liquor Control or otherwise
lawfully acquired pursuant to this chapter, R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303, or
any other intoxicating liquor or beer, in one or more containers, which was
not lawfully acquired pursuant to those chapters.



(R.C. § 4301.67)  ('69 Code, § 133.09) 



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 4301.99(B))  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.21  PROHIBITION AGAINST SALE OR POSSESSION OF DILUTED LIQUOR AND
REFILLED CONTAINERS.



   (A)   No person shall sell, offer for sale, or possess with the
intent to sell intoxicating liquor in any original container which has been
diluted, refilled, or partly refilled.



(R.C. § 4301.68)  ('69 Code, § 133.13)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C. § 4301.99(C))  Penalty, see § 94.99



§ 94.22  SALE TO UNDERAGE PERSONS PROHIBITED.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in R.C.
Chapter 4301, no person shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor to an underage
person, shall buy beer or intoxicating liquor for an underage person, or
shall furnish it to an underage person unless given by a physician in the
regular line of the physician's practice or given for established religious
purposes or unless the underage person is supervised by a parent, spouse who
is not an underage person, or legal guardian.  In proceedings before the
Liquor Control Commission, no permit holder, or the employee or agent of a
permit holder, charged with a violation of this division shall be charged,
for the same offense, with a violation of R.C. § 4301.22(A)(1) or a
substantially similar municipal ordinance.



   (B)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or
private place shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on
the public place while possessing or consuming beer or intoxicating liquor,
unless the intoxicating liquor or beer is given to the person possessing or
consuming it by that person's parent, spouse who is not an underage person,
or legal guardian and the parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or
legal guardian is present at the time of the person's possession or
consumption of the beer or intoxicating liquor.  An owner of a public or
private place is not liable for acts or omissions in violation of this
division that are committed by a lessee of that place, unless the owner
authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee's acts or omissions.



   (C)   No person shall engage or use accommodations at a hotel, inn,
cabin, campground, or restaurant when the person knows or has reason to know
either of the following:



      (1)   That beer or intoxicating liquor will be consumed by an
underage person on the premises of the accommodations that the person engages
or uses, unless the person engaging or using the accommodations is the spouse
of the underage person and who is not an underage person, or is the parent or
legal guardian of all of the underage persons, who consume beer or
intoxicating liquor on the premises and that person is on the premises at all
times when beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by an underage
person.



      (2)   That a drug of abuse will be consumed on the premises of
the accommodations by any person, except a person who obtained the drug of
abuse pursuant to a prescription issued by a licensed health professionals
authorized to prescribe drugs and has the drug of abuse in the original
container in which it was dispensed to the person.



   (D)   (1)   No person is required to permit the engagement of
accommodations at any hotel, inn, cabin, or campground by an underage person
or for an underage person, if the person engaging the accommodations knows or
has reason to know that the underage person is intoxicated, or that the
underage person possesses any beer or intoxicating liquor and is not
supervised by a parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal
guardian who is or will be present at all times when the beer or intoxicating
liquor is being consumed by the underage person.



      (2)   No underage person shall knowingly engage or attempt to
engage accommodations at any hotel, inn, cabin, or campground by presenting
identification that falsely indicates that the underage person is 21 years of
age or older for the purpose of violating this section.



   (E)   (1)   No underage person shall knowingly order, pay for,
share the cost of, attempt to purchase, possess, or consume any beer or
intoxicating liquor in any public or private place.  No underage person
shall knowingly be under the influence of any beer or intoxicating liquor in
any public place.  The prohibitions set forth in this division against an
underage person knowingly possessing, consuming, or being under the influence
of any beer or intoxicating liquor shall not apply if the underage person is
supervised by a parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal
guardian, or the beer or intoxicating liquor is given by a physician in the
regular line of the physician's practice or given for established religious
purposes.



      (2)   (a)   If a person is charged with violating division
(E)(1) of this section in a complaint filed under R.C. § 2151.27, the court
may order the child into a diversion program specified by the court and hold
the complaint in abeyance pending successful completion of the diversion
program.  A child is ineligible to enter into a diversion program under this
division if the child previously has been diverted pursuant to this
division.  If the child completes the diversion program to the satisfaction
of the court, the court shall dismiss the complaint and order the child's
record in the case sealed under R.C. §§ 2151.356 through 2151.358.  If the
child fails to satisfactorily complete the diversion program, the court shall
proceed with the complaint.



         (b)   If a person is charged in a criminal complaint
with violating division (E)(1) of this section, R.C. § 2935.36 shall apply
to the offense, except that a person is ineligible for diversion under that
section if the person previously has been diverted pursuant to divisions
(E)(2)(a) or (E)(2)(b) of this section. If the person completes the diversion
program to the satisfaction of the court, the court shall dismiss the
complaint and order the record in the case sealed under R.C. § 2953.52.  If
the person fails to satisfactorily complete the diversion program, the court
shall proceed with the complaint.



   (F)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal
guardian of a minor shall knowingly permit the minor to violate this section
or R.C. § 4301.63, 4301.632, 4301.633, or 4301.634, or any substantially
similar municipal ordinance.



   (G)   The operator of any hotel, inn, cabin, or campground shall
make the provisions of this section available in writing to any person
engaging or using accommodations at the hotel, inn, cabin, or campground.



   (H)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   DRUG OF ABUSE.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.011.



   HOTEL.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3731.01.



   LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS and
PRESCRIPTION.  Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.



   MINOR.  A person under the age of 18 years.



   UNDERAGE PERSON.  A person under the age of 21 years.



(R.C. § 4301.69)  ('69 Code, § 133.14) 



   (I)   The provisions of R.C. §§ 4301.633 through 4301.637, or
substantially similar municipal ordinances, shall not be deemed to modify or
affect divisions (A) through (H) of this section or R.C. § 4301.69.



(R.C. § 4301.638)



   (J)   (1)   Except as provided in division (J)(2) of this
section, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.  If an offender who violates division (E)(1) of this section
was under the age of 18 years at the time of the offense and the offense
occurred while the offender was the operator of or a passenger in a motor
vehicle, the court, in addition to any other penalties it imposes upon the
offender, shall suspend the offender's temporary instruction permit or
probationary driver's license for a period of six months.  If the offender
is 15 years and 6 months of age or older and has not been issued a temporary
instruction permit or probationary driver's license, the offender shall not
be eligible to be issued such a license or permit for a period of six
months.  If the offender has not attained the age of 15 years and 6 months,
the offender shall not be eligible to be issued a temporary instruction
permit until the offender attains the age of 16 years.



(R.C. § 4301.99(C))



      (2)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor, shall be fined not less than $500 nor more than $1000, and
in addition to the fine, may be imprisoned for a definite term of not more
than six months.



(R.C. § 4301.99(I))



Statutory reference:



   Changes to law if federal uniform drinking age is repealed or declared
unconstitutional, see R.C. § 4301.691



§ 94.23  KEEPING PLACE WHERE BEER OR INTOXICATING LIQUORS ARE SOLD IN
VIOLATION OF LAW.



   (A)   No person shall keep a place where beer or intoxicating
liquors are sold, furnished, or given away in violation of law.  The court,
on conviction for a subsequent violation of this section, shall order the
place where the beer or intoxicating liquor is sold, furnished, or given away
to be abated as a nuisance or shall order the person so convicted to give
bond payable to the state in the sum of $1,000, with sureties to the
acceptance of the court, that the person will not sell, furnish, or give away
beer or intoxicating liquor in violation of law and will pay all fines,
costs, and damages assessed against the person for that subsequent violation
of this section.  The giving away of beer or intoxicating liquors, or any
other device to evade this section, constitutes unlawful selling.



   (B)   As used in this section, BEER has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 4301.01.



   (C)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any premises
for which a permit has been issued under R.C. Chapter 4303 while that permit
is in effect.



(R.C. § 4399.09) 



   (D)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than
$100 nor more than $500 on a first offense and shall be fined not less than
$200 nor more than $500 on each subsequent offense.



(R.C. § 4399.99(B))



§ 94.24  INTOXICATING LIQUORS SHALL NOT BE SOLD IN BROTHELS.



   (A)   No person shall sell, exchange, or give away intoxicating
liquor in a brothel.



(R.C. § 4399.10) 



   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than
$100 nor more than $500 and imprisoned not less than one or more than six
months.



(R.C. § 4399.99(C))



§ 94.25  USE OF INTOXICATING LIQUOR IN A PUBLIC DANCE HALL PROHIBITED;
EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(2) of
this section, no person who is the proprietor of, or who conducts, manages,
or is in charge of any public dance hall shall allow the use of any
intoxicating liquor or the presence of intoxicated persons in the public
dance hall or on the premises on which it is located.



      (2)   The prohibition against the use of any intoxicating
liquor contained in division (A)(1) of this section does not apply to
establishments that are holders of a D-1, D-2, D-3, D-4, or D-5 permit whose
principal business consists of conducting a hotel, a restaurant, a club, or a
nightclub, all as defined in as defined by R.C. § 4301.01.



(R.C. § 4399.14) 



   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $25
nor more than $500, imprisoned not more than six months, or both.



(R.C. § 4399.99(D))



§ 94.26  POISONOUSLY ADULTERATED LIQUORS.



   (A)   No person, for the purpose of sale, shall adulterate
spirituous liquor, alcoholic liquor, or beer used or intended for drink or
medicinal or mechanical purposes, with cocculus indicus, vitriol, grains of
paradise, opium, alum, capsicum, copperas, laurelwater, logwood, brazilwood,
cochineal, sugar of lead, aloes, glucose, tannic acid, or any other substance
that is poisonous or injurious to health, or with a substance not a necessary
ingredient in the manufacture of the spiritous liquor, alcoholic liquor, or
beer, or sell, offer, or keep for sale spiritous liquor, alcoholic liquor, or
beer that is so adulterated.



   (B)   In addition to the penalties provided in division (C) of this
section, a person convicted of violating this section shall pay all necessary
costs and expenses incurred in inspecting and analyzing spiritous liquor,
alcoholic liquor, or beer that is so adulterated, sold, kept, or offered for
sale.



(R.C. § 4399.15)



   (C)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $20
nor more than $100, imprisoned not less than 20 nor more than 60 days, or
both.



(R.C. § 4399.99(E))



§ 94.27  TAVERN KEEPER PERMITTING RIOTING OR DRUNKENNESS.



   (A)   No tavern keeper shall permit rioting, reveling, intoxication,
or drunkenness in his house or on his premises.



(R.C. § 4399.16)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $5
nor more than $100.



(R.C. § 4399.99(A))



§ 94.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provisions of this chapter for which no other
penalty has been provided is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. §§ 4301.70, 4301.99(A))  (Ord. C-609, passed 1-12-87; Am. Ord.
C-609, passed 1-12-87)



CHAPTER 95: NUISANCES



Section



   95.01   Application of the chapter



Unclean Habitations



   95.10   Permitting unclean habitations



   95.11   When habitations are deemed unsanitary



   95.12   Order for abatement or vacation of premises



   95.13   Enforcement of vacation order by Police Chief



   95.14   Enforcement through court proceedings



Privy Vaults, Cesspools, Refuse



   95.20   Location of privy vaults, cesspools, and septic tanks



   95.21   Unsanitary vaults



   95.22   Open or uncovered well, cistern or other excavation



   95.23   Removal of contents of vault



   95.24   Deposit of dead animals, offal upon land or water



   95.25   Prohibition against defiling spring or well



   95.26   Dumping of refuse in village forbidden



   95.27   Surface drainage into street



   95.28   Draining slops



   95.29   Disposal of garbage and other waste along streams



   95.30   (Reserved)



   95.31   Power of city to fill or drain land



Weeds and Litter on Private Property



   95.40   Noxious weeds



   95.41   Diseased or dead trees or landscaping to be removed



   95.42   Removal of litter



   95.43   Reserved



   95.44   Notice, enforcement, and remedies



Miscellaneous



   95.50   Trimming of trees and shrubbery to prevent obstruction



   95.51   Damage to gardens and lawns by animals



   95.52   Dish-type satellite signal receiving stations



   95.53   Noise; excessive sound prohibited



   95.54   Construction contamination control



Inoperable and Unlicensed Vehicles



   95.60   Definitions



   95.61   Prohibition concerning motor vehicles



Deteriorated Driveways and Private Roads



   95.70   Maintenance of driveways and private roads



   95.71   Order for repair



 



   95.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Sanitation, health and safety, see Ch. 96



Statutory reference:



   Impounding and disposition of abandoned motor vehicle on public
property, see R.C. §§ 4513.61 and 4513.63



   Power of municipality to abate and prevent nuisances, see R.C. § 715.44



§ 95.01  APPLICATION OF THE CHAPTER.



   The provisions of this chapter shall be enforceable within this
municipality concurrently with the state and federal laws relative to
sanitation and health and the ordinances or orders of the local health
district relative thereto, and shall not be construed as modifying,
repealing, limiting, or affecting in any manner such laws, ordinances, or
orders.



Cross-reference:



   Sanitation, health and safety, see Ch. 96



UNCLEAN HABITATIONS



§ 95.10  PERMITTING UNCLEAN HABITATIONS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to lease, let, permit the occupancy
of, permit the continuation of the occupancy of, or continue the occupancy of
a structure or building or any portion thereof used for human habitation,
unless such structure or building or portion thereof is free from unclean and
unsanitary conditions as defined in § 95.11 and unless the provisions of the
subsequent sections are complied with.



Penalty, see § 95.99



Statutory reference:



   Duties of the landlord, R.C. § 5321.04



   Duties of the tenant, R.C. § 5321.05



   Injunction for failure to comply, R.C. § 715.30



   Power of municipality to regulate buildings used for human occupancy,
R.C. § 715.29



§ 95.11  WHEN HABITATIONS ARE DEEMED UNSANITARY.



   A structure, building, or any portion thereof used for human habitation
shall be deemed to be in unclean and unsanitary condition when any of the
following conditions exist:



   (A)   Infection with communicable disease;



   (B)   Absence of the toilet facilities required by law or ordinance;



   (C)   Presence of sewer gas;



   (D)   Dampness or wetness due to lack of repair;



   (E)   Accumulation of dirt, filth, litter, refuse, or other
offensive or dangerous substances likely to cause sickness among the
occupants;



   (F)   Defective or improperly used drainage, plumbing, or
ventilation facilities likely to cause sickness.



§ 95.12  ORDER FOR ABATEMENT OR VACATION OF PREMISES.



   If the local Board of Health ascertains from examination or reports of
its inspectors or sanitary officers or otherwise determines that a public
nuisance as defined in § 95.11, exists in or upon any structure or building,
or portion thereof, and has notified the owner, occupant, or person in charge
of the premises to abate the nuisance or vacate the premises, it shall be
unlawful to occupy or permit the occupancy of the premises or portion thereof
until the nuisance has been completely abated and building or portion thereof
has been rendered clean and sanitary in accordance with the terms of the
notices of the Board of Health.



§ 95.13  ENFORCEMENT OF VACATION ORDER BY POLICE CHIEF.



   When the notice or order of vacation has not been complied with, and
the Board of Health certifies such fact to the Police Chief of the village,
together with a copy of the order of notice, it shall be the duty of the
Police Chief to enforce such notice or order of vacation and to cause the
premises to be vacated in accordance with the terms of the notice or order.



§ 95.14  ENFORCEMENT THROUGH COURT PROCEEDINGS.



   Whenever the Board of Health certifies to the Solicitor any failure to
comply with any order or notice of vacation, with the request that civil
proceedings for the enforcement thereof be instituted, the solicitor shall
institute any and all proceedings, either legal or equitable, that may be
appropriate or necessary for the enforcement of the order or notice and the
abatement of the nuisance against which the order or notice was directed. 
These suits or proceedings shall be brought in the name of the municipality.
Proceedings under this section shall not relieve any party defendant from
criminal prosecution or punishment under this code or any other criminal law
or ordinance in force within the municipality.



PRIVY VAULTS, CESSPOOLS, REFUSE



§ 95.20  LOCATION OF PRIVY VAULTS, CESSPOOLS, AND SEPTIC TANKS.



   No owner, occupant, or person in charge of any premises so situated as
to permit connection with any sanitary sewer shall maintain or permit to be
maintained on or in connection with such premises any privy vault, cesspool,
septic tank, or other repository for human excreta.



Penalty, see § 95.99



Statutory reference:



   Power of municipality to regulate water closets and privies, see R.C.
§ 715.40



   Power of municipality to regulate refuse disposal, see R.C. § 715.43



§ 95.21  UNSANITARY VAULTS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person being the owner, lessor, occupant,
or person in charge of any premises upon which a privy vault, cesspool, or
septic tank is located to permit such vault, pool, or tank, or any building,
fixture, or device appurtenant thereto, to become foul, noisome, filthy, or
offensive to neighboring property owners.



Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.22  OPEN OR UNCOVERED WELL, CISTERN OR OTHER EXCAVATION.



   No owner, occupant or tenant of any property within the limits of the
village shall permit any well, cistern, pit or other excavation upon the
property to remain open, unless the same is protected by a substantial cover
which is strong enough to hold a weight of 400 pounds, and which is securely
fastened.



('69 Code, § 93.02)  (Ord. 102, passed 6-13-49)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.23  REMOVAL OF CONTENTS OF VAULT.



   Whenever any part of the waste in any privy vault or cesspool extends
to a point less than three feet below the surface of the ground adjacent
thereto, or whenever use of any such vault or cesspool is abandoned or where
such use or maintenance is prohibited by ordinance or health order, the
owner, lessor, occupant or person in charge of such premises shall cause the
vault or cesspool to be emptied of its contents, thoroughly cleaned, and
disinfected, and if abandoned, to be filled with clean earth or mineral
matter to the level of the adjacent ground.



Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.24  DEPOSIT OF DEAD ANIMALS, OFFAL UPON LAND OR WATER.



   (A)   No person shall put the carcass of a dead animal or the offal
from a slaughter house, butcher's establishment, packing house or fish house,
or spoiled meat, spoiled fish, or other putrid substance or the contents of a
privy vault, upon or into a lake, river, bay, creek, pond, canal, road,
street, alley, lot, meadow, public ground, market place, or common.  No
owner or occupant of such place shall knowingly permit such thing to remain
therein to the annoyance of any citizen or neglect to remove or abate the
nuisance occasioned thereby within 24 hours after knowledge of the existence
thereof, or after notice thereof in writing from the designated municipal
official.



(R.C. § 3767.16) 



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 3767.99(D)



§ 95.25  PROHIBITION AGAINST DEFILING SPRING OR WELL.



   (A)   No person shall maliciously put a dead animal, carcass, or
part thereof, or other putrid, nauseous, or offensive substance into, or
befoul, a well, spring, brook, or branch of running water, or a reservoir of
a waterworks, of which use is or may be made for domestic purposes.



(R.C. § 3767.18) 



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 3767.99(D)



§ 95.26  DUMPING OF REFUSE IN VILLAGE FORBIDDEN.



   No person may dump, cause or permit to be dumped on publicly or
privately owned land or water in the village, any paper, brush, rubbish,
glass, plastic or metal, vegetation, garbage, or refuse of any kind without
first having obtained written permission from the Village Manager.



(Am. Ord. C-693, passed 11-12-90) Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.27  SURFACE DRAINAGE INTO STREET.



   No owner, occupant or tenant of property within the village, nor any
contractor or builder, shall permit surface drainage of any property to be
discharged into any roadway within the limits of the village, unless there is
no established natural or artificial channel other than the roadway itself
available for drainage.



('69 Code, § 93.03)  (Ord. 104, passed 6-13-49)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.28  DRAINING SLOPS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to drain, cause to be
drained, or allow to drain from any property occupied by him any kitchen
slops or other greasy or impure matter in the open gutters or waterways in
the municipality, unless the drainage has been drained into a vault and
filtered through a lesser vault filled with sand and fine gravel, built under
the inspection of the local Board of Health.



Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.29  DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE AND OTHER WASTE ALONG STREAMS.



   (A)   No person, regardless of intent, shall deposit litter or cause
litter to be deposited on any public property, on private property not owned
by him or her, or in or on waters of the state, unless one of the following
applies:



      (1)   The person is directed to do so by a public official as
part of a litter collection drive.



      (2)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, the
person deposits the litter in a litter receptacle in a manner that prevents
its being carried away by the elements.



      (3)   The person is issued a permit or license covering the
litter pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3734 or 6111.



   (B)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly deposit
litter, or cause it to be deposited, in a litter receptacle located on any
public property or on any private property not owned by him or her, unless
one of the following applies:



      (1)   The litter was generated or located on the property on
which the litter receptacle is located.



      (2)   The person is directed to do so by a public official as
part of a litter collection drive.



      (3)   The person is directed to do so by a person whom he or
she reasonably believes to have the privilege to use the litter receptacle.



      (4)   The litter consists of any of the following:



         (a)   The contents of a litter bag or container of a
type and size customarily carried and used in a motor vehicle.



         (b)   The contents of an ash tray of a type customarily
installed or carried and used in a motor vehicle.



         (c)   Beverage containers and food sacks, wrappings, and
containers of a type and in an amount that reasonably may be expected to be
generated during routine commuting or business or recreational travel by a
motor vehicle.



         (d)   Beverage containers, food sacks, wrappings,
containers, and other materials of a type and in an amount that reasonably
may be expected to be generated during a routine day by a person and
deposited in a litter receptacle by a casual passerby.



   (C)   (1)   As used in division (B)(1) of this section, PUBLIC
PROPERTY includes any private property open to the public for the conduct of
business, the provision of a service, or upon the payment of a fee but does
not include any private property to which the public otherwise does not have
a right of access.



      (2)   As used in division (B)(4) of this section, CASUAL
PASSERBY means a person who does not have depositing litter in a litter
receptacle as his or her primary reason for traveling to or by the property
on which the litter receptacle is located.



   (D)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   DEPOSIT.  To throw, drop, discard, or place.



   LITTER.  Garbage, trash, waste, rubbish, ashes, cans, bottles, wire,
paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts, furniture, glass, or anything else
of an unsightly or unsanitary nature.



   LITTER RECEPTACLE.  A dumpster, trash can, trash bin, garbage can, or
similar container in which litter is deposited for removal.



   (E)   This section may be enforced by any sheriff, deputy sheriff,
police officer of a municipal corporation, police constable or officer of a
township, or township or joint police district, wildlife officer designated
under R.C. § 1531.13, natural resources officer appointed under R.C. §
1501.24, forest-fire investigator appointed under R.C. § 1503.09,
conservancy district police officer, inspector of nuisances of a county, or
any other law enforcement officer within the law enforcement officer’s
jurisdiction.



(R.C. § 3767.32) 



   (F)   Whoever violates any provision of this section shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor of the third degree.  The sentencing court may, in addition
to or in lieu of the penalty provided in this division, require a person who
violates this section to remove litter from any public or private property or
in or on waters of the state.



(R.C. § 3767.99(C))



§ 95.30 (RESERVED).



§ 95.31  POWER OF CITY TO FILL OR DRAIN LAND.



   (A)   The municipality may fill or drain any lot or land within its
limits on which water at any time becomes stagnant, remove all putrid
substances from any lot, and remove all obstructions from culverts, covered
drains, or private property, laid in any natural watercourse, creek, brook,
or branch, which obstruct the water naturally flowing therein, causing it to
flow back or become stagnant, in a way prejudicial to the health, comfort, or
convenience of any of the citizens of the neighborhood.  If such culverts or
drains are of insufficient capacity, the municipality may make them of such
capacity as reasonable to accommodate the flow of such water at all times.



   (B)   The Legislative Authority may, by resolution, direct the owner
to fill or drain such lot, remove such putrid substance or other
obstructions, and if necessary, enlarge such culverts or covered drains to
meet the requirements thereof.



   (C)   After service of a copy of such resolution, or after a
publication thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in the municipality
or as provided in R.C. § 7.16, for two consecutive weeks, the owner, or the
owner’s agent or attorney, shall comply with the directions of the
resolution within the time therein specified.



   (D)   In case of the failure or refusal of such owner to comply with
the resolution, the work required thereby may be done at the expense of the
municipality, and the amount of money so expended shall be recovered from the
owner before any court of competent jurisdiction.  This expense from the
time of the adoption of the resolution shall be a lien on such lot, which may
be enforced by suit in the Court of Common Pleas, and like proceedings may be
had as directed in relation to the improvement of streets.



   (E)   The officers connected with the Health Department of the
municipality shall see that this section is strictly and promptly enforced.



(R.C. § 715.47)



WEEDS AND LITTER ON PRIVATE PROPERTY



§ 95.40  NOXIOUS WEEDS.



   (A)   Any person owning or having charge of  land within the
municipality, shall keep the property  free and  clear from all noxious
weeds and rank vegetation.



   (B)   Noxious weeds and rank vegetation shall include but not be
limited to:



      (1)   Any weeds such as poison ivy, jimson, burdock, ragweed,
thistle, cocklebur, or other weeds of a like kind;



      (2)   Bushes of the species of tall, common, or European
barberry, further known as berberis vulgaris or its horticultural varieties;



      (3)   Any weed or wild growth which, by reason of the pollen
or seed spread by it, or the density of its growth, or its unsightliness,
injuriously affects the public health, safety or welfare.



   (C)   All noxious weeds are declared nuisances.



('69 Code, § 96.01)  (Ord. C-18, passed 2-14-55; Am. Ord. C-138, passed
3-9-59; Am. Ord. 2011-11, passed 8-8-11; Am. Ord. 2013-02, passed 3-11-13)



§ 95.41  DISEASED OR DEAD TREES OR LANDSCAPING TO BE REMOVED.



   (A)   The owner of any property within the village upon which is
located an elm tree or part thereof which is infected with Dutch Elm Tree
disease, which hereby constitutes a nuisance, shall cause such elm tree to be
immediately cut down and all parts thereof to be destroyed or disposed of in
such manner as to preclude the transmission of elm tree disease or the
harboring, feeding or breeding of the elm tree beetle.



   (B)   A dead, dying, diseased or hazardous tree, bush, or
landscaping on private property, may be declared a nuisance and its removal
forced if it threatens public streets, public property, or the health,
safety, or welfare of persons or private property.



('69 Code, § 96.02)  (Ord. C-18, passed 2-14-55; Am. Ord. C-138, passed
3-5-59; Am. Ord. C-663, passed 7-10-89; Am. Ord. C-712, passed 7-8-91; Am.
Ord. 2011-11, passed 8-8-11; Am. Ord. 2013-02, passed 3-11-13)  Penalty, see
§ 95.99



§ 95.42  REMOVAL OF LITTER.



   (A)   Any person owning or having charge of land within the village
shall keep such land free of litter.



   (B)   As used in this section LITTER includes in the broadest sense
any garbage, rubbish, brush, downed trees or branches, and similar items of
an unsightly or unsanitary nature.



(Am. Ord. 2013-02, passed 3-11-13)



§ 95.43  RESERVED.



§ 95.44  NOTICE, ENFORCEMENT, AND REMEDIES.



   Notices of violation and enforcement of §§ 95.40 to 95.42, including
all remedies and rights of the village, shall follow §§ 159.080 to 159.083
of the Property Maintenance Code.



(Ord. C-663, passed 7-10-89; Am. Ord. 2013-02, passed 3-11-13)



MISCELLANEOUS



§ 95.50  TRIMMING OF TREES AND SHRUBBERY TO PREVENT OBSTRUCTION.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any person to plant, grow, or
maintain any shade tree or trees or shrubbery which will obstruct the proper
distribution of light from street lamps or which will obstruct the view of
traffic approaching an intersection by operators of vehicles approaching the
intersection from another direction.



   (B)   All trees shall be trimmed so as to have a clear height of ten
feet above the surface of sidewalks and 12 feet above the surface of the
street or roadway, and the branches of all trees in front of and along lots
or lands near which street lights are placed shall be trimmed so as not to
obstruct the free passage of light from said street lights to the street and
sidewalk.



   (C)   The Council shall cause a written notice to be given to
property owners ordering them to trim or remove trees and/or shrubbery so
that the trees and shrubbery shall conform to the provisions of divisions (A)
and (B).



   (D)   If the property owner fails to trim or remove the trees and/or
shrubbery as ordered, the Council may cause the trees or shrubbery to be
trimmed or removed as ordered, and the cost thereof shall be a lien upon such
real estate.



Penalty, see § 95.99



Statutory reference:



   Power of municipality to regulate shade trees, R.C. § 715.20



§ 95.51  DAMAGE TO GARDENS AND LAWNS BY ANIMALS.



   No person owning, harboring or having the care of any dog, cat, fowl or
other animal, shall permit the same to run at large so as to trespass upon
the property of another in a manner as to do damage to gardens, lawns,
shrubbery or other property of another.



('69 Code, § 93.01)  (Ord. C-141, passed 6-8-59)  Penalty, see § 95.99



Cross-reference:



   Animals, see Ch. 90



§ 95.52  DISH-TYPE SATELLITE SIGNAL RECEIVING STATIONS.



   (A)   Dish-type satellite signal receiving stations (hereafter
"stations"), subject to the following regulations, may be located within the
village.



   (B)   Stations shall not be linked to receivers which are not
located on the same lot as the station.



   (C)   Stations shall be located in the "yard, rear," as defined in
this code, and behind the principal dwelling or structure located on the lot;
shall be located so that however turned or otherwise used, all parts of the
station will be set back at least five feet from the inner side yard lines;
and shall be set back from the rear lot line no less than 20 feet or one-half
the depth of the rear yard, whichever is greater.



   (D)   The height of the station, should the dish antenna be turned
perpendicular to the ground, shall not extend above 15 feet; and the maximum
diameter of any dish antenna shall not exceed 12 feet.



   (E)   No installation or erection of a station shall commence before
a permit is obtained in accordance with §§ 154.56 and 154.57.



(Ord. C-540, passed 6-14-82)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.53  NOISE; EXCESSIVE SOUND PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall engage in any
construction work, operate any machinery, or operate, cause to be operated or
permit to be operated any radio, phonograph, television, musical instrument,
or other sound producing or sound amplifying instrument, or in any other way
create noise or sound, in such manner as to disturb the peace and quiet of
the neighborhood.  "Construction work" as used herein shall mean any type of
work which requires a building permit pursuant to this code of ordinances. 
This section shall not apply to any construction work performed by the
village for the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the village. 
No person being the owner, operator, or person in control or possession of a
motor vehicle with a device described in this section shall cause or permit
any noise, including bass reverberations, emanating from the motor vehicle
which is plainly audible at a distance of more than fifty feet from the motor
vehicle. Measurement standards, in addition to the factors set forth below,
shall include the auditory senses based upon direct line of sight. The noise
may constitute a violation of this section even though words and phrases are
not discernible, and whether the motor vehicle is stopped, standing, parked
or moving on a street, highway, alley, parking lot or driveway. The lawful
use of a standard equipment motor vehicle horn shall not be a violation of
this section.



   (B)   It shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of division
(A) for any person, firm or corporation to permit or for any person, firm or
corporation to engage in any such creation of noise or sound before 7:00 a.m.
or after 11:00 p.m.



   (C)   In determining whether a noise is of such character as to
disturb the peace and quiet in a neighborhood, a court, among other factors,
shall consider the following factors:



      (1)   Complaints of neighbors regarding the noise;



      (2)   The time of day at which the noise takes place;



      (3)   The intensity and duration of the noise;



      (4)   The type of noise produced;



      (5)   The alternate means available without excessive noise.



   (D)   The following uses and activities shall be exempt from noise
level regulations:



      (1)   Noises of safety signals and warning devices.



      (2)   Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicle,
when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency.



      (3)   Noises resulting from any work made necessary to restore
property to a safe condition or work required to protect persons or property
from an imminent exposure to danger.



      (4)   Any aircraft operated in conformity with, or pursuant
to, federal law, federal air regulations, and air traffic control instruction.



   (E)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of
this section shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  Each day that a
violation of this section occurs shall constitute a new and separate offense.



(Ord. C-781, passed 6-13-94; Am. Ord. 2001-16, passed 10-9-01)



§ 95.54  CONSTRUCTION CONTAMINATION CONTROL.



   (A)   No person, firm or corporation engaged in construction work
shall discharge from any source whatsoever, or cause to exist during the
course of such construction work, such quantities of dust or other air
contamination, or dirt, mud or other construction debris on the village
streets or on a site other than the construction site, which is detrimental
or causes injury, or which is injurious to or materially interferes with the
public health, welfare, or safety, or which causes or has a natural tendency
to cause injury to business or property.  "Construction work" as used herein
shall mean any type of work which requires a building permit pursuant to this
code of ordinances.



   (B)   In addition to any other enforcement method or penalty as may
be provided, the provisions of this section may be enforced by each or a
combination of the following methods:



      (1)   By issuance of a notice of violation indicating the
violation and ordering immediate action by approved methods to satisfactorily
reduce or eliminate such contaminants;



      (2)   By the issuance by the Building Commissioner of a stop
work order ordering all construction work on the property to cease until
approved action is taken to correct the violation;



      (3)   By the Village Solicitor obtaining an injunction to
cause the necessary compliance with this section.



   (C)   Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of
this section shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor.  Each day that a
violation of this section occurs shall constitute a new and separate offense.



(Ord. C-781, passed 6-13-94)



INOPERABLE AND UNLICENSED VEHICLES



§ 95.60  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   MOTOR VEHICLE IN AN INOPERATIVE CONDITION. Any style or type of
motor-driven vehicle used or useful in the conveyance of persons or property
which is unable to move under its own power due to defective or missing parts
or which has a flat or missing tire or broken or missing windshield or
windows, and which has remained in such condition for not less than ten days.



(Ord. 1998-18, passed 9-14-98)



§ 95.61  PROHIBITION CONCERNING MOTOR VEHICLES.



   It shall be unlawful, and is declared to be a nuisance, for any person
to store, place or allow to remain any motor vehicle in an inoperative
condition or unlicensed motor vehicle or trailer or automobile parts on any
parcel of land or lot within the corporate limits of the village other than
in a completely enclosed building.



   (A)   In the event of a violation of § 95.61, the Village Manager
shall give notice to the owner, occupant, or person having charge of the
premises upon which the violation occurs to cease such violation. This notice
shall be in writing and shall be served personally upon the owner, occupant,
or person having charge of the premises by a member of the Police Department,
or served upon such owner, occupant or person having charge of the premises
by registered or certified mail directed to such person's last known place of
residence.



   (B)   If the person served with the notice as provided in division
(A) fails to cause such violation to cease within ten days of the date upon
which the notice has issued, such person shall be subject to the penalty
provided in § 95.99, and a separate offense shall be deemed committed upon
each and every day during or on which the violation occurs or continues
beyond the ten-day period; however, no additional notice of violation is
required to be given for the subsequent days.



(Ord. 1998-18, passed 9-14-98)  Penalty, see § 95.99



DETERIORATED DRIVEWAYS AND PRIVATE ROADS



§ 95.70  MAINTENANCE OF DRIVEWAYS AND PRIVATE ROADS.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful and is declared to be a nuisance which
interferes with public safety and the ability of emergency equipment to
access buildings for any person owning or having charge of land within the
village to permit defective conditions to exist on any driveway, driveway
apron, or private road that provides ingress to or egress from structures.



   (B)   Defective condition shall mean deterioration of 50% or more of
the top surface of the driveway, driveway apron, or private road; cracks
which are three quarters inch or more in width; or where sunken or broken,
two inches or more differential in elevation between two areas.



(Ord. 1999-4, passed 3-8-99)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.71 ORDER FOR REPAIR.



   (A)   In the event of a violation of § 95.70, the Village Manager
shall give notice to the owner, occupant, or person having charge of the
premises upon which the violation occurs to cease such violation and repair
the defective condition. This notice shall be in writing and shall be served
upon the owner, occupant, or person having charge of the premises either
personally by a member of the Police Department or at the usual place of
residency of such owner, occupant, or person having charge of the premises by
registered or certified mail addressed to such person's last place of
residence.



   (B)   If the person served with the notice, as provided in division
(A), fails to cause such violation to cease and repair to be made within 45
days of the date upon which the notice has issued, the person shall be
subject to the penalty provided in § 95.99, and a separate offense shall be
deemed committed upon each and every day during or on which the violation
occurs or continues beyond the 45-day period. However, no additional notice
of violation is required to be given for the subsequent days.



(Ord. 1999-4, passed 3-8-99)  Penalty, see § 95.99



§ 95.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, for which another
penalty is not already provided, shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



CHAPTER 96: SANITATION, HEALTH, AND SAFETY



Section



General



   96.01   Unvented heaters



   96.02   Abandoned refrigerators



   96.03   (Reserved)



   96.04   Display of items for sale near street



Food and Food Handlers



   96.10   Definitions



   96.11   Permitting unclean premises



   96.12   Equipment



   96.13   Cleanliness of persons employed



   96.14   Health of persons employed



   96.15   Unsanitary food



Communicable Diseases



   96.20   Attending schools and other public places when infected



 



   96.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Privy vaults, cesspools, refuse, see Ch. 95



   Unclean habitations, see Ch. 95



   Weeds, litter on private property, see Ch. 95



GENERAL



§ 96.01  UNVENTED HEATERS.



   (A)   The use of a brazier, salamander, space heater, room heater,
furnace, water heater, or other burner or heater using wood, coal, coke, fuel
oil, kerosene, gasoline, natural gas, liquid petroleum gas or similar fuel,
and tending to give off carbon monoxide or other harmful gases must comply
with the following provisions:



      (1)   When used in living quarters, or in any enclosed
building or space in which persons are usually present, shall be used with a
flue or vent so designed, installed, and maintained as to vent the products
of combustion outdoors; except in storage, factory, or industrial buildings
which are provided with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon
monoxide poisoning.



      (2)   When used as a portable or temporary burner or heater at
a construction site, or in a warehouse, shed, or structure in which persons
are temporarily present, shall be vented as provided in division (A)(1) or
used with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide
poisoning.



   (B)   This section does not apply to domestic ranges, laundry
stoves, gas logs installed in a fireplace with an adequate flue, or hot
plates, unless the same are used as space or room heaters.



   (C)   No person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person
in charge, or occupant of premises, negligently permit the use of a burner or
heater in violation of the standards for venting and ventilation provided in
this section.



   (D)   Division (A) above does not apply to any kerosene-fired space
or room heater that is equipped with an automatic extinguishing tip-over
device, or to any natural gas-fired or liquid petroleum gas-fired space or
room heater that is equipped with an oxygen depletion safety shut-off system,
and that has its fuel piped from a source outside the building in which it is
located, that are approved by an authoritative source recognized by the State
Fire Marshal in the State Fire Code adopted by him or her under R.C. §
3737.82.



   (E)   The State Fire Marshal may make rules to ensure the safe use
of unvented kerosene, natural gas, or liquid petroleum gas heaters exempted
from division (A) above when used in assembly buildings, business buildings,
high hazard buildings, institutional buildings, mercantile buildings, and
type R-1 and R-2 residential buildings, as these groups of buildings are
defined in rules adopted by the Board of Building Standards under R.C. §
3781.10.  No person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in
charge or occupant of premises, negligently permit the use of a heater in
violation of any rules adopted under this division.



   (F)   The State Fire Marshal may make rules prescribing standards
for written instructions containing ventilation requirements and warning of
any potential fire hazards that may occur in using a kerosene, natural gas,
or liquid petroleum gas heater.  No person shall sell or offer for sale any
kerosene, natural gas, or liquid petroleum gas heater unless the manufacturer
provides with the heater written instructions that comply with any rules
adopted under this division.



   (G)   No product labeled as a fuel additive for kerosene heaters and
having a flash point below 100°F or 37.8°C shall be sold, offered for sale,
or used in any kerosene space heater.



   (H)   No device that prohibits any safety feature on a kerosene,
natural gas, or liquid petroleum gas space heater from operating shall be
sold, offered for sale, or used in connection with any kerosene, natural gas,
or liquid petroleum gas space heater.



   (I)   No person shall sell or offer for sale any kerosene-fired,
natural gas, or liquid petroleum gas-fired heater that is not exempt from
division (A) above, unless it is marked conspicuously by the manufacturer on
the container with the phrase "Not Approved For Home Use."



   (J)   No person shall use a cabinet-type, liquid petroleum gas-fired
heater having a fuel source within the heater, inside any building, except as
permitted by the State Fire Marshal in the State Fire Code adopted by him or
her under R.C. § 3737.82.



(R.C. § 3701.82)



   (K)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C. § 3701.99(B))  ('69 Code, § 134.08)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) 
Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.02  ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS.



   (A)   No person shall abandon, discard, or knowingly permit to
remain on premises under the person's control, in a place accessible to
children, any abandoned or discarded icebox, refrigerator, or other airtight
or semi-airtight container which has a capacity of 1½ cubic feet or more and
an opening of 50 square inches or more and which has a door or lid equipped
with a hinge, latch, or other fastening device capable of securing such door
or lid, without rendering the equipment harmless to human life by removing
such hinges, latches or other hardware which may cause a person to be
confined therein.  This section shall not apply to an icebox, refrigerator
or other airtight or semi-airtight container located in that part of a
building occupied by a dealer, warehouse or repairer.



(R.C. § 3767.29)



   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor
of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 3767.99(B))



('69 Code, § 134.09)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)  Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.03  (RESERVED).



§ 96.04  DISPLAY OF ITEMS FOR SALE NEAR STREET.



   (A)   No person, firm or corporation shall display any vehicle
regulated by the Ohio Motor Vehicles Law, or any other item of merchandise or
produce for sale along the streets or highways within the municipality,
nearer than 25 feet to the right-of-way line of the street or highway.  No
model or sample from which the sale of other vehicles or merchandise are to
be made shall be so displayed.



   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A), this section
shall not be construed to prohibit the display or sale of merchandise for
sale within the limits above mentioned where a building or structure is
presently erected or is authorized to be erected under the zoning and
building laws of the municipality and the display for sale is no closer to
the right-of-way than the front building line of the building.



('69 Code, § 134.12)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)  Penalty, see § 96.99



FOOD AND FOOD HANDLERS



§ 96.10  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FOOD.  Breads, meats, fruits, grains, vegetables, milk, juices, and
all other foodstuffs, food products or food ingredients in the natural or
processed state.  The expression shall be deemed to include all canned,
bottled, dehydrated or otherwise preserved foods.



   FOOD HANDLER.  Wholesale or retail grocers, bakers, butchers,
restaurant or lunch stand operators, dairymen, hucksters, fruit stand
operators, canners, or packers of foodstuffs, cold storage house operators,
or other persons commercially engaged in processing, handling, transporting,
storing, or selling food.



§ 96.11  PERMITTING UNCLEAN PREMISES.



   It shall be unlawful for any food handler to keep or possess food
except when in original cans, packages or containers, in any room, building,
establishment or other place, unless such place:



   (A)   Is adequately lighted to reveal any dirt or unwholesome
condition which might exist.



   (B)   Has smooth, tight floors, walls and ceilings, free from
projections, cracks and crevices and kept clean and sanitary at all times by
painting, scrubbing and cleaning to prevent the accumulation of dirt and
filth.



   (C)   Is adequately ventilated and screened against flies and other
insects.



   (D)   Is free from all vermin and rodents.



   (E)   Is provided with an ample supply of pure and uncontaminated
running water with sanitary drainage into a cesspool or sewer.



Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.12  EQUIPMENT.



   Every food handler's establishment shall be equipped with an adequate
supply of furniture, machinery, implements, containers, and utensils for the
proper conduct of such business, and it shall be unlawful for any food
handler to have in possession or use in connection with such business any
furniture, machine, implement, container, utensil, or other article of
equipment which is not thoroughly clean, sanitary, and free from rust or
corrosion.



Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.13  CLEANLINESS OF PERSONS EMPLOYED.



   Every food handler or employee thereof who is engaged in handling food,
except when such food is in original cans, packages or containers, shall keep
his person, aprons, services, caps and other articles of clothing throughly
clean and free from dirt and filth. Failure to observe the provisions of this
section shall constitute a misdemeanor and the employer of any person
violating the same shall be deemed an aider and abettor and may be prosecuted
as if he were the principal offender.



Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.14  HEALTH OF PERSONS EMPLOYED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person suffering from cholera, dysentery,
epidemic or streptoccus sore throat, paratyphoid fever, poliomyelitis (acute
anterior), scarlet fever, tuberculosis, typhoid fever, or who is a carrier of
the organism of any such disease, or who is suffering from any veneral
disease, to serve or handle food, except when such food is in original cans
or containers.  The employer of any person violating this section shall be
deemed an aider and abettor and may be prosecuted as if he were the principal
offender.



Penalty, see § 96.99



§ 96.15  UNSANITARY FOOD.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for any food handler to prepare,
manufacture, possess, sell, or expose or offer for sale any food which is
impure, moldy, tainted, rancid, unwholesome, or otherwise unsanitary or which
is adulterated or misbranded.



   (B)   The regulations of the public health council governing food
service operations and providing uniform sanitation standards are adopted and
declared to be the standards of purity intended and required by this chapter.



Penalty, see § 96.99



COMMUNICABLE DISEASES



§ 96.20  ATTENDING SCHOOLS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES WHEN INFECTED.



   It shall be unlawful for any person infected with or exposed to
infection of influenza, infantile paralysis, cerebrospinal meningitis,
measles, chicken pox, smallpox, whooping cough, cholera, scarlet fever,
diphtheria, or other communicable disease, to attend any public, parochial or
private school, theater or other public gathering.  The parents, guardian or
other person having custody or control of any child under 18 years of age,
violating this section, shall be deemed aiders and abettors and may be
prosecuted as if they were principal offenders.



Penalty, see § 96.99



Statutory reference:



   Power of municipality to secure its inhabitants from contagious
diseases, R.C. § 715.37



§ 96.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Whoever violates § 96.01 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.



('69 Code, § 134.08(D))



   (B)   Whoever violates § 96.04 shall be fined not more than 150 for
each offense. Each day the violation continues shall be deemed a separate
offense.



('69 Code, § 134.12)



   (C)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, for which
another penalty is not already provided, shall be fined not more than $150.



(Am. Ord. 2004-17, passed 7-12-04)



CHAPTER 97: STREETS AND SIDEWALKS



Section



   97.01   Purpose



   97.02   Definitions



   97.03   Construction permits



   97.04   Construction bond requirements



   97.05   Construction permit fee



   97.06   Removal and relocation



   97.07   Emergencies



   97.08   Waiver of permit fee



   97.09   Liability insurance



   97.10   Construction standards



 



   97.99   Penalty



§ 97.01  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose and intent of this chapter:



   (A)   To manage the use of public ways and rights-of-way in the
village; and



   (B)   To assure that the actual costs incurred by the village when a
person or persons constructs or installs facilities, or otherwise performs
maintenance or other work activity in the village rights-of-way, are paid or
reimbursed by said person(s).



(Ord. 2007-03, passed 4-9-07)



§ 97.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter, and the interpretation and enforcement
thereof, the following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:



   APPLICANT.  Any person who seeks to obtain a construction permit.



   CONSTRUCTION PERMIT.  Any authorization for use of the public
rights-of-way granted in accordance with the terms of this chapter, and the
laws and policies of the village.



   EXCAVATE.  To dig into or in any way remove or physically disturb or
penetrate any part of the right-of-way.



   FACILITY or FACILITIES.  The plant, equipment and/or property,
including but not limited to, cables, fibers, wires, pipes, conduits, ducts,
pedestals, antennae, electronics, poles, mains, plants and other
appurtenances located under, on or above the surface of the ground within the
rights-of-way of the village.



   PERMIT HOLDER.  The holder of a valid Construction Permit issued
pursuant to this chapter. 



   PERSON.  Individuals, corporations, companies, associations, joint
stock companies or associations, firms, partnerships, limited liability
companies, trusts, and includes their successors, trustees, receivers and
assigns, and any other legal entity.



   PUBLIC STREET.  means any highway, street, alley or other public
roadway for motor vehicle travel under the jurisdiction and control of the
village, which has been acquired by, established by, or dedicated to the
village.



   PUBLIC WAY.  Right-of-way and includes all public streets and utility
easements as those terms are herein defined herein, now or hereafter owned by
the village. 



   RIGHT-OF-WAY. The surface of and the space above and below any public
highway, street, way, place, alley, sidewalk, and easement dedicated to
public use, including but not limited to, sidewalks, roadways, shoulders and
berms, ditches and slopes extending to the right-of-way limits dedicated to
public use. 



   UTILITY EASEMENT.  Any easement owned by the village and acquired,
established, and dedicated for public utility purposes.



   VILLAGE. The municipality of Amberley Village, Ohio.



   VILLAGE ENGINEER. The individual or company under contract to provide
professional engineering services to the village.



   VILLAGE MANAGER.  The administrative head of the municipal government
known as Amberley Village, Ohio.



   WORK or WORK ACTIVITY.  Any labor or other action performed within a
right-of-way; or any use or storage of equipment or materials within a
right-of-way, including but not limited to, construction of streets and all
related appurtenances, fixtures, improvements, sidewalks, driveway openings,
street lights, and traffic signal devices within a right-of-way.  Work or
work activity also includes excavation, construction, maintenance or repair
of all underground structures such as pipes, conduit, tunnels, manholes,
vaults, buried cable, wire, or any other structure located below surface, and
installation of overhead poles or facilities attached to any above ground
structure used for any purpose within a right-of-way.



(Ord. 2007-03, passed 4-9-07)



§ 97.03  CONSTRUCTION PERMITS. 



   All persons, except the village, seeking to perform any type of work
activity on, under or above a right-of-way, including but not limited to work
which involves construction, reconstruction, installation, maintenance and/or
repair of facilities or other activity which results in excavation in the
right-of-way or involves the safety of the traveling public, shall obtain a
construction permit from the Village Manager or his designated representative.



   (A)   Applications.  Applications shall be accompanied by drawings,
plans and specifications in sufficient detail to demonstrate:



      (1)   The date of application; and the names and addresses of
the applicant(s), the developer(s), the contractor(s) and the
subcontractor(s).



      (2)   The specific nature of the facilities to be constructed
or installed and/or other work to be performed.



      (3)   That the facilities will be constructed in accordance
with all applicable codes, rules and regulations.



      (4)   The location and route of all facilities to be located
under the surface of the ground, including the line and grade proposed for
the burial at all points along the route which are within the public ways.



      (5)   The location of all existing underground utilities,
conduits, ducts, pipes, mains and installations which are in close proximity
with the public ways along the underground route proposed by the applicant. 



      (6)   The construction methods to be employed for protection
of existing structures, fixtures and facilities within or adjacent to the
public ways.



      (7)   The location and dimension of all trees, and the type if
known, within or adjacent to the public ways along the route proposed by the
applicant.



      (8)   Additionally, all plan submissions shall be in
accordance with the submission requirements as established and maintained by
the Village Manager.  In cases such as major projects involving construction
or relocation of multiple utilities or other facilities in the right-of-way,
situations where the structural integrity of surrounding facilities is at
issue, or other such construction concerns, such drawings, plans and
specifications, upon request of the Village Manager, shall be certified by a
state registered professional engineer that they are in compliance with all
applicable codes, rules and regulations. 



   (B)   Issuance of construction permit.



      (1)   Upon submission of all documents required of the
applicant, including any certification required, and the Village Manager is
satisfied that all drawings, plans, specifications and other documents comply
with all requirements of this chapter, the Village Manager shall issue a
construction permit authorizing the proposed work in the right-of-way,
subject to such further conditions, restrictions or regulations affecting the
time, place and manner of performing such work as the Village Manager shall
deem necessary or appropriate.



      (2)   The construction permit shall expire on the date
specified in the permit by the Village Manager.



   (C)   Coordination of construction.



      (1)   Upon the issuance of a construction permit under this
chapter, the village reserves the right to require a pre-construction
meeting, the submission of a construction schedule, and/or the submission of
a traffic control plan demonstrating that the protective measures and devices
that will be employed are consistent with the Ohio Manual on Uniform Traffic
Control Devices, so as to prevent injury or damage to Persons or property and
to minimize disruptions to efficient pedestrian and vehicular traffic.



      (2)   All permit holders are required to cooperate with the
village and with each other.  All construction, locations, activities and
schedules shall be coordinated, as ordered by the Village Manager, to
minimize public inconvenience, disruption or damages.



   (D)   Compliance with permit. All construction practices and
activities shall be in accordance with the permit and with approved final
drawings, plans and specifications for the facilities and/or other work. 
The Village Manager and his representatives shall be provided access to the
work and such further information as may be required to ensure compliance
with such requirements.



   (E)   Display of Permit.  The permit holder shall maintain a copy
of the construction permit and approved plans as the construction site, which
shall be displayed and made available for inspection by the Village Manager
or his representatives at all times when work occurring.



   (F)   Completion of construction.  The permit holder shall promptly
complete all construction activities so as to minimize disruption of the
public ways and other public or private property.  All construction work
authorized by a permit within the public ways, including restoration, must be
completed in a time period to be established by the Village Manager and
permit holder, and set forth in the permit.



   (G)   Restoration of property.  Upon completion of any construction
work, the permit holder, at his or its own expense, shall promptly repair any
and all public ways; and as to any property improvements, fixtures,
structures and facilities damaged during the course of construction, shall
restore the same to its condition before the commencement of construction.



      (1)   If weather or other conditions prevent the timely
restoration required by this section, the permit holder shall temporarily
restore the affected public ways or property in accordance with standards
established by the village.  Such temporary restoration shall be at the
permit holder's sole expense and the permit holder shall promptly undertake
and complete the required permanent restoration as soon as weather or other
conditions no longer prevent such permanent restoration.



      (2)   A permit holder or other person acting in its behalf
shall use suitable barricades, flags, flag  men or women, lights, flares and
other measures as are necessary and in accordance with applicable state and
local requirements for the safety of all members of the general public and to
prevent injury or damage to any person, vehicle or property by reason of such
work in or affecting such ways or property. 



   (H)   Landscape restoration. All trees, landscaping and grounds
removed, damaged or disturbed as a result of the construction, installation,
maintenance, repair or replacements must be replaced or restored to the
satisfaction of the Village Manager.



(Ord. 2007-03, passed 4-9-07)



§ 97.04  CONSTRUCTION BOND REQUIREMENTS.



   (A)   Before a permit is granted, either the owner of the project or
the contractor performing the work on such project shall post sufficient bond
in an amount satisfactory to the Village Manager to assure completion of
construction, that the terms and conditions of this chapter shall be met, and
that the right-of-way, public way and damaged property shall be properly
restored in accordance with § 97.03(G) and (H), in the form of a surety or
maintenance bond, escrow account, irrevocable letter of credit, or cash
deposit. 



   (B)   Maintenance of the work or other activity performed in the
rights-of-way, performed under a construction permit issued in accordance
with this chapter, shall remain the responsibility of the permit holder for a
period of one year from the date of final inspection by the village, except
that period shall be two years for permits issued for pavement cuts or boring
holes through or under the pavement.  A sufficient bond, in an amount to be
determined by the Village Manager, shall be posted during these periods. 



   (C)   Notwithstanding the foregoing bond requirements, upon
application the Village Council, in its sole discretion, may waive said bond
requirements if satisfied that the applicant is sufficiently self-insured and
maintains a satisfactory credit rating.



(Ord. 2007-03, passed 4-9-07)



§ 97.05  CONSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE.



   (A)   Fee.  After completion of the project, work or other activity
pursuant to a construction permit, the village will invoice the permit holder
for all the actual costs incurred by the village in the review, management,
oversight and inspection that are related to the application for, granting
of, and work performed under, the construction permit and which meet the
tests prescribed for public way fees by The Public Utilities Commission of
Ohio.



   (B)   Exemption from fee.  The following shall not be subject to
the fee provided in division (A) above:



      (1)   The village.



      (2)   Cable operators who are providing only cable service and
are operating pursuant to a valid franchise agreement with the village is
pre-empted from assessing such fees by the Federal Communications Commission.



   (C)   Nothing herein prevents an entity that is a public utility
pursuant to R.C. § 2905.02 from obtaining cost recovery for any facility
relocation required as a part of its occupancy of the right-of-way pursuant
to R.C. § 4939.07.



(Ord. 2007-03, passed 4-9-07)



§ 97.06  REMOVAL AND RELOCATION.



   (A)   Within a time designated by the Village Manager and not less
than 120 days following written notice from the village, the permit holder or
other person that owns the facility or related appurtenances shall, at its
own expense, temporarily or permanently remove, relocate, change or alter the
position or location of any facilities or related appurtenances within the
public ways whenever the village shall have determined that such removal,
relocation, change or alteration is reasonably necessary for the following
reasons:



      (1)   The construction, repair, maintenance or installation of
any village or other public improvement in, on or above the public ways;



      (2)   The operations of the village or other governmental
entity in, on or above the public ways;



      (3)   The permit holder or owner has discontinued operations
of, or has abandoned the facility and/or appurtenances.



   (B)   If the permit holder or owner fails to remove, relocate,
change or alter the facility and/or appurtenances within the time designated,
the village may, at its option, either have such relocation, removal, change
or alteration performed and invoice the permit holder or owner for the costs
to the village to do so, or invoice the permit holder or owner for increased
costs incurred by the village resulting from such failure.



(Ord. 2007-03, passed 4-9-07)



§ 97.07  EMERGENCIES.



   Where, because of a leak in a water or gas main, a break in an electric
duct, or some other serious accident, the public safety requires immediate
action, any excavation work may proceed without seeking a permit, but the
permit shall be obtained at the earliest reasonable time following the
accident.



(Ord. 2007-03, passed 4-9-07)



§ 97.08  WAIVER OF PERMIT FEE.



   The fee required by § 97.05 shall be waived if the work activity in
the right-of-way is the result of a request by the village for the owner of a
facility or appurtenances located in the right-of-way to relocate or remove
the facility or related appurtenances, unless such facility or related
appurtenances are no longer in use, are not authorized or have been abandoned.



(Ord. 2007-03, passed 4-9-07)



§ 97.09  LIABILITY INSURANCE.



   Before a construction permit is issued, the person seeking the permit
must present to the village evidence that the owner and the person to be
performing the work activity in the right-of-way are covered by comprehensive
general liability insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000 for
bodily injury, death or property damage, or such additional amounts as
prescribed by the Village Manager, that such insurance shall name the village
as a co-insured party, shall be in a form prescribed by the Village Engineer,
and providing that such insurance will remain in full force and effect until
the work activity is completed.



(Ord. 2007-03, passed 4-9-07)



§ 97.10  CONSTRUCTION STANDARDS.



   (A)   That all guardrails will be wood posts with galvanized metal
cable systems.



   (B)   That native limestone rocks set in cement mortar shall be used
on all culvert headwalls, bridge abutments, retaining walls of any type and
any and all structures.



   (C)   That native limestone shall be used to line all culverts that
are subject to erosion, and the rock shall be laid with no mortar and overlap
like shingles on a roof.  The rock shall be placed on the sides and bottom
of the culverts or swales as required to handle typical water flows in
ordinary storms.



   (D)   That all traffic signs and signs of any type shall be
consolidated so there are an absolute minimum amount of posts or poles. 
Whenever possible, signs will be placed on existing electric or telephone
utility poles.



   (E)   That concrete turf block shall be utilized on shoulder areas
where cars routinely park.  Vertical plastic marking posts will be
eliminated.



   (F)   That black smooth-bore corrugated pipe shall be utilized for
water transmission under driveways, etc.  The village staff will ensure that
this pipe is only used in locations where vehicle loads and water flow do not
exceed design limitations for the piping.



(Res. 2007-08, passed 5-14-07)



§ 97.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person as defined herein who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, or refuses to comply with any provisions of this chapter shall be
guilty of a minor misdemeanor and fined not more than $150 for each offense
or violation.  Each and every day that a violation continues shall
constitute a separate offense. 



   (B)   Nothing herein shall prevent the village from taking such
other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 



(Ord. 2007-03, passed 4-9-07)



CHAPTER 98: POOLS AND VILLAGE-OWNED TENNIS COURTS



Section



Swimming Pools



   98.01   Definitions



   98.02   Fencing of pools required



Village-Owned Tennis Courts



   98.05   Use of village courts restricted to residents



   98.06   Limitation on number of guests



   98.07   Shoes and shirts required



   98.08   Food, beverages prohibited on courts



   98.09   Playing time restricted



   98.10   Tension on nets to be released



   98.11   Fee for tennis keycards



SWIMMING POOLS



§ 98.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   FENCE.  A barrier with necessary gate(s) which encircles a pool.



   POOLS.  Includes swimming pools, wading pools, hot tubs, jacuzzis, and
any other out-of-doors permanent, semi-permanent, or temporary structure
intended to contain water for human wading, swimming, bathing or lounging.



(Am. Ord. C-636, passed 5-9-88; Am. Ord. 2003-13, passed 7-14-03)



§ 98.02  FENCING OF POOLS REQUIRED.



   (A)   (1)   No person who is the owner, occupant or tenant of any
parcel of real property within the village limits shall permit a pool to be
constructed or maintained thereon, unless surrounded by a fence at least
three feet and not more than four and one-half feet in height.



      (2)   Exception:  Hot tubs and jacuzzis need not be
surrounded by a fence so long as a secured cover is in place over them when
they are not in active use.



   (B)   Each day a pool is permitted to remain unfenced, or uncovered
if a hot tub or jacuzzi, shall be considered a separate offense.



('69 Code, § 95.01)  (Ord. C-63, passed 5-8-56; Am. Ord. C-68, passed
12-10-56; Am. Ord. C-636, passed 5-9-88)  Penalty, see § 10.99



VILLAGE-OWNED TENNIS COURTS



§ 98.05  USE OF VILLAGE COURTS RESTRICTED TO RESIDENTS.



   (A)   Use of the village tennis courts shall be restricted to
residents of Amberley Village holding current key cards issued by the
village, and their guests, except as hereinafter provided.



   (B)   Each group using a tennis court shall have at least one
resident as a part of that group.



   (C)   Use of village tennis courts may be extended to nonresidents
as authorized by Village Council.



(Ord. C-424, passed 5-10-76; Am. Ord. 2009-15, passed 9-14-09)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 98.06  LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF GUESTS.



   No resident using the tennis courts shall bring more than three guests
to the courts at any one time.  The guests shall be restricted to the court
used by the resident.



(Ord. C-424, passed 5-10-76)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.07  SHOES AND SHIRTS REQUIRED.



   (A)   Only regulation tennis shoes shall be worn on the village
tennis courts.



   (B)   Appropriate attire at the courts shall include shirts to be
worn at all times.



(Ord. C-424, passed 5-10-76)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.08  FOOD, BEVERAGES PROHIBITED ON COURTS.



   No food or beverage shall be permitted on the village tennis courts.



(Ord. C-424, passed 5-10-76)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.09  PLAYING TIME RESTRICTED.



   (A)   Except as authorized by Council, when other players are
waiting to play, players must limit their playing time to one hour maximum. 
To assure compliance with this rule, courts must be relinquished at
"changeover time" regardless of the time the courts have been in use by the
players occupying the courts.  "Changeover time" is defined as the exact
hour (i.e., 12:00 noon, l:00 p.m., 2:00 p.m., and the like).  The clock in
the village hall window is to be used for this purpose.  Waiting players
have their choice of courts at "changeover time."



   (B)   Utilization of courts shall be restricted to daylight hours. 
No person shall enter the village tennis courts for any purpose during
night-time hours.



(Ord. C-424, passed 5-10-76; Am. Ord. 2009-15, passed 9-14-09)  Penalty, see
§ 10.99



§ 98.10  TENSION ON NETS TO BE RELEASED.



   Players shall release tension on the net when the court is not in use.



(Ord. C-424, passed 5-10-76)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 98.11  FEE FOR TENNIS KEYCARDS.



   (A)   The fee for a two-year tennis key card for village residents
to access the village tennis courts is hereby established at $50 per card;
the fee for a second-year card only to be $35.  Two-year key cards will be
valid for the season for which it was issued and the following season; and
second-year key cards will be valid only for the single season in which it
was issued.



   (B)   Pursuant to § 98.05(C), key cards shall be issued to persons
who are not residents of the village for the use of the lower tennis courts
located immediately south of Village Hall upon payment of $100 for the
two-year access, $70 for the second year only access.  Such key cards will
be valid as outlined in division (A).  A maximum limit of 25 key cards will
be issued.  Applicants must provide the village with a valid name, current
address, phone number, and email address before a key card will be issued.
Any nonresident with a valid key card may have up to three guests as part of
the same group on the same court at any one time.



   (C)   The replacement fee for a lost or damaged key card is $10. 
All fees herein are nonrefundable unless the village terminates the privilege
granted by the issuance of a key card, in which event the village will
reimburse the annual fee paid for that key card. The Village Manager may
revoke the privileges granted herein at any time for a violation of any
village rule, policy, or procedure relating to use of the tennis courts.



(Res. C-734, passed 3-13-89; Am. Res. C-804, passed 3-11-91; Am. Res.
1997-28, passed 5-12-97; Am. Res. 2003-12, passed 4-14-03; Am. Res. 2005-02,
passed 4-11-05; Am. Res. 2007-05, passed 4-9-07; Am. Res. 2009-03, passed
4-13-09; Am. Res. 2011-02, passed 4-11-11; Am. Res. 2015-7, passed 3-9-15)



CHAPTER 99: CABLE TELEVISION RATES REGULATIONS



Section



   99.01   Definitions



   99.02   Initial review of basic cable rates



   99.03   Review of request for increase in basic cable rates



   99.04   Cable operator information



   99.05   Video service provider fee



§ 99.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BASIC CABLE RATES.  The monthly charges for a subscription to the
basic service tier and the associated equipment.



   BASIC SERVICE TIER.  A separately available service tier to which
subscription is required for access to any other tier of service, including
as a minimum, but not limited to, all "must carry" signals, all PEG channels,
and all domestic television signals other than superstations.



   BENCHMARK.  A per channel rate of charge for cable service and
associated equipment which the FCC has determined as being reasonable.



   CABLE ACT OF 1992.  The Cable Television Consumer Protection and
Competition Act of 1992.



   CABLE OPERATOR.  Any person or group of persons:



      (1)   Who provide cable service over a cable system and
directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in
such a cable system; or



      (2)   Who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through
any arrangement, the management and operation of such a cable system.



   CHANNEL.  A unit of cable service identified and selected by a channel
number or similar designation.



   COST OF SERVICE SHOWING.  A filing in which the cable operator
attempts to show that the benchmark rate or the price cap is not sufficient
to allow the cable operator to fully recover the costs of providing the basic
service tier and to continue to attract capital.



   FCC. The Federal Communications Commission.



   INITIAL BASIC CABLE RATES.  The rates that the cable operator is
charging for the basic service tier, including charges for associated
equipment, at the time the village notifies the cable operator of the
village's qualification and intent to regulate basic cable rates.



   INTERCOMMUNITY CABLE REGULATORY COMMISSION (ICRC).  A regional council
of governments organized under Ohio law of which the village is a member
having the authority to conduct certain administrative procedures on behalf
of the village in relation to this chapter.



   MUST-CARRY SIGNAL.  The signal of any local broadcast station (except
superstations) which is required to be carried on the basic service tier.



   PEG CHANNEL.  The channel capacity designated for public, educational,
or governmental use, and facilities and equipment for the use of that channel
capacity.



   PRICE CAP.  The ceiling set by the FCC on future increases in basic
cable rates regulated by the village, based on a formula using the GNP fixed
weight price index, reflecting general increases in the cost of doing
business and changes in overall inflation.



   REASONABLE RATE STANDARD.  A per channel rate that is at, or below,
the benchmark or price cap level.



   SUPERSTATION.  Any non-local broadcast signal secondarily transmitted
by satellite.



(Ord. C-767, passed 12-13-93)



§ 99.02  INITIAL REVIEW OF BASIC CABLE RATES.



   (A)   Notice.  Upon the adoption of this chapter and the
certification of the village by the FCC, the village or the ICRC shall
immediately notify each cable operator which is operating within the village,
by certified mail, return receipt requested, that the village intends to
regulate subscriber rates charged for the operator's basic service tier and
associated equipment as authorized by the Cable Act of 1992.



   (B)   Cable operator response.  Within 30 days of receiving notice
from the village or the ICRC, a cable operator shall file with the village or
the ICRC, its current rates for the basic service tier and associated
equipment and any supporting material concerning the reasonableness of its
rates.



   (C)   Expedited determination and public hearing.



      (1)   If the Village Council is able to expeditiously
determine that the cable operator's rates for the basic service tier and
associated equipment are within the FCC's reasonable rate standard, as
determined by the applicable benchmark, the Village Council shall:



         (a)   Hold a public hearing at which interested persons
may express their views; and



         (b)   Act to approve the rates within 30 days from the
date the cable operator filed its basic cable rates with the village.



      (2)   If the Village Council or the ICRC takes no action
within 30 days from the date the cable operator filed its basic cable rates
with the village, the proposed rates will continue in effect.



      (3)   Such public hearing may be held in conjunction with
other ICRC communities under the direction of the ICRC.



   (D)   Extended review period.



      (1)   If the Village Council is unable to determine whether
the rates in issue are within the FCC's reasonable rate standard based on the
material before it, or if the cable operator submits a cost-of-service
showing, the Village Council shall, within 60 days from the date the cable
operator filed its basic cable rates with the village and by adoption of a
formal resolution, invoke the following additional periods of time, as
applicable, to make a final determination:



         (a)   90 days if the Village Council needs more time to
ensure that a rate is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard; or



         (b)   150 days if the cable operator has submitted a
cost-of-service showing seeking to justify a rate above the applicable
benchmark.



      (2)   If the Village Council has not made a decision within
the 90 or 150 day period, the Village Council shall issue a brief written
order at the end of the period requesting the cable operator to keep accurate
account of all amounts received by reason of the proposed rate and on whose
behalf the amounts are paid.



   (E)   Public hearing.  During the extended review period and before
taking action on the proposed rate, the Village Council or the ICRC shall
hold at least one public hearing at which interested persons may express
their views and record objections.



   (F)   Objections.  An interested person who wishes to make an
objection to the proposed initial basic rate may request the Clerk of Council
or ICRC to record the objection during the public hearing or may submit the
objection in writing anytime before the decision resolution is adopted.  In
order for an objection to be made part of the record, the objector must
provide the Clerk of Council or ICRC with the objector's name and address.



   (G)   Benchmark analysis.  If a cable operator submits its current
basic cable rate schedule as being in compliance with the FCC's reasonable
rate standard, the Village Council or the ICRC shall review the rates using
the benchmark analysis in accordance with the standard form authorized by the
FCC.  Based on the Village Council or the ICRC's findings, the initial basic
cable rates shall be established as follows:



      (1)   If the current basic cable rates are below the
benchmark, those rates shall become the initial basic cable rates and the
cable operator's rates will be capped at that level.



      (2)   If the current basic cable rates exceed the benchmark,
the rates shall be the greater of the cable operator's per channel rate on
September 30, 1992, reduced by 10%, or the applicable benchmark, adjusted for
inflation and any change in the number of channels occurring between
September 30, 1992 and the initial date of regulation.



      (3)   If the current basic cable rates exceed the benchmark
but the cable operator's per channel rate was below the benchmark on
September 30, 1992, the initial basic cable rate shall be the benchmark,
adjusted for inflation.



   (H)   Cost-of-service showings.  If a cable operator does not wish
to reduce the rates to the permitted level, the cable operator shall have the
opportunity to submit a cost-of-service showing in an attempt to justify
initial basic cable rates above the FCC's reasonable rate standard.  The
Village Council will conduct a cost-of-service review.  The Village Council
may approve initial basic cable rates above the benchmark if the cable
operator makes the necessary showing; however, a cost-of-service
determination resulting in rates below the benchmark or below the cable
operator's September 30, 1992 rates, reduced by 10%, will prescribe the cable
operator's new rates.



   (I)   Decision:



      (1)   By formal resolution.  After completion by the village
or the ICRC of its review of the cable operator's proposed rates, the Village
Council shall adopt its decision by formal resolution.  The decision shall
include one of the following:



         (a)   If the proposal is within the FCC's reasonable
rate standard or is justified by a cost-of-service analysis, the Village
Council shall approve the initial basic cable rates proposed by the cable
operator; or



         (b)   If the proposal is not within the FCC's reasonable
rate standard, and the cost-of-service analysis, if any, does not justify the
proposed rates, the Village Council shall establish initial basic cable rates
that are within the FCC's reasonable rate standard or that are justified by a
cost-of-service analysis.



      (2)   Rollbacks and refunds.  If the Village Council
determines that the initial basic cable rates as submitted exceed the
reasonable rate standard or that the cable operator's cost-of-service showing
justifies lower rates, the Village Council may order the rates reduced in
accordance with divisions (G) or (H) above, as applicable.  In addition, the
Village Council may order the cable operator to pay to subscribers refunds of
the excessive portion of the rates with interest (computed at applicable
rates published by the Internal Revenue Service for tax refunds and
additional tax payments), retroactive to September 1, 1993.  The method for
paying any refund and the interest rate will be in accordance with FCC
regulations as directed in the Village Council's decision resolution.



      (3)   Statement of reasons for decision and public notice. If
rates proposed by a cable operator are disapproved in whole or in part, or if
there were objections made by other parties to the proposed rates, the
resolution must state the reasons for the decision and the Village Council
must give public notice of its decision.  Public notice will be given as
directed by the Village Council.



   (J)   Appeal.  The Village Council's decision concerning rates for
the basic service tier or associated equipment, may be appealed to the FCC in
accordance with applicable federal regulations.



(Ord. C-767, passed 12-13-93)



§ 99.03  REVIEW OF REQUEST FOR INCREASE IN BASIC CABLE RATES.



   (A)   Notice.  A cable operator in the village who wishes to
increase its rates for the basic service tier or associated equipment shall
file a request with the village and the ICRC and notify all subscribers at
least 30 days before the cable operator desires the increase to take
effect.  Such request may not be made more often than annually, and not
until at least one year after the determination of the initial basic cable
rates.



   (B)   Expedited determination and public hearing.



      (1)   If the Village Council or the ICRC is able to
expeditiously determine that the cable operator's rate increase request for
basic cable service is within the FCC's reasonable rate standard, as
determined by the applicable price cap, the Village Council shall:



         (a)   Hold a public hearing at which interested persons
may express their views; and



         (b)   Act to approve the rate increase within 30 days
from the date the cable operator filed its request with the village.



      (2)   If the Village Council takes no action within 30 days
from the date the cable operator filed its request with the village, the
proposed rates will go into effect.



      (3)   During the extended review period and before taking
action on the proposed rate, the Village Council or the ICRC shall hold at
least one public hearing at which interested persons may express their views
and record objections.



   (C)   Extended review period.



      (1)   If the Village Council and the ICRC are unable to
determine whether the rate increase is within the FCC's reasonable rate
standard based on the material before it, or if the cable operator submits a
cost-of-service showing, the Village Council shall, by adoption of a formal
resolution, invoke the following additional periods of time as applicable, to
make a final determination:



         (a)   90 days if the Village Council or the ICRC needs
more time to ensure that the requested increase is within the FCC's
reasonable rate standard as determined by the applicable price cap; and



         (b)   150 days if the cable operator has submitted a
cost-of-service showing seeking to justify a rate increase above the
applicable price cap.



      (2)   The proposed rate increase is tolled during the extended
review period.



      (3)   If the Village Council has not made a decision within
the 90- or 150-day period, the Village Council shall issue a brief written
order at the end of the period requesting the cable operator to keep accurate
account of all amounts received by reason of the proposed rate increase and
on whose behalf the amounts are paid.



   (D)   Public hearing.  During the extended review period and before
taking action on the requested rate increase, the Village Council or the ICRC
shall hold at least one public hearing at which interested persons may
express their views and record objections.



   (E)   Objections.  An interested person who wishes to make an
objection to the proposed rate increase may request the Clerk of Council or
ICRC to record the objection during the public hearing or may submit the
objection in writing anytime before the decision resolution is adopted.  In
order for an objection to be made part of the record, the objector must
provide the Clerk of Council or ICRC with the objector's name and address.



   (F)   Delayed determination.  If the Village Council is unable to
make a final determination concerning a requested rate increase within the
extended time period, the cable operator may put the increase into effect,
subject to subsequent refund if the Village Council later issued a decision
disapproving any portion of the increase.



   (G)   Price cap analysis.  If a cable operator presents its request
for a rate increase as being in compliance with the FCC's price cap, the
Village Council shall review the rate using a price cap analysis in
accordance with the standard form authorized by the FCC.  Based on the
Village Council's findings, the basic cable rates shall be established as
follows:



      (1)   If the proposed basic cable rate increase is within the
price cap established by the FCC, the proposed rates shall become the new
basic cable rates.



      (2)   If the proposed basic cable rate increase exceeds the
price cap established by the FCC, the Village Council shall disapprove the
proposed rate increase and order an increase that is in compliance with the
price cap.



   (H)   Cost-of-service showings.  If a cable operator submits a
cost-of-service showing in an attempt to justify a rate increase above the
price cap, the Village Council will review the submission pursuant to the FCC
standards for cost-of-service review.  The Village Council may approve a
rate increase above the price cap if the cable operator makes the necessary
showing; however, a cost-of-service determination resulting in a rate below
the price cap or below the cable operator's then current rate will prescribe
the cable operator's new rate.



   (I)   Decision.  The Village Council's decision concerning the
requested rate increase shall be adopted by formal resolution.  If a rate
increase proposed by a cable operator is disapproved in whole or in part, or
if objections were made by other parties to the proposed rate increases, the
resolution must state the reasons for the decision.  Objections may be made
at the public hearing by a person requesting the Clerk of Council or ICRC to
record the objection or may be submitted in writing at anytime before the
decision resolution is adopted.



   (J)   Refunds.



      (1)   The Village Council may order refunds of subscribers'
rate payments with interest if:



         (a)   The Village Council was unable take a decision
within the extended time period as described in division (C) above;



         (b)   The cable operator implemented the rate increase
at the end of the extended review period; and



         (c)   The Village Council determines that the rate
increase as submitted exceeds the applicable price cap or that the cable
operator failed to justify the rate increase by a cost-of-service showing,
and the Village Council disapproves any portion of the rate increase.



      (2)   The method of paying any refund and the interest rate
will be in accordance with FCC regulations as directed in the Village
Council's decision resolution.



   (K)   Appeal.  The Village Council's decision concerning rates for
the basic service tier or associated equipment may be appealed to the FCC in
accordance with applicable federal regulations.



(Ord. C-767, passed 12-13-93)



§ 99.04  CABLE OPERATOR INFORMATION.



   (A)   May require:



      (1)   In those cases when the cable operator has submitted
initial rates or proposed an increase that exceeds the reasonable rate
standard, the Village Council or the ICRC may require the cable operator to
produce information in addition to that submitted, including proprietary
information, if needed to make a rate determination.  In these cases, a
cable operator may request the information be kept confidential in accordance
with this section.



      (2)   In cases where initial or proposed rates comply with the
reasonable rate standard, the Village Council or the ICRC may request
additional information only in order to document that the cable operator's
rates are in accord with the standard.



   (B)   Request for confidentiality.  A cable operator submitting
information to the Village Council may request in writing that the
information may be made routinely available for public inspection. A copy of
the request shall be attached to and cover all of the information and all
copies of the information to which it applies.



(Ord. C-767, passed 12-13-93)



§ 99.05  VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER FEE.



   (A)   Pursuant to R.C. § 1332.32, the village shall receive from a
video service provider (or hereafter VSP) that provides service in the
village a video service provider fee in the amount of 5% of the VSP's gross
revenues, including advertising revenues, as provided in R.C. § 1332.32.



   (B)   The following receipt by the village of a notice of a VSP's
intent, pursuant to R.C. § 1332.27, to offer services in the village, the
Village Manager, or his or her designee, within ten days after the village
receives such notice, shall serve on the VSP a notice of the video service
provider fee established by division (A).



   (C)   The village and any VSP providing service in the village shall
be subject to the provisions R.C. § 1332.32, pertaining to the village, at
its sole expense, conducting an annual audit for the purpose of verifying the
accuracy of a VSP's calculation of the video service provider fees.



   (D)   Except as otherwise provided by law, no acceptance of any
payment by the village shall be construed as a release or as an accord and
satisfaction of any claim the village may have for further or additional sums
payable as a video service provider fee or from the performance of any other
obligation of the VSP.



   (E)   Payments of video service providers' fees shall be made by a
VSP in accordance with R.C. § 1332.32 and a VSP shall comply with all of the
customer service standards set forth in R.C. 1332.26.



   (F)   VSP's currently providing PEG channel(s) pursuant to a
franchise, competitive video service agreement, ordinance or resolution
shall, as provided in R.C. § 1332.30, continue to provide PEG channel(s) and
support.



(Ord. 2008-02, passed 1-14-08)



CHAPTER 100: TREES



Section



   100.01   Establishment; title



   100.02   Purpose; findings



   100.03   Objectives; powers and duties



   100.04   Definitions



   100.05   Duty of private property owners



   100.06   Responsibilities of village



   100.07   Determination of suitable trees for public planting



   100.08   Abuse or mutilation of public trees



   100.09   Trees in new subdivisions



   100.10   Tree spacing



   100.11   Distance from curb and sidewalk



   100.12   Distance from street corners and fire hydrants



   100.13   Utilities



 



   100.99   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Amberley Village Beautification Committee, see § 33.05



§ 100.01  ESTABLISHMENT; TITLE.



   There is hereby created and established the Amberley Village Public
Tree Ordinance. 



(Ord. 2004-19, passed 11-8-04)



§ 100.02  PURPOSE; FINDINGS.



   The primary purpose of this chapter is to preserve and enhance the
natural park-like heritage of Amberley Village and to improve the visual
appearances of its neighborhoods. This includes all trees, gardens and
streetscapes within the public areas.



(Ord. 2004-19, passed 11-8-04)



§ 100.03  OBJECTIVES; POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   To provide a means to study, investigate, counsel, develop and
update a written annual plan for the care, design, preservation, pruning,
positioning, planting, re-planting, removal, selection, or disposition of
trees in public areas. This plan shall include an operating budget approved
by Council and shall include proposals for community events such as Arbor
Day, and other educational activities focused on the beautification of
Amberley Village.



   (B)   Achieve the designation of Tree City USA and maintain our
status as defined by Tree City USA guidelines and regulations.



   (C)   Establish an ongoing appreciation and awareness for the
natural beauty and resources within the village through celebration and
information such as:



      (1)   Celebration of Arbor Day;



      (2)   Amberley Beautification Day;



      (3)   Community education emphasizing environmental awareness;



      (4)   Link to Amberley Village website to the mission of the
Amberley Village Public Tree Committee, its events and information.



   (D)   Establish a list of tree species that may be planted on the
public right-of-way. The tree species will be classified as small trees,
medium trees, and large trees. The Amberley Village Beautification Committee
(AVBC) shall approve this list, to be known as the AVBC List of Street Trees.



(Ord. 2004-19, passed 11-8-04)



§ 100.04  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly requires or indicates a different meaning.



   ACTUAL COST. Invoices paid, overhead plus labor and materials used.



   DAMAGE. Any action undertaken which causes injury or death of a tree.
This includes, but is not limited to, cutting, poisoning, over watering,
relocating or transplanting a tree, or trenching, excavating or paying within
the root zone of a tree.



   DRIPLINE. The outermost edge of the tree's canopy. When depicted on a
map, the DRIPLINE will appear as an irregular shape that follows the contour
of the tree's branches as seen overhead.



   PERSON. Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.



   PROPERTY OWNER. The person owning the property as shown by the County
Auditor's Plat of the Village of Amberley, Hamilton County, Ohio, including
the executor, administrator or beneficiary of the estate of a deceased owner.



   PUBLIC PLACES. All other grounds owned by the Village of Amberley.



   PUBLIC TREES. All shade and ornamental trees now or hereafter growing
on any public places.



   ROOT FEEDING ZONE. The outer two-thirds of the root zone.



   ROOT ZONE. The area within the dripline of a tree extending to at least
two feet below the surface of the ground.



   STREET OR HIGHWAY. The entire width of every public way, easement or
right-of-way when any part thereof is open to the public, as a matter of
right, for the purpose of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.



   STREET TREES AND OTHER PUBLIC TREES. Any tree of which more than
one-half of the basal cross-sectional area is located on city property.



   TREE. A tall growing woody plant with one or more perennial main stems
or trunks which develop branches from the aerial section of the stem rather
than from the base; capable of being pruned to at least six feet of clear
branches trunk below the crown within five years of planting.



   TREE EXPERT. A certified professional forester and/or certified
arborist.



   TREE LAWN. That part of a street or highway, lying between the property
line and that portion of the street or highway usually used for vehicular
traffic.



   TREE TOPPING. The severe cutting back of limbs to stubs of three inches
or more in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree as to remove the
normal canopy and disfigure the tree.



(Ord. 2004-19, passed 11-8-04)



§ 100.05  DUTY OF PRIVATE PROPERTY OWNERS.



   (A)   It shall be the duty of any property owner upon whose property
there may be trees outside of the right-of-way that are designated by the
AVBC with a tree expert as dead or dying and deemed a menace to the trees in
the right-of-way to remove or cause to be removed that tree.



   (B)   In the above situation, the Village Manager shall send a
certified written notice to the property owner indicating the required action
(pruning or removal) to be taken. A period of 30 days from receipt of this
letter shall be permitted for the property owner to effect the indicated
action. Should the property owner fail to comply, it shall be lawful for the
Village Manager or his or her agent to enter upon the property and cause such
action. The property owner shall be charged the actual cost of the work and
payment shall be made within 30 days or the actual cost of the work shall be
assessed to the property taxes.



   (C)   No person or property owner shall remove a tree from the
right-of-way for any reason without approval from the AVBC. Should approval
be given for the removal, the person may be required to replant or replace an
equal number of trees at the property owner's expense. The AVBC must approve
the replacement or replanting. Failure to plant replacements may result in
replacement by the village and the actual cost to the village shall be billed
to the property owner.



(Ord. 2004-19, passed 11-8-04) Penalty, see § 100.99



§ 100.06  RESPONSIBILITIES OF VILLAGE.



   (A)   The Village Manager may remove or cause to be removed from the
right-of-way any trees or part thereof which by reason of its nature is
injurious to existing sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines,
or other public improvements.



   (B)   Whenever it is necessary for the village to remove trees from
the village right-of-way, the village shall remove the trees and shall
consult with AVBC regarding any replacement of the trees which are removed.



(Ord. 2004-19, passed 11-8-04) 



§ 100.07  DETERMINATION OF SUITABLE TREES FOR PUBLIC PLANTING.



   The AVBC shall be charged with the duty of preparing a tree landscaping
plan setting forth the types and kinds of trees, especially recommending
native species, suitable and desirable for planting along selected public
streets within the village.



(Ord. 2004-19, passed 11-8-04)  Penalty, see § 100.99



§ 100.08  ABUSE OR MUTILATION OF PUBLIC TREES.



   (A)   For purposes of § 131.21, privilege for public land may also
be granted by AVBC.



   (B)   No person shall excavate any ditches, tunnels, trenches, or
drive within a radius of ten feet from any public tree.



   (C)   No person without privilege to do so shall deposit, place,
store, or maintain upon any public place of the village, any stone, brick,
sand, concrete, or other materials which may impede the free passage of
water, air, or fertilizer to the roots of any tree growing therein.



(Ord. 2004-19, passed 11-8-04) Penalty, see § 100.99



Cross-reference:



   Injuring vines, bushes, trees or crops, see § 131.21



§ 100.09  TREES IN NEW SUBDIVISIONS.



   The AVBC shall review the tree plan for any newly developed village
treelawns.



(Ord. 2004-19, passed 11-8-04)



§ 100.10  TREE SPACING.



   The spacing of public trees should be in accordance with the three
species size classes referred to in the AVBC list of street trees and no
trees may be planted closer together than the following:



   (A)   Small trees - 20 feet;



   (B)   Medium trees - 30 feet; and



   (C)   Large trees - 40 feet;



except in special plantings designed or approved by the AVBC.



(Ord. 2004-19, passed 11-8-04) Penalty, see § 100.99



§ 100.11  DISTANCE FROM CURB AND SIDEWALK.



   The distance public trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and
sidewalks will be in accordance with the three species size classes in the
AVBC list of street trees and no trees may be planted closer to the curb or
sidewalk than the following:



   (A)   Small trees - two feet (minimum of a three-foot wide treelawn);



   (B)   Medium trees - three feet (minimum of a five-foot wide
treelawn); and



   (C)   Large trees - four feet (minimum of a seven-foot wide
treelawn);



except in special plantings designed or approved by the AVBC.



(Ord. 2004-19, passed 11-8-04) Penalty, see § 100.99



§ 100.12  DISTANCE FROM STREET CORNERS AND FIRE HYDRANTS.



   (A)   No public tree shall be planted closer than 35 feet from any
street corner, measured from the point nearest to the intersecting curbs or
curb lines and shall comply with § 154.13.



   (B)   No public tree shall be planted closer than ten feet to any
fire hydrant.



(Ord. 2004-19, passed 11-8-04) Penalty, see § 100.99



§ 100.13  UTILITIES.



   Utility companies shall provide written evidence to the village of
adherence to established guidelines as recommended by the National Arborists
Association for line clearance work. These guidelines shall cover the
following areas: tree trimming, tree removal, brushing, right-of-way
clearance for new transmission lines, and chemical brush control and
appropriate precautions.



(Ord. 2004-19, passed 11-8-04) Penalty, see § 100.99



§ 100.99  PENALTY.



   Any person violating or failing to comply with any provisions of this
chapter shall be, upon conviction or a plea of guilty, subject to a fine not
less than $25 nor more than $250 per violation in addition to any required
restitution for damages incurred by the village or any special assessments
levied as provided for herein.



(Ord. 2004-19, passed 11-8-04)



CHAPTER 101:  INCOME TAX, EFFECTIVE BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2016



Section



   101.01   Authority to levy tax; purpose of tax; rate



   101.02   Effective date



   101.03   Definitions



   101.04   Income subject to tax for individuals



   101.05   Collection at source



   101.06   Income subject to net profit tax



   101.0680   Filing net profit taxes; election to be subject to
provisions of chapter



   101.0681   Definitions



   101.0682   Applicability; taxable situs; apportionment



   101.0684   Information provided to Tax Administrators;
confidentiality



   101.0685   Filing of annual return; remittance; disposition of funds



   101.06851   Electronic filing



   101.0686   Consolidated returns



   101.0687   Failure to pay tax



   101.0688   Declaration of estimated taxes



   101.0689   Additional penalties



   101.0690   Assessments against taxpayer



   101.0691   Refund applications



   101.0692   Amended returns



   101.0693   Examination of records and other documents and persons



   101.0694   Credits



   101.0695   Reckless violations; penalties



   101.07   Declaration of estimated tax



   101.08   Credit for tax paid



   101.09   Annual return



   101.10   Penalty, interest, fees and charges



   101.11   Audit



   101.12   Rounding



   101.13   Authority and powers of Tax Administrator



   101.14   Confidentiality



   101.15   Fraud



   101.16   Opinion of the Tax Administrator



   101.17   Assessment; appeal based on presumption of delivery



   101.18   Local Board of Tax Review; appeal to Local Board of Tax
Review



   101.19   Actions to recover; statute of limitations



   101.20   Adoption of rules



   101.21   Miscellaneous



 



   101.97   Collection of tax after termination of chapter



   101.98   Savings clause



   101.99   Violations; penalty



§ 101.01 AUTHORITY TO LEVY TAX; PURPOSES OF TAX; RATE.



   (A)   Authority to levy tax.



      (1)   The tax on income and the withholding tax established by
this Chapter are authorized by Article XVIII, Section 3 of the Ohio
Constitution. The tax on income and the withholding tax established by this
Chapter are deemed to be levied in accordance with, and to be consistent
with, the provisions and limitations of R.C. Chapter  718). This chapter is
deemed to incorporate the provisions of R.C. Chapter 718.



      (2)   The tax levied hereunder is an annual tax levied on the
income of every person residing in or earning or receiving income in the
village, and shall be measured by municipal taxable income, as defined
herein. The village shall tax income at a uniform rate.



(R.C. § 718.04)



   (B)   Purposes of tax; rate.



      (1)   The purpose of the tax levied under this chapter is,
without limitation, to provide funds for adequate general municipal
operations, projected capital improvements and the establishment of adequate
reserves for the normal operations of the village. There shall be, and is
hereby, levied a tax on salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation,
and on net profits as hereinafter provided.



      (2)   Tax rate. An annual tax for the purposes specified
herein shall be imposed on and after January l, 2016, at the rate of 2% per
annum.



(R.C. §  718.04)



   (C)   Allocation of funds. The funds to be derived from the
enforcement of this chapter shall be allocated in accordance with the
determination of the Council by ordinances passed from time to time.



   (D)   Statement of procedural history; state mandated changes to
municipal income tax.



      (1)   Significant and wide-ranging amendments to R.C. Chapter
718 were enacted by Am Sub HB 5, passed by the 130th General Assembly, and
signed by Governor Kasich on December 19, 2014, and H.B. 5 required municipal
corporations to conform to and adopt the provisions of R.C. Chapter 718 in
order to have the authority to impose, enforce, administer and collect a
municipal income tax.



      (2)   As mandated by H.B. 5, this chapter is effective January
1, 2016 and replaces chapter 93 for all tax years beginning January 1, 2016
in accordance with the provisions of R.C. Chapter 718 to allow the village to
continue the income tax and withholding tax administration and collection
efforts on behalf of the village.



(Ord. 2015-12, passed 11-9-15)



§ 101.02  EFFECTIVE DATE.



   (A)   This chapter is effective January 1, 2016 and corresponds with
changes to R.C. Chapter 718, and applies to municipal taxable years beginning
on or after January 1, 2016. All provisions of this chapter apply to taxable
years beginning 2016 and succeeding taxable years.



   (B)   This chapter does not repeal the existing Chapter 93 for any
taxable year prior to 2016, but rather replaces Chapter 93 effective January
1, 2016 going forward. For municipal taxable years beginning before January
1, 2016, the village shall continue to administer, audit, and enforce the
income tax of the village under R.C. Chapter 718 and ordinances and
resolutions of the Village as that statute and those ordinances and
resolutions existed before January 1, 2016.



(Uncodified Section 2 of Am Sub HB 5, passed Dec 2014; R.C. §  718.04) 
(Ord. 2015-12, passed 11-9-15)



§ 101.03  DEFINITIONS.



   Any term used in this chapter that is not otherwise defined has the
same meaning as when used in a comparable context in laws of the United
States relating to federal income taxation or in R.C. Title LVII, unless a
different meaning is clearly required. If a term used in this chapter that is
not otherwise defined is used in a comparable context in both the laws of the
United States relating to federal income tax and in R.C. Title LVII and the
use is not consistent, then the use of the term in the laws of the United
States relating to federal income tax shall control over the use of the term
in R.C. Title LVII.



   For purposes of this chapter, the singular shall include the plural,
and the masculine shall include the feminine and the gender-neutral.



   As used in this chapter:



   ADJUSTED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME. For a person required to file as a C
corporation, or for a person that has elected to be taxed as a C corporation
under division (4) of the definition of "net profit" in this section, a C
corporation's federal taxable income before net operating losses and special
deductions as determined under the Internal Revenue Code, adjusted as follows:



      (1)   Deduct intangible income to the extent included in
federal taxable income. The deduction shall be allowed regardless of whether
the intangible income relates to assets used in a trade or business or assets
held for the production of income.



      (2)   Add an amount equal to 5% of intangible income deducted
under division (1) of this definition, but excluding that portion of
intangible income directly related to the sale, exchange, or other
disposition of property described in section 1221 of the Internal Revenue
Code;



      (3)   Add any losses allowed as a deduction in the computation
of federal taxable income if the losses directly relate to the sale,
exchange, or other disposition of an asset described in section 1221 or 1231
of the Internal Revenue Code;



      (4)   (a)   Except as provided in division (4)(b) of this
definition, deduct income and gain included in federal taxable income to the
extent the income and gain directly relate to the sale, exchange, or other
disposition of an asset described in section 1221 or 1231 of the Internal
Revenue Code;



         (b)   Division (4)(a) of this definition does not apply
to the extent the income or gain is income or gain described in section 1245
or 1250 of the Internal Revenue Code.



      (5)   Add taxes on or measured by net income allowed as a
deduction in the computation of federal taxable income;



      (6)   In the case of a real estate investment trust or
regulated investment company, add all amounts with respect to dividends to,
distributions to, or amounts set aside for or credited to the benefit of
investors and allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable
income;



      (7)   Deduct, to the extent not otherwise deducted or excluded
in computing federal taxable income, any income derived from a transfer
agreement or from the enterprise transferred under that agreement under R.C.
§ 4313.02;



      (8)   (a)   Except as limited by divisions (8)(b), (c) and
(d) of this definition, deduct any net operating loss incurred by the person
in a taxable year beginning on or after January 1, 2017. The amount of such
net operating loss shall be deducted from net profit that is reduced by
exempt income to the extent necessary to reduce municipal taxable income to
zero, with any remaining unused portion of the net operating loss carried
forward to not more than five consecutive taxable years following the taxable
year in which the loss was incurred, but in no case for more years than
necessary for the deduction to be fully utilized.



         (b)   No person shall use the deduction allowed by
division (8) of this definition to offset qualifying wages.



         (c)   1.   For taxable years beginning in 2018, 2019,
2020, 2021, or 2022, a person may not deduct, for purposes of an income tax
levied by the village before January 1, 2016, more than 50% of the amount of
the deduction otherwise allowed by division (8)(a) of this definition.



            2.   For taxable years beginning in 2023 or
thereafter, a person may deduct, for purposes of an income tax levied by the
village before January 1, 2016, the full amount allowed by division (8)(a) of
this definition.



         (d)   Any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward
deduction that is available must be utilized before a taxpayer may deduct any
amount pursuant to division (8) of this definition.



         (e)   Nothing in division (8)(c)1. of this definition
precludes a person from carrying forward, for use with respect to any return
filed for a taxable year beginning after 2018, any amount of net operating
loss that was not fully utilized by operation of division (8)(c)1. of this
definition. To the extent that an amount of net operating loss that was not
fully utilized in one or more taxable years by operation of division (8)(c)1.
of this section is carried forward for use with respect to a return filed for
a taxable year beginning in 2019, 2020, 2021, or 2022, the limitation
described in division (8)(c)1. of this section shall apply to the amount
carried forward.



      (9)   Deduct any net profit of a pass-through entity owned
directly or indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's federal
taxable income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that net
profit in the group's federal taxable income in accordance with §
101.06(C)(5)(c)2. of this chapter.



      (10)   (a)   Add any loss incurred by a pass-through entity
owned directly or indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's
federal taxable income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes
that loss in the group's federal taxable income in accordance with §
101.06(C)(5)(c)2. of this chapter.



         (b)   If the taxpayer is not a C corporation, is not a
disregarded entity that has made the election described in division (2) of
the definition of "taxpayer" in this section, is not a publicly traded
partnership that has made the election described in division (4) of the
definition of "net profit" in this section, and is not an individual, the
taxpayer shall compute adjusted federal taxable income under this section as
if the taxpayer were a C corporation, except guaranteed payments and other
similar amounts paid or accrued to a partner, former partner, shareholder,
former shareholder, member, or former member shall not be allowed as a
deductible expense unless such payments are in consideration for the use of
capital and treated as payment of interest under section 469 of the Internal
Revenue Code or United States Treasury regulations. Amounts paid or accrued
to a qualified self-employed retirement plan with respect to a partner,
former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member of
the taxpayer, amounts paid or accrued to or for health insurance for a
partner, former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former
member, and amounts paid or accrued to or for life insurance for a partner,
former partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member
shall not be allowed as a deduction.



         (c)   Nothing in this definition shall be construed as
allowing the taxpayer to add (or deduct any amount more than once or shall be
construed as allowing any taxpayer to deduct any amount paid to or accrued
for purposes of federal self-employment tax.



   ASSESSMENT.  Any of the following:



      (1)   A written finding by the Tax Administrator that a person
has underpaid municipal income tax, or owes penalty and interest, or any
combination of tax, penalty, or interest, to the village;



      (2)   A full or partial denial of a refund request issued
under § 101.09(F)(2)(b) of this chapter;



      (3)   A Tax Administrator's denial of a taxpayer's request for
use of an alternative apportionment method, issued under § 101.06(B)(2)(b)
of this chapter; or



      (4)   A Tax Administrator's requirement for a taxpayer to use
an alternative apportionment method, issued under § 101.06(B)(2)(c) of this
chapter.



      (5)   For purposes of divisions (1), (2), (3) and (4) of this
definition, an ASSESSMENT shall commence the person's time limitation for
making an appeal to the Local Board of Tax Review pursuant to § 101.18 of
this chapter, and shall have "ASSESSMENT" written in all capital letters at
the top of such finding.



ASSESSMENT does not include notice(s) denying a request for refund issued
under § 101.09(F)(2)(c) of this chapter, a billing statement notifying a
taxpayer of current or past-due balances owed to the village, a tax
administrator's request for additional information, a notification to the
taxpayer of mathematical errors, or a tax administrator's other written
correspondence to a person or taxpayer that does not meet the criteria
prescribed in this definition.



   AUDIT. The examination of a person or the inspection of the books,
records, memoranda, or accounts of a person, ordered to appear before the Tax
Administrator, for the purpose of determining liability for municipal income
tax.



   BOARD OF REVIEW.  That body created by and constituted as provided in
§ 101.18 and has same meaning as "Local Board of Tax Review."



   CALENDAR QUARTER. The three-month period ending on the last day of
March, June, September, or December.



   CERTIFIED MAIL, EXPRESS MAIL, UNITED STATES MAIL, or POSTAL SERVICE.
Any delivery service authorized pursuant to R.C. § 5703.056.



   COMPENSATION. Any form of remuneration paid to an employee for personal
services, including, but not limited to, salaries, wages, vacation pay, sick
pay, commissions, bonuses, tips, severance pay, supplemental unemployment
pay, or any other form of remuneration that is paid to or constructively
received by the taxpayer, and whether paid in cash or other form of property.
That portion of gross wages which may be deferred under a federally
recognized plan is subject to taxation and to withholding.



   DISREGARDED ENTITY. A single member limited liability company, a
qualifying subchapter S subsidiary, or another entity if the company,
subsidiary, or entity is a disregarded entity for federal income tax purposes.



   DOMICILE. The true, fixed and permanent home of the taxpayer to which,
whenever absent, the taxpayer intends to return.



   EXEMPT INCOME. All of the following:



      (1)   The military pay or allowances of members of the armed
forces of the United States or members of their reserve components, including
the national guard of any state;



      (2)   Intangible income;



      (3)   Social security benefits, railroad retirement benefits,
unemployment compensation, pensions, retirement benefit payments, payments
from annuities, and similar payments made to an employee or to the
beneficiary of an employee under a retirement program or plan, disability
payments received from private industry or local, state, or federal
governments or from charitable, religious or educational organizations, and
the proceeds of sickness, accident, or liability insurance policies. As used
in this division, "unemployment compensation" does not include supplemental
unemployment compensation described in section 3402(o)(2) of the Internal
Revenue Code.



      (4)   The income of religious, fraternal, charitable,
scientific, literary, or educational institutions to the extent such income
is derived from tax-exempt real estate, tax-exempt tangible or intangible
property, or tax-exempt activities.



      (5)   Compensation paid under R.C. §§ 3501.28 or 3501.36 to
a person serving as a precinct election official to the extent that such
compensation does not exceed $1,000 for the taxable year. Such compensation
in excess of $1,000 for the taxable year may be subject to taxation by the
village. The village will not require the payer of such compensation to
withhold any tax from that compensation.



      (6)   Dues, contributions, and similar payments received by
charitable, religious, educational, or literary organizations or labor
unions, lodges, and similar organizations;



      (7)   Alimony and child support received;



      (8)   Awards for personal injuries or for damages to property
from insurance proceeds or otherwise, excluding compensation paid for lost
salaries or wages or awards for punitive damages;



      (9)   Income of a public utility when that public utility is
subject to the tax levied under R.C. § 5727.24 or 5727.30. This section does
not apply for purposes of R.C. Chapter 5745.



      (10)   Gains from involuntary conversions, interest on federal
obligations, items of income subject to a tax levied by the state and that a
municipal corporation is specifically prohibited by law from taxing, and
income of a decedent's estate during the period of administration except such
income from the operation of a trade or business;



      (11)   Compensation or allowances excluded from federal gross
income under section 107 of the Internal Revenue Code;



      (12)   Employee compensation that is not qualifying wages as
defined in this section;



      (13)   An S corporation shareholder's distributive share of
net profits of the S corporation, other than any part of the distributive
share of net profits that represents wages as defined in section 3121(a) of
the Internal Revenue Code or net earnings from self-employment as defined in
section 1402(a) of the Internal Revenue Code.



      (14)   (a)   Except as provided in this division,
qualifying wages described in § 101.05(B)(2)(a) and (B)(5) of this chapter
to the extent the qualifying wages are not subject to withholding for the
village under either of those divisions.



         (b)   The exemption provided in division (14)(a) of this
definition does not apply with respect to the municipal corporation in which
the employee resided at the time the employee earned the qualifying wages.



         (c)   The exemption provided in division (14)(a) of this
definition does not apply to qualifying wages that an employer elects to
withhold under § 101.05(B)(4)(b) of this chapter.



         (d)   The exemption provided in division (14)(a) of this
definition does not apply to qualifying wages if both of the following
conditions apply:



            1.   For qualifying wages described in §
101.05(B)(2)(a), the employee's employer withholds and remits tax on the
qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the employee's
principal place of work is situated, or, for qualifying wages described in §
101.05(B)(5), the employee's employer withholds and remits tax on the
qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the employer's fixed
location is located;



            2.   The employee receives a refund of the tax
described in division (14)(d)1. of this definition on the basis of the
employee not performing services in that municipal corporation.



      (15)   (a)   Except as provided in this division,
compensation that is not qualifying wages paid to a nonresident individual
for personal services performed in the village on not more than 20 days in a
taxable year.



         (b)   The exemption provided in division (15)(a) of this
definition does not apply under either of the following circumstances:



            1.   The individual's base of operation is located
in the village.



            2.   The individual is a professional athlete,
professional entertainer, or public figure, and the compensation is paid for
the performance of services in the individual's capacity as a professional
athlete, professional entertainer, or public figure. For purposes of this
division, "professional athlete," "professional entertainer," and "public
figure" have the same meanings as in § 101.05(B) of this chapter.



         (c)   Compensation to which this division applies shall
be treated as earned or received at the individual's base of operation. If
the individual does not have a base of operation, the compensation shall be
treated as earned or received where the individual is domiciled.



         (d)   For purposes of this division, "base of operation"
means the location where an individual owns or rents an office, storefront,
or similar facility to which the individual regularly reports and at which
the individual regularly performs personal services for compensation.



      (16)   Compensation paid to a person for personal services
performed for a political subdivision on property owned by the political
subdivision, regardless of whether the compensation is received by an
employee of the subdivision or another person performing services for the
subdivision under a contract with the subdivision, if the property on which
services are performed is annexed to a municipal corporation pursuant to R.C.
§ 709.023 on or after March 27, 2013, unless the person is subject to such
taxation because of residence. If the compensation is subject to taxation
because of residence, municipal income tax shall be payable only to the
municipal corporation of residence.



      (17)   Income the taxation of which is prohibited by the
constitution or laws of the United States.



      (18)   Any item of income that is exempt income of a
pass-through entity under the definition of EXEMPT INCOME in this section is
exempt income of each owner of the pass-through entity to the extent of that
owner's distributive or proportionate share of that item of the entity's
income.



   FORM 2106. Internal Revenue Service form 2106 filed by a taxpayer
pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.



   GENERIC FORM. An electronic or paper form that is not prescribed by the
village and that is designed for reporting taxes withheld by an employer,
agent of an employer, or other payer, estimated municipal income taxes, or
annual municipal income tax liability, including a request for refund.



   INCOME. All of the following:



      (1)   (a)   For residents, all income, salaries, qualifying
wages, commissions, and other compensation from whatever source earned or
received by the resident, including the resident's distributive share of the
net profit of pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by the
resident and any net profit of the resident, except as provided in division
(4) of the definition of "net profit" in this section.



         (b)   For the purposes of this division:



            1.   Any net operating loss of the resident
incurred in the taxable year and the resident's distributive share of any net
operating loss generated in the same taxable year and attributable to the
resident's ownership interest in a pass-through entity shall be allowed as a
deduction, for that taxable year and the following five taxable years,
against any other net profit of the resident or the resident's distributive
share of any net profit attributable to the resident's ownership interest in
a pass-through entity until fully utilized, subject to division (1)(d) of
this definition;



            2.   The resident's distributive share of the net
profit of each pass-through entity owned directly or indirectly by the
resident shall be calculated without regard to any net operating loss that is
carried forward by that entity from a prior taxable year and applied to
reduce the entity's net profit for the current taxable year.



         (c)   Subdivision (1)(b) of this definition immediately
above does not apply with respect to any net profit or net operating loss
attributable to an ownership interest in an S corporation unless
shareholders' distributive shares of net profits from S corporations are
subject to tax in the municipal corporation as provided in division (13) of
the definition of "exempt income".



         (d)   Any amount of a net operating loss used to reduce
a taxpayer's net profit for a taxable year shall reduce the amount of net
operating loss that may be carried forward to any subsequent year for use by
that taxpayer. In no event shall the cumulative deductions for all taxable
years with respect to a taxpayer's net operating loss exceed the original
amount of that net operating loss available to that taxpayer.



      (2)   In the case of nonresidents, all income, salaries,
qualifying wages, commissions, and other compensation from whatever source
earned or received by the nonresident for work done, services performed or
rendered, or activities conducted in the village, including any net profit of
the nonresident, but excluding the nonresident's distributive share of the
net profit or loss of only pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly
by the nonresident.



      (3)   For taxpayers that are not individuals, net profit of
the taxpayer;



      (4)   Lottery, sweepstakes, gambling and sports winnings,
winnings from games of chance, and prizes and awards. If the taxpayer is a
professional gambler for federal income tax purposes, the taxpayer may deduct
related wagering losses and expenses to the extent authorized under the
Internal Revenue Code and claimed against such winnings. Credit for tax
withheld or paid to another municipal corporation on such winnings paid to
the municipal corporation where winnings occur is limited to the credit as
specified in § 101.08(A) of this chapter.



   INTANGIBLE INCOME. Income of any of the following types: income yield,
interest, capital gains, dividends, or other income arising from the
ownership, sale, exchange, or other disposition of intangible property
including, but not limited to, investments, deposits, money, or credits as
those terms are defined in R.C. Chapter 5701, and patents, copyrights,
trademarks, trade names, investments in real estate investment trusts,
investments in regulated investment companies, and appreciation on deferred
compensation. INTANGIBLE INCOME does not include prizes, awards, or other
income associated with any lottery winnings, gambling winnings, or other
similar games of chance.



   INTERNAL REVENUE CODE. The Internal Revenue Code of 1986,100 Sta. 2085,
26 U.S.C.A. 1, as amended.



   LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY. A limited liability company formed under
R.C. Chapter 1705 or under the laws of another state.



   LOCAL BOARD OF TAX REVIEW and BOARD OF TAX REVIEW. The entity created
under § 101.18 of this chapter.



   MUNICIPAL CORPORATION. In general terms, a status conferred upon a
local government unit, by state law giving the unit certain autonomous
operating authority such as the power of taxation, power of eminent domain,
police power and regulatory power, and includes a joint economic development
district or joint economic development zone that levies an income tax under
R.C. §§ 715.691, 715.70, 715.71, or 715.74.



   MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME.



      (1)   (a)   For a person other than an individual, income
reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and then,
as applicable, apportioned or sitused to the village under § 101.06(B), and
further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to
the person for the village.



         (b)   1.   For an individual who is a resident of a
municipal corporation other than a qualified municipal corporation, income
reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income, then
reduced as provided in division (2) of this definition, and further reduced
by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to the individual
for the municipal corporation.



            2.   For an individual who is a resident of a
qualified municipal corporation, Ohio adjusted gross income reduced by income
exempted, and increased by deductions excluded, by the qualified municipal
corporation from the qualified municipal corporation's tax on or before
December 31, 2013. If a qualified municipal corporation, on or before
December 31, 2013, exempts income earned by individuals who are not residents
of the qualified municipal corporation and net profit of persons that are not
wholly located within the qualified municipal corporation, such individual or
person shall have no municipal taxable income for the purposes of the tax
levied by the qualified municipal corporation and may be exempted by the
qualified municipal corporation from the requirements of R.C. § 718.03.



         (c)   For an individual who is a nonresident of the
village, income reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in
income and then, as applicable, apportioned or sitused to the village under
§ 101.06(B), then reduced as provided in division (2) of this definition,
and further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available
to the individual for the village.



      (2)   In computing the municipal taxable income of a taxpayer
who is an individual, the taxpayer may subtract, as provided in division
(1)(b)1. or (1)(c) of this definition, the amount of the individual's
employee business expenses reported on the individual's form 2106 that the
individual deducted for federal income tax purposes for the taxable year,
subject to the limitation imposed by section 67 of the Internal Revenue Code.
For the municipal corporation in which the taxpayer is a resident, the
taxpayer may deduct all such expenses allowed for federal income tax
purposes. For a municipal corporation in which the taxpayer is not a
resident, the taxpayer may deduct such expenses only to the extent the
expenses are related to the taxpayer's performance of personal services in
that nonresident municipal corporation.



   MUNICIPALITY. The Village of Amberley Village.



   NET OPERATING LOSS. A loss incurred by a person in the operation of a
trade or business. NET OPERATING LOSS does not include unutilized losses
resulting from basis limitations, at-risk limitations, or passive activity
loss limitations.



   NET PROFIT.



      (1)   For a person other than an individual, it means adjusted
federal taxable income.



      (2)   For a person who is an individual, it means the
individual's net profit required to be reported on schedule C, schedule E, or
schedule F reduced by any net operating loss carried forward. For the
purposes of this division, the net operating loss carried forward shall be
calculated and deducted in the same manner as provided in division (8) of the
definition of "adjusted federal taxable income" in this section.



      (3)   For the purposes of this chapter, and notwithstanding
division (1) of this definition, net profit of a disregarded entity shall not
be taxable as against that disregarded entity, but shall instead be included
in the net profit of the owner of the disregarded entity.



      (4)   (a)   For purposes of this chapter, "publicly traded
partnership" means any partnership, an interest in which is regularly traded
on an established securities market. A "publicly traded partnership" may have
any number of partners.



         (b)   For the purposes of this chapter, and not
withstanding any other provision therein, the net profit of a publicly traded
partnership that makes the election described in this division shall be taxed
as if the partnership were a C corporation, and shall not be treated as the
net profit or income of any owner of the partnership.



         (c)   A publicly traded partnership that is treated as a
partnership for federal income tax purposes and that is subject to tax on its
net profits in one or more municipal corporations in this state may elect to
be treated as a C corporation for municipal income tax purposes. The publicly
traded partnership shall make the election in every municipal corporation in
which the partnership is subject to taxation on its net profits. The election
shall be made on the annual tax return filed in each such municipal
corporation. Once the election is made, the election is binding for a
five-year period beginning with the first taxable year of the initial
election. The election continues to be binding for each subsequent five-year
period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing municipal income tax
returns as a C corporation for municipal purposes under division (4)(d) of
this definition.



         (d)   An election to discontinue filing as a C
corporation must be made in the first year following the last year of a
five-year election period in effect under division (4)(c) of this definition.
The election to discontinue filing as a C corporation is binding for a
five-year period beginning with the first taxable year of the election and
continues to be binding for each subsequent five-year period unless the
taxpayer elects to discontinue filing municipal income tax returns as a
partnership for municipal purposes. An election to discontinue filing as a
partnership must be made in the first year following the last year of a
five-year election period.



         (e)   The publicly traded partnership shall not be
required to file the election with any municipal corporation in which the
partnership is not subject to taxation on its net profits, but division (4)
of this definition applies to all municipal corporations in which an
individual owner of the partnership resides.



         (f)   The individual owners of the partnership not
filing as a C corporation shall be required to file with their municipal
corporation of residence, and report partnership distribution of net profit.



   NONRESIDENT. An individual that is not a resident of the village.



   OHIO BUSINESS GATEWAY. The online computer network system, created
under R.C. § 125.30 that allows persons to electronically file business
reply forms with state agencies and includes any successor electronic filing
and payment system.



   OTHER PAYER. Any person, other than an individual's employer or the
employer's agent, that pays an individual any amount included in the federal
gross income of the individual. OTHER PAYER includes casino operators and
video lottery terminal sales agents.



   PASS-THROUGH ENTITY. A partnership not treated as an association
taxable as a C corporation for federal income tax purposes, a limited
liability company not treated as an association taxable as a C corporation
for federal income tax purposes, an S corporation, or any other class of
entity from which the income or profits of the entity are given pass-through
treatment for federal income tax purposes. PASS-THROUGH ENTITY does not
include a trust, estate, grantor of a grantor trust, or disregarded entity.



   PENSION. Any amount paid to an employee or former employee that is
reported to the recipient on an IRS form 1099-R, or successor form. PENSION
does not include deferred compensation, or amounts attributable to
nonqualified deferred compensation plans, reported as FICA/Medicare wages on
an IRS form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement, or successor form.



   PERSON. Individuals, firms, companies, joint stock companies, business
trusts, estates, trusts, partnerships, limited liability partnerships,
limited liability companies, associations, C corporations, S corporations,
governmental entities, and any other entity.



   POSTAL SERVICE. The United States postal service, or private delivery
service delivering documents and packages within an agreed upon delivery
schedule, or any other carrier service delivering the item.



   POSTMARK DATE, or DATE OF POSTMARK. The date recorded and marked by a
delivery service and recorded electronically to a database kept in the
regular course of its business and marked on the cover in which the payment
or document is enclosed, the date on which the payment or document was given
to the delivery service for delivery.



   PRE-2017 NET OPERATING LOSS CARRYFORWARD.



      (1)   Any net operating loss incurred in a taxable year
beginning before January 1, 2017, to the extent such loss was permitted, by a
resolution or ordinance of the village that was adopted by the village before
January 1, 2016, to be carried forward and utilized to offset income or net
profit generated in the village in future taxable years.



      (2)   For the purpose of calculating municipal taxable income,
any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward may be carried forward to any
taxable year, including taxable years beginning in 2017 or thereafter, for
the number of taxable years provided in the resolution or ordinance or until
fully utilized, whichever is earlier.



   QUALIFIED MUNICIPAL CORPORATION. A municipal corporation that, by
resolution or ordinance adopted on or before December 31, 2011, adopted Ohio
adjusted gross income, as defined by R.C. § 5747.01, as the income subject
to tax for the purposes of imposing a municipal income tax.



   QUALIFYING WAGES. Wages as defined in section 3121(a) of the Internal
Revenue Code, without regard to any wage limitations, adjusted as follows:



      (1)   Deduct the following amounts:



         (a)   Any amount included in wages if the amount
constitutes compensation attributable to a plan or program described in
section 125 of the Internal Revenue Code.



         (b)   Any amount included in wages if the amount
constitutes payment on account of a disability related to sickness or an
accident paid by a party unrelated to the employer, agent of an employer, or
other payer.



         (c)   Any amount included in wages that is exempt income.



      (2)   Add the following amounts:



         (a)   Any amount not included in wages solely because
the employee was employed by the employer before April 1, 1986.



         (b)   Any amount not included in wages because the
amount arises from the sale, exchange, or other disposition of a stock
option, the exercise of a stock option, or the sale, exchange, or other
disposition of stock purchased under a stock option, only as applied to those
amounts constituting ordinary income.



         (c)   Any amount not included in wages if the amount is
an amount described in sections 401(k), 403(b), or 457 of the Internal
Revenue Code, only as applied to employee contributions and employee
deferrals.



         (d)   Any amount that is supplemental unemployment
compensation benefits described in section 3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue
Code and not included in wages.



         (e)   Any amount received that is treated as
self-employment income for federal tax purposes in accordance with section
1402(a)(8) of the Internal Revenue Code.



         (f)   Any amount not included in wages if all of the
following apply:



            1.   For the taxable year the amount is employee
compensation that is earned outside of the United States and that either is
included in the taxpayer's gross income for federal income tax purposes or
would have been included in the taxpayer's gross income for such purposes if
the taxpayer did not elect to exclude the income under section 911 of the
Internal Revenue Code;



            2.   For no preceding taxable year did the amount
constitute wages as defined in section 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code;



            3.   For no succeeding taxable year will the
amount constitute wages; and



            4.   For any taxable year the amount has not
otherwise been added to wages pursuant to either this division (2) of this
definition or R.C. § 718.03, as that section existed before the effective
date of H.B. 5 of the 130th General Assembly, March 23, 2015.



   RELATED ENTITY. Any of the following:



      (1)   An individual stockholder, or a member of the
stockholder's family enumerated in section 318 of the Internal Revenue Code,
if the stockholder and the members of the stockholder's family own directly,
indirectly, beneficially, or constructively, in the aggregate, at least 50%
of the value of the taxpayer's outstanding stock;



      (2)   A stockholder, or a stockholder's partnership, estate,
trust, or corporation, if the stockholder and the stockholder's partnerships,
estates, trusts, or corporations own directly, indirectly, beneficially, or
constructively, in the aggregate, at least 50% of the value of the taxpayer's
outstanding stock;



      (3)   A corporation, or a party related to the  corporation
in a manner that would require an attribution of stock from the corporation
to the party or from the party to the corporation under division (4) of this
definition, provided the taxpayer owns directly, indirectly, beneficially, or
constructively, at least 50% of the value of the corporation's outstanding
stock;



      (4)   The attribution rules described in section 318 of the
Internal Revenue Code apply for the purpose of determining whether the
ownership requirements in divisions (1) to (3) of this definition have been
met.



   RELATED MEMBER. A person that, with respect to the taxpayer during all
or any portion of the taxable year, is either a related entity, a component
member as defined in section 1563(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, or a
person to or from whom there is attribution of stock ownership in accordance
with section 1563(e) of the Internal Revenue Code except, for purposes of
determining whether a person is a related member under this definition,
"twenty per cent" shall be substituted for "5 percent" wherever "5 percent"
appears in section 1563(e) of the Internal Revenue Code.



   RESIDENT. An individual who is domiciled in the village as determined
under § 101.04(B) of this chapter.



   S CORPORATION. A person that has made an election under subchapter S of
Chapter 1 of Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code for its taxable year.



   SCHEDULE C. Internal Revenue Service schedule C (form 1040) filed by a
taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.



   SCHEDULE E. Internal Revenue Service schedule E (form 1040) filed by a
taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.



   SCHEDULE F. Internal Revenue Service schedule F (form 1040) filed by a
taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.



   SINGLE MEMBER LIMITED LIABILITY COMPANY. A limited liability company
that has one direct member.



   SMALL EMPLOYER. Any employer that had total revenue of less than
$500,000 during the preceding taxable year. For purposes of this definition,
"total revenue" means receipts of any type or kind, including, but not
limited to, sales receipts; payments; rents; profits; gains, dividends, and
other investment income; commissions; premiums; money; property; grants;
contributions; donations; gifts; program service revenue; patient service
revenue; premiums; fees, including premium fees and service fees; tuition
payments; unrelated business revenue; reimbursements; any type of payment
from a governmental unit, including grants and other allocations; and any
other similar receipts reported for federal income tax purposes or under
generally accepted accounting principles. SMALL EMPLOYER does not include the
federal government; any state government, including any state agency or
instrumentality; any political subdivision; or any entity treated as a
government for financial accounting and reporting purposes.



   TAX ADMINISTRATOR or ADMIN- ISTRATOR. The individual charged with
direct responsibility for administration of an income tax levied by the
village in accordance with this chapter, and also includes the following:



      (1)   A municipal corporation acting as the agent of another
municipal corporation;



      (2)   A person retained by a municipal corporation to
administer a tax levied by the municipal corporation, but only if the
municipal corporation does not compensate the person in whole or in part on a
contingency basis;



      (3)   The Central Collection Agency (CCA) or the Regional
Income Tax Agency (RITA) or their successors in interest, or another entity
organized to perform functions similar to those performed by the Central
Collection Agency and the Regional Income Tax Agency.



   TAX COMMISSIONER or COMMISSIONER. The Tax Commissioner appointed under
R.C. § 121.03.  The term "Tax Administrator" does not include the Tax
Commissioner.



   TAX RETURN PREPARER. Any individual described in section 7701(a)(36) of
the Internal Revenue Code and 26 C.F.R. 301.7701-15.



   TAXABLE YEAR. The corresponding tax reporting period as prescribed for
the taxpayer under the Internal Revenue Code.



   TAXPAYER.



      (1)   A person subject to a tax levied on income by the
village in accordance with this chapter. TAXPAYER does not include a grantor
trust or, except as provided in division (2)(a) of this definition, a
disregarded entity.



      (2)   (a)   A single member limited liability company that
is a disregarded entity for federal tax purposes may be a separate taxpayer
from its single member in all Ohio municipal corporations in which it either
filed as a separate taxpayer or did not file for its taxable year ending in
2003, if all of the following conditions are met:



            1.   The limited liability company's single member
is also a limited liability company.



            2.   The limited liability company and its single
member were formed and doing business in one or more Ohio municipal
corporations for at least five years before January 1, 2004.



            3.   Not later than December 31, 2004, the limited
liability company and its single member each made an election to be treated
as a separate taxpayer under R.C. § 718.01(L) as this section existed on
December 31, 2004.



            4.   The limited liability company was not formed
for the purpose of evading or reducing Ohio municipal corporation income tax
liability of the limited liability company or its single member.



            5.   The Ohio municipal corporation that was the
primary place of business of the sole member of the limited liability company
consented to the election.



         (b)   For purposes of division (2)(a)5. of this
definition, a municipal corporation was the primary place of business of a
limited liability company if, for the limited liability company's taxable
year ending in 2003, its income tax liability was greater in that municipal
corporation than in any other municipal corporation in Ohio, and that tax
liability to that municipal corporation for its taxable year ending in 2003
was at least $400,000.



   TAXPAYERS' RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES. The rights provided to
taxpayers in R.C. §§ 718.11, 718.12, 718.19, 718.23, 718.36, 718.37,
718.38, 5717.011, and 5717.03 and any corresponding ordinances of the
village, and the responsibilities of taxpayers to file, report, withhold,
remit, and pay municipal income tax and otherwise comply with R.C. Chapter
718 and resolutions, ordinances, and rules adopted by a municipal corporation
for the imposition and administration of a municipal income tax.



(Most definitions can be found in R.C. § 718.01) 



(Ord. 2015-12, passed 11-9-15; Am. Ord. 2018-6, passed 3-12-18)



§ 101.04  INCOME SUBJECT TO TAX FOR INDIVIDUALS.



   (A)   Determining municipal taxable income for individuals.



      (1)   “Municipal taxable income” for a resident of the
village is calculated as follows: “income” reduced by “exempt income”
to the extent such exempt income is otherwise included in income, reduced by
allowable employee business expense deduction as found in division (2) of the
definition of “municipal taxable income” in § 101.03, further reduced by
any “pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward” equals “municipal
taxable income.”



         (a)   “Net profit” is included in “income”. This
section also provides that the net operating loss carryforward shall be
calculated and deducted in the same manner as provided in division (8) of the
definition of adjusted federal taxable income in § 101.03. Treatment of net
profits received by an individual taxpayer from rental real estate is
provided in § 101.06(B)(5).



         (b)   The definition of “income” in § 101.03
provides the following: offsetting and net operating loss carryforward
treatment in division (1)(b)1. thereof ; resident’s distributive share of
net profit from pass through entity treatment in division (1)(b)2. thereof;
treatment of S Corporation distributive share of net profit in the hands of
the shareholder in division (1)(c) thereof; restriction of amount of loss
permitted to be carried forward for use by taxpayer in a subsequent taxable
year in division (1)(d) thereof.



         (c)   Allowable employee business expense deduction is
described in division (2) of the definition of “municipal taxable income”
in § 101.03 and is subject to the limitations provided in that section.



      (2)   “Municipal taxable income” for a nonresident of the
village is calculated as follows: “income” reduced by “exempt income”
to the extent such exempt income is otherwise included in income, as
applicable, apportioned or sitused to the village as provided in §
101.06(B), reduced by allowable employee business expense deduction as found
in division (2) of the definition of “municipal taxable income” in §
101.03, further reduced by any “pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward”
equals “municipal taxable income.”



         (a)   “Net profit” is included in “income.” This
section also provides that the net operating loss carryforward shall be
calculated and deducted in the same manner as provided in division (8) of the
definition of “adjusted federal taxable income” in § 101.03. “Net
profit” for a nonresident individual includes any net profit of the
nonresident, but excludes the distributive share of net profit or loss of
only pass through entity owned directly or indirectly by the nonresident.



         (b)   “Apportioned or sitused to the municipality as
provided in § 101.06(B) of this chapter” includes the apportionment of net
profit income attributable to work done or services performed in the village.
Treatment of net profits received by an individual taxpayer from rental real
estate is provided in § 101.06(B)(5).



         (c)   “Allowable employee business expense
deduction” as described in division (2) of the definition of “municipal
taxable income” in § 101.03 is subject to the limitations provided in that
section. For a nonresident of the village, the deduction is limited to the
extent the expenses are related to the performance of personal services by
the nonresident in the village.



   (B)   Domicile.



      (1)   As used in this division (B):



         (a)   DOMICILE means the true, fixed and permanent home
of the taxpayer to which whenever absent, the taxpayer intends to return.



         (b)   An individual is presumed to be domiciled in the
village for all or part of a taxable year if the individual was domiciled in
the village on the last day of the immediately preceding taxable year or if
the Tax Administrator reasonably concludes that the individual is domiciled
in the village for all or part of the taxable year.



         (c)   An individual may rebut the presumption of
domicile described in division (B)(1)(a) of this section if the individual
establishes by a preponderance of the evidence that the individual was not
domiciled in the village for all or part of the taxable year.



      (2)   For the purpose of determining whether an individual is
domiciled in the village for all or part of a taxable year, factors that may
be considered include, but are not limited to, the following:



         (a)   The individual’s domicile in other taxable years;



         (b)   The location at which the individual is registered
to vote;



         (c)   The address on the individual’s driver’s
license;



         (d)   The location of real estate for which the
individual claimed a property tax exemption or reduction allowed on the basis
of the individual’s residence or domicile;



         (e)   The location and value of abodes owned or leased
by the individual;



         (f)   Declarations, written or oral, made by the
individual regarding the individual’s residency;



         (g)   The primary location at which the individual is
employed.



         (h)   The location of educational institutions attended
by the individual’s dependents as defined in § 152 of the Internal Revenue
Code, to the extent that tuition paid to such educational institution is
based on the residency of the individual or the individual’s spouse in the
municipal corporation or state where the educational institution is located;



         (i)   The number of contact periods the individual has
with the village. For the purposes of this division, an individual has one
“contact period” with the village if the individual is away overnight
from the individual’s abode located outside of the village and while away
overnight from that abode spends at least some portion, however minimal, of
each of two consecutive days in the village. For purposes of this section,
the state’s contact period test or bright-line test and resulting
determination have no bearing on municipal residency or domicile.



         (j)   All applicable factors provided in R.C. § 718.012.



(R.C. § 718.012)  (Ord. 2015-12, passed 11-9-15)



§ 101.05  COLLECTION AT SOURCE.



   (A)   Collection at source; withholding from qualifying wages.



      (1)   (a)   Each employer, agent of an employer, or other
payer located or doing business in the village shall withhold from each
employee an amount equal to the qualifying wages of the employee earned by
the employee in the village multiplied by the applicable rate of the
village's income tax, except for qualifying wages for which withholding is
not required under division (B) or division (A)(4) or (A)(5) of this section.
An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall deduct and withhold
the tax from qualifying wages on the date that the employer, agent, or other
payer directly, indirectly, or constructively pays the qualifying wages to,
or credits the qualifying wages to the benefit of, the employee.



         (b)   In addition to withholding the amounts required
under division (A)(1)(a) of this section, an employer, agent of an employer,
or other payer may also deduct and withhold, on the request of an employee,
taxes for the municipal corporation in which the employee is a resident.



      (2)   An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall
remit to the Tax Administrator of the village the greater of the income taxes
deducted and withheld or the income taxes required to be deducted and
withheld by the employer, agent, or other payer, along with any report
required by the Tax Administrator to accompany such payment, according to the
following schedule:



         (a)   Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer
not required to make payments under division (A)(2)(b) of this section of
taxes required to be deducted and withheld shall make quarterly payments to
the Tax Administrator not later than the last day of the month following the
last day of each calendar quarter.



         (b)   Taxes required to be deducted and withheld shall
be remitted monthly to the Tax Administrator if the total taxes deducted and
withheld or required to be deducted and withheld by the employer, agent, or
other payer on behalf of the municipal corporation in the preceding calendar
year exceeded $2,399, or if the total amount of taxes deducted and withheld
or required to be deducted and withheld on behalf of the village in any month
of the preceding calendar quarter exceeded $200. Payment under division
(A)(2)(b) of this section shall be made so that the payment is received by
the Tax Administrator not later than fifteen days after the last day of each
month.



      (3)   An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer shall
make and file a return showing the amount of tax withheld by the employer,
agent, or other payer from the qualifying wages of each employee and remitted
to the Tax Administrator. A return filed by an employer, agent, or other
payer under this division shall be accepted by the village as the return
required of an employee whose sole income subject to the tax under this
chapter is the qualifying wages reported by the employee's employer, agent of
an employer, or other payer, unless the village requires all resident
individual taxpayers to file a tax return under § 101.09(A) of this chapter.



      (4)   An employer, agent of an employer, or other payer is not
required to withhold municipal income tax with respect to an individual's
disqualifying disposition of an incentive stock option if, at the time of the
disqualifying disposition, the individual is not an employee of either the
corporation with respect to whose stock the option has been issued or of such
corporation's successor entity.



      (5)   (a)   An employee is not relieved from liability for
a tax by the failure of the employer, agent of an employer, or other payer to
withhold the tax as required under this chapter or by the employer's,
agent's, or other payer's exemption from the requirement to withhold the tax.



         (b)   The failure of an employer, agent of an employer,
or other payer to remit to the village the tax withheld relieves the employee
from liability for that tax unless the employee colluded with the employer,
agent, or other payer in connection with the failure to remit the tax
withheld.



      (6)   Compensation deferred before June 26, 2003, is not
subject to any municipal corporation income tax or municipal income tax
withholding requirement to the extent the deferred compensation does not
constitute qualifying wages at the time the deferred compensation is paid or
distributed.



      (7)   Each employer, agent of an employer, or other payer
required to withhold taxes is liable for the payment of that amount required
to be withheld, whether or not such taxes have been withheld, and such amount
shall be deemed to be held in trust for the village until such time as the
withheld amount is remitted to the Tax Administrator.



      (8)   On or before the last day of February of each year, an
employer shall file a withholding reconciliation return with the Tax
Administrator listing the names, addresses, and social security numbers of
all employees from whose qualifying wages tax was withheld or should have
been withheld for the village during the preceding calendar year, the amount
of tax withheld, if any, from each such employee's qualifying wage, the total
amount of qualifying wages paid to such employee during the preceding
calendar year, the name of every other municipal corporation for which tax
was withheld or should have been withheld from such employee during the
preceding calendar year, any other information required for federal income
tax reporting purposes on Internal Revenue Service form W-2 or its equivalent
form with respect to such employee, and other information as may be required
by the Tax Administrator.



      (9)   The officer or the employee of the employer, agent of an
employer, or other payer with control or direct supervision of or charged
with the responsibility for withholding the tax or filing the reports and
making payments as required by this section, shall be personally liable for a
failure to file a report or pay the tax due as required by this section. The
dissolution of an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer does not
discharge the officer's or employee's liability for a failure of the
employer, agent of an employer, or other payer to file returns or pay any tax
due.



      (10)   An employer is required to deduct and withhold
municipal income tax on tips and gratuities received by the employer's
employees and constituting qualifying wages only to the extent that the tips
and gratuities are under the employer's control. For the purposes of this
division, a tip or gratuity is under the employer's control if the tip or
gratuity is paid by the customer to the employer for subsequent remittance to
the employee, or if the customer pays the tip or gratuity by credit card,
debit card, or other electronic means.



      (11)   The Tax Administrator shall consider any tax withheld
by an employer at the request of an employee when such tax is not otherwise
required to be withheld by this chapter to be tax required to be withheld and
remitted for the purposes of this division (A).



      (12)   Employers of household employees, such as domestic
help, casual employees, secretaries, administrative assistants and other
individuals who perform their services in the employer's home, shall, on or
before April 15 of each year, file a return, and pay to the Tax Administrator
the amount of taxes so withheld, for the preceding year.



   (B)   Collection at source; occasional entrant.



      (1)   The following terms as used in this section:



         (a)   EMPLOYER includes a person that is a related
member to or of an employer.



         (b)   PROFESSIONAL ATHLETE means an athlete who performs
services in a professional athletic event for wages or other remuneration.



         (c)   PROFESSIONAL ENTER-TAINER means a person who
performs services in the professional performing arts for wages or other
remuneration on a per-event basis.



         (d)   PUBLIC FIGURE means a person of prominence who
performs services at discrete events, such as speeches, public appearances,
or similar events, for wages or other remuneration on a per-event basis.



         (e)   FIXED LOCATION means a permanent place of doing
business in this state, such as an office, warehouse, storefront, or similar
location owned or controlled by an employer.



         (f)   WORKSITE LOCATION means a construction site or
other temporary worksite in this state at which the employer provides
services for more than 20 days during the calendar year. WORKSITE LOCATION
does not include the home of an employee.



         (g)   PRINCIPAL PLACE OF WORK means the fixed location
to which an employee is required to report for employment duties on a regular
and ordinary basis. If the employee is not required to report for employment
duties on a regular and ordinary basis to a fixed location, "principal place
of work" means the worksite location in this state to which the employee is
required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis. If
the employee is not required to report for employment duties on a regular and
ordinary basis to a fixed location or worksite location, "principal place of
work" means the location in this state at which the employee spends the
greatest number of days in a calendar year performing services for or on
behalf of the employee's employer. If there is not a single municipal
corporation in which the employee spent the "greatest number of days in a
calendar year" performing services for or on behalf of the employer, but
instead there are two or more municipal corporations in which the employee
spent an identical number of days that is greater than the number of days the
employee spent in any other municipal corporation, the employer shall
allocate any of the employee's qualifying wages subject to division
(B)(2)(a)1. of this section among those two or more municipal corporations.
The allocation shall be made using any fair and reasonable method, including,
but not limited to, an equal allocation among such municipal corporations or
an allocation based upon the time spent or sales made by the employee in each
such municipal corporation. A municipal corporation to which qualifying wages
are allocated under this division shall be the employee's "principal place of
work" with respect to those qualifying wages for the purposes of this
section. For the purposes of this division, the location at which an employee
spends a particular day shall be deemed in accordance with division (B)(2)(b)
of this section, except that "location" shall be substituted for "municipal
corporation" wherever "municipal corporation" appears in that division.



      (2)   (a)   Subject to divisions (B)(3), (B)(5), (B)(6),
and (B)(7) of this section, an employer is not required to withhold municipal
income tax on qualifying wages paid to an employee for the performance of
personal services in a municipal corporation that imposes such a tax if the
employee performed such services in the municipal corporation on 20 or fewer
days in a calendar year, unless one of the following conditions applies:



            1.   The employee's principal place of work is
located in the village.



            2.   The employee performed services at one or
more presumed worksite locations in the village. For the purposes of this
division, PRESUMED WORKSITE LOCATION means a construction site or other
temporary worksite in this state at which the employer provides services that
can reasonably be expected by the employer to last more than 20 days in a
calendar year. Services can "reasonably be expected by the employer to last
more than 20 days" if either of the following applies at the time the
services commence:



               a.   The nature of the services are such
that it will require more than 20 days of actual services to complete the
services;



               b.   The agreement between the employer and
its customer to perform services at a location requires the employer to
perform actual services at the location for more than 20 days.



            3.   The employee is a resident of the village and
has requested that the employer withhold tax from the employee's qualifying
wages as provided in division (A) of this section.



            4.   The employee is a professional athlete,
professional entertainer, or public figure, and the qualifying wages are paid
for the performance of services in the employee's capacity as a professional
athlete, professional entertainer, or public figure within the village.



         (b)   For the purposes of division (B)(2)(a) of this
section, an employee shall be considered to have spent a day performing
services in a municipal corporation only if the employee spent more time
performing services for or on behalf of the employer in that municipal
corporation than in any other municipal corporation on that day. For the
purposes of determining the amount of time an employee spent in a particular
location, the time spent performing one or more of the following activities
shall be considered to have been spent at the employee's principal place of
work:



            1.   Traveling to the location at which the
employee will first perform services for the employer for the day;



            2.   Traveling from a location at which the
employee was performing services for the employer to any other location;



            3.   Traveling from any location to another
location in order to pick up or load, for the purpose of transportation or
delivery, property that has been purchased, sold, assembled, fabricated,
repaired, refurbished, processed, remanufactured, or improved by the
employee's employer;



            4.   Transporting or delivering property described
in division (B)(2)(b)3. of this section, provided that, upon delivery of the
property, the employee does not temporarily or permanently affix the property
to real estate owned, used, or controlled by a person other than the
employee's employer;



            5.   Traveling from the location at which the
employee makes the employee's final delivery or pick-up for the day to either
the employee's principal place of work or a location at which the employee
will not perform services for the employer.



      (3)   If the principal place of work of an employee is located
in a municipal corporation that imposes an income tax in accordance with this
chapter, the exception from withholding requirements described in division
(B)(2)(a) of this section shall apply only if, with respect to the employee's
qualifying wages described in that division, the employer withholds and
remits tax on such qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the
employee's principal place of work is located.



      (4)   (a)   Except as provided in division (B)(4)(b) of
this section, if, during a calendar year, the number of days an employee
spends performing personal services in a municipal corporation exceeds the
20-day threshold described in division (B)(2)(a) of this section, the
employer shall withhold and remit tax to that municipal corporation for any
subsequent days in that calendar year on which the employer pays qualifying
wages to the employee for personal services performed in that municipal
corporation.



         (b)   An employer required to begin withholding tax for
a municipal corporation under division (B)(4)(a) of this section may elect to
withhold tax for that municipal corporation for the first 20 days on which
the employer paid qualifying wages to the employee for personal services
performed in that municipal corporation.



         (c)   If an employer makes the election described in
division (B)(4)(b) of this section, the taxes withheld and paid by such an
employer during those first 20 days to the municipal corporation in which the
employee's principal place of work is located are refundable to the employee.



      (5)   Without regard to the number of days in a calendar year
on which an employee performs personal services in any municipal corporation,
an employer shall withhold municipal income tax on all of the employee's
qualifying wages for a taxable year and remit that tax only to the municipal
corporation in which the employer's fixed location is located if the employer
qualifies as a small employer as defined in § 101.03. To determine whether
an employer qualifies as a small employer for a taxable year, a Tax
Administrator may require the employer to provide the Tax Administrator with
the employer's federal income tax return for the preceding taxable year.



      (6)   Divisions (B)(2)(a) and (B)(4) of this section shall not
apply to the extent that a Tax Administrator and an employer enter into an
agreement regarding the manner in which the employer shall comply with the
requirements of § 101.05(A).



(Ord. 2015-12, passed 11-9-15; Am. Ord. 2018-6, passed 3-12-18)



§ 101.06  INCOME SUBJECT TO NET PROFIT TAX.



   (A)   Determining municipal taxable income for taxpayers who are not
individuals. Municipal taxable income for a taxpayer who is not an individual
is calculated as follows:



      (1)   Income reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise
included in income, multiplied by apportionment, further reduced by any
pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward equals municipal taxable income.



         (a)   Income for a taxpayer that is not an individual
means the net profit of the taxpayer. Net profit for a person other than an
individual is defined in § 101.03.



         (b)   "Apportionment" means the apportionment as
determined by division (B) of this section.



   (B)   Net profit; income subject to net profit tax; alternative
apportionment. This division (B) applies to any taxpayer engaged in a
business or profession in the village unless the taxpayer is an individual
who resides in the village or the taxpayer is an electric company, combined
company, or telephone company that is subject to and required to file reports
under R.C. Chapter 5745.



      (1)   Net profit from a business or profession conducted both
within and without the boundaries of the village shall be considered as
having a taxable situs in the village for purposes of municipal income
taxation in the same proportion as the average ratio of the following:



         (a)   The average original cost of the real property and
tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or
profession in the village during the taxable period to the average original
cost of all of the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the
taxpayer in the business or profession during the same period, wherever
situated. As used in this division (B)(1)(a), tangible personal or real
property shall include property rented or leased by the taxpayer and the
value of such property shall be determined by multiplying the annual rental
thereon by eight;



         (b)   Wages, salaries, and other compensation paid
during the taxable period to individuals employed in the business or
profession for services performed in the village to wages, salaries, and
other compensation paid during the same period to individuals employed in the
business or profession, wherever the individual's services are performed,
excluding compensation from which taxes are not required to be withheld under
§ 101.05(B);



         (c)   Total gross receipts of the business or profession
from sales and rentals made and services performed during the taxable period
in the village to total gross receipts of the business or profession during
the same period from sales, rentals, and services, wherever made or performed.



      (2)   (a)   If the apportionment factors described in
division (B)(1) of this section do not fairly represent the extent of a
taxpayer's business activity in the village, the taxpayer may request, or the
Tax Administrator of the village may require, that the taxpayer use, with
respect to all or any portion of the income of the taxpayer, an alternative
apportionment method involving one or more of the following:



            1.   Separate accounting;



            2.   The exclusion of one or more of the factors;



            3.   The inclusion of one or more additional
factors that would provide for a more fair apportionment of the income of the
taxpayer to the village;



            4.   A modification of one or more of the factors.



         (b)   A taxpayer request to use an alternative
apportionment method shall be in writing and shall accompany a tax return,
timely filed appeal of an assessment, or timely filed amended tax return. The
taxpayer may use the requested alternative method unless the Tax
Administrator denies the request in an assessment issued within the period
prescribed by § 101.19(A).



         (c)   The Tax Administrator may require a taxpayer to
use an alternative apportionment method as described in division (B)(2)(a) of
this section only by issuing an assessment to the taxpayer within the period
prescribed by § 101.19(A).



         (d)   Nothing in division (B)(2) of this section
nullifies or otherwise affects any alternative apportionment arrangement
approved by a Tax Administrator or otherwise agreed upon by both the Tax
Administrator and taxpayer before January 1, 2016.



      (3)   As used in division (B)(1)(b) of this section, wages,
salaries, and other compensation includes only wages, salaries, or other
compensation paid to an employee for services performed at any of the
following locations:



         (a)   A location that is owned, controlled, or used by,
rented to, or under the possession of one of the following:



            1.   The employer;



            2.   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of the
employer, or a related member of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient;



            3.   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of a
person described in division (B)(3)(a)2. of this section, or a related member
of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient.



         (b)   Any location at which a trial, appeal, hearing,
investigation, inquiry, review, court-martial, or similar administrative,
judicial, or legislative matter or proceeding is being conducted, provided
that the compensation is paid for services performed for, or on behalf of,
the employer or that the employee's presence at the location directly or
indirectly benefits the employer;



         (c)   Any other location, if the Tax Administrator
determines that the employer directed the employee to perform the services at
the other location in lieu of a location described in division (B)(3)(a) or
(b) of this section solely in order to avoid or reduce the employer's
municipal income tax liability. If the Tax Administrator makes such a
determination, the employer may dispute the determination by establishing, by
a preponderance of the evidence, that the Tax Administrator's determination
was unreasonable.



      (4)   For the purposes of division (B)(1)(c) of this section,
receipts from sales and rentals made and services performed shall be sitused
to a municipal corporation as follows:



         (a)   Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal
property shall be sitused to the municipal corporation in which the sale
originated. For the purposes of this division, a sale of property originates
in a municipal corporation if, regardless of where title passes, the property
meets any of the following criteria:



            1.   The property is shipped to or delivered
within the municipal corporation from a stock of goods located within the
municipal corporation.



            2.   The property is delivered within the
municipal corporation from a location outside the municipal corporation,
provided the taxpayer is regularly engaged through its own employees in the
solicitation or promotion of sales within such municipal corporation and the
sales result from such solicitation or promotion.



            3.   The property is shipped from a place within
the municipal corporation to purchasers outside the municipal corporation,
provided that the taxpayer is not, through its own employees, regularly
engaged in the solicitation or promotion of sales at the place where delivery
is made.



         (b)   Gross receipts from the sale of services shall be
sitused to the municipal corporation to the extent that such services are
performed in the municipal corporation.



         (c)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts
from the sale of real property located in the municipal corporation shall be
sitused to the municipal corporation.



         (d)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts
from rents and royalties from real property located in the municipal
corporation shall be sitused to the municipal corporation.



         (e)   Gross receipts from rents and royalties from
tangible personal property shall be sitused to the municipal corporation
based upon the extent to which the tangible personal property is used in the
municipal corporation.



      (5)   (a)   The net profit received by an individual
taxpayer from the rental of real estate owned directly by the individual or
by a disregarded entity owned by the individual shall be subject to tax only
by the municipal corporation in which the property generating the net profit
is located and the municipal corporation in which the individual taxpayer
that receives the net profit resides.



         (b)   A municipal corporation shall allow such taxpayers
to elect to use separate accounting for the purpose of calculating net profit
sitused under this division to the municipal corporation in which the
property is located.



      (6)   (a)   Except as provided in division (B)(6)(b) of
this section, commissions received by a real estate agent or broker relating
to the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate shall be sitused to the
municipal corporation in which the real estate is located. Net profit
reported by the real estate agent or broker shall be allocated to a municipal
corporation based upon the ratio of the commissions the agent or broker
received from the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate located in the
municipal corporation to the commissions received from the sale, purchase, or
lease of real estate everywhere in the taxable year.



         (b)   An individual who is a resident of a municipal
corporation that imposes a municipal income tax shall report the individual's
net profit from all real estate activity on the individual's annual tax
return for that municipal corporation. The individual may claim a credit for
taxes the individual paid on such net profit to another municipal corporation
to the extent that such credit is allowed under § 101.08(A).



      (7)   (a)   If, in computing a taxpayer's adjusted federal
taxable income, the taxpayer deducted any amount with respect to a stock
option granted to an employee, and if the employee is not required to include
in the employee's income any such amount or a portion thereof because it is
exempted from taxation under division (12) of the definition of "exempt
income" and division (1) of the definition of "qualifying wages" in § 101.03
by a municipal corporation to which the taxpayer has apportioned a portion of
its net profit, the taxpayer shall add the amount that is exempt from
taxation to the taxpayer's net profit that was apportioned to that municipal
corporation. In no case shall a taxpayer be required to add to its net profit
that was apportioned to that municipal corporation any amount other than the
amount upon which the employee would be required to pay tax were the amount
related to the stock option not exempted from taxation.



         (b)   This division (B)(7) applies solely for the
purpose of making an adjustment to the amount of a taxpayer's net profit that
was apportioned to a municipal corporation under this section.



      (8)   When calculating the ratios described in divisions
(B)(1) or (B)(2) of this section, the owner of a disregarded entity shall
include in the owner's ratios the property, payroll, and gross receipts of
such disregarded entity.



   (C)   Consolidated federal income tax return.



      (1)   As used in this division (C):



         (a)   AFFILIATED GROUP OF CORPORATIONS means an
affiliated group as defined in section 1504 of the Internal Revenue Code,
except that, if such a group includes at least one incumbent local exchange
carrier that is primarily engaged in the business of providing local exchange
telephone service in this state, the affiliated group shall not include any
incumbent local exchange carrier that would otherwise be included in the
group.



         (b)   CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL INCOME TAX RETURN means a
consolidated return filed for federal income tax purposes pursuant to section
1501 of the Internal Revenue Code.



         (c)   CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME means the
consolidated taxable income of an affiliated group of corporations, as
computed for the purposes of filing a consolidated federal income tax return,
before consideration of net operating losses or special deductions.
CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME does not include income or loss of an
incumbent local exchange carrier that is excluded from the affiliated group
under division (C)(1) and (C)(2) of this section.



         (d)   INCUMBENT LOCAL EXCHANGE CARRIER has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 4927.01.



         (e)   LOCAL EXCHANGE TELEPHONE SERVICE has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 5727.01.



      (2)   (a)   For taxable years beginning on or after January
1, 2016, a taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations
may elect to file a consolidated municipal income tax return for a taxable
year if at least one member of the affiliated group of corporations is
subject to the municipal income tax in that taxable year and if the
affiliated group of corporations filed a consolidated federal income tax
return with respect to that taxable year.



            1.   The election is binding for a five-year
period beginning with the first taxable year of the initial election unless a
change in the reporting method is required under federal law;



            2.   The election continues to be binding for each
subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing
consolidated municipal income tax returns under division (C)(2)(b) of this
section; or



            3.   A taxpayer receives permission from the Tax
Administrator. The Tax Administrator shall approve such a request for good
cause shown.



         (b)   An election to discontinue filing consolidated
municipal income tax returns under this section must be made in the first
year following the last year of a five-year consolidated municipal income tax
return election period in effect under division (C)(2)(a) of this section.
The election to discontinue filing a consolidated municipal income tax return
is binding for a five-year period beginning with the first taxable year of
the election.



         (c)   An election made under division (C)(2)(a) or
(C)(2)(b) of this section is binding on all members of the affiliated group
of corporations subject to a municipal income tax.



      (3)   A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of
corporations that filed a consolidated federal income tax return for a
taxable year shall file a consolidated municipal income tax return for that
taxable year if the Tax Administrator determines, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that intercompany transactions have not been conducted at arm's
length and that there has been a distortive shifting of income or expenses
with regard to allocation of net profits to the municipal corporation. A
taxpayer that is required to file a consolidated municipal income tax return
for a taxable year shall file a consolidated municipal income tax return for
all subsequent taxable years unless the taxpayer requests and receives
written permission from the Tax Administrator to file a separate return or a
taxpayer has experienced a change in circumstances.



      (4)   A taxpayer shall prepare a consolidated municipal income
tax return in the same manner as is required under the United States
Department of Treasury regulations that prescribe procedures for the
preparation of the consolidated federal income tax return required to be
filed by the common parent of the affiliated group of which the taxpayer is a
member.



      (5)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions
(C)(5)(b), (C)(5)(c), and (C)(5)(d) of this section, corporations that file a
consolidated municipal income tax return shall compute adjusted federal
taxable income, as defined in § 101.03 by substituting "consolidated federal
taxable income" for "federal taxable income" wherever "federal taxable
income" appears in that division and by substituting "an affiliated group of
corporation's" for "a C corporation's" wherever "a C corporation's" appears
in that division.



         (b)   No corporation filing a consolidated municipal
income tax return shall make any adjustment otherwise required under the
definition of "adjusted federal taxable income" in § 101.03 to the extent
that the item of income or deduction otherwise subject to the adjustment has
been eliminated or consolidated in the computation of consolidated federal
taxable income.



         (c)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity
having at least 80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or
controlled, directly or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is
included in that affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a
taxable year, the corporation filing a consolidated municipal income tax
return shall do one of the following with respect to that pass-through
entity's net profit or loss for that taxable year:



            1.   Exclude the pass-through entity's net profit
or loss from the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group
and, for the purpose of making the computations required in division (B) of
this section, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the
pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit
sitused to a municipal corporation. If the entity's net profit or loss is so
excluded, the entity shall be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on
the basis of the entity's net profits that would otherwise be included in the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group.



            2.   Include the pass-through entity's net profit
or loss in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group
and, for the purpose of making the computations required in division (B) of
this section, include the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the
pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit
sitused to a municipal corporation. If the entity's net profit or loss is so
included, the entity shall not be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer
on the basis of the entity's net profits that are included in the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group.



         (d)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity
having less than 80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or
controlled, directly or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is
included in that affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a
taxable year, all of the following shall apply:



            1.   The corporation filing the consolidated
municipal income tax return shall exclude the pass-through entity's net
profit or loss from the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated
group and, for the purposes of making the computations required in division
(B) of this section, exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the
pass-through entity in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit
sitused to a municipal corporation;



            2.   The pass-through entity shall be subject to
municipal income taxation as a separate taxpayer in accordance with this
chapter on the basis of the entity's net profits that would otherwise be
included in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group.



      (6)   Corporations filing a consolidated municipal income tax
return shall make the computations required under division (B) of this
section by substituting "consolidated federal taxable income attributable to"
for "net profit from" wherever "net profit from" appears in that section and
by substituting "affiliated group of corporations" for "taxpayer" wherever
"taxpayer" appears in that section.



      (7)   Each corporation filing a consolidated municipal income
tax return is jointly and severally liable for any tax, interest, penalties,
fines, charges, or other amounts imposed by a municipal corporation in
accordance with this chapter on the corporation, an affiliated group of which
the corporation is a member for any portion of the taxable year, or any one
or more members of such an affiliated group.



      (8)   Corporations and their affiliates that made an election
or entered into an agreement with a municipal corporation before January 1,
2016, to file a consolidated or combined tax return with such municipal
corporation may continue to file consolidated or combined tax returns in
accordance with such election or agreement for taxable years beginning on and
after January 1, 2016.



   (D)   Tax credit for businesses that foster new jobs in Ohio. The
village, by ordinance, may grant a refundable or nonrefundable credit against
its tax on income to a taxpayer to foster job creation in the village. If a
credit is granted under this section, it shall be measured as a percentage of
the new income tax revenue the village derives from new employees of the
taxpayer and shall be for a term not exceeding 15 years. Before the village
passes an ordinance granting a credit, the village and the taxpayer shall
enter into an agreement specifying all the conditions of the credit.



   (E)   Tax credits to foster job retention. The village, by
ordinance, may grant a refundable or nonrefundable credit against its tax on
income to a taxpayer for the purpose of fostering job retention in the
village. If a credit is granted under this section, it shall be measured as a
percentage of the income tax revenue the village derives from the retained
employees of the taxpayer, and shall be for a term not exceeding 15 years.
Before the village passes an ordinance allowing such a credit, the village
and the taxpayer shall enter into an agreement specifying all the conditions
of the credit.



(Ord. 2015-12, passed 11-9-15; Am. Ord. 2018-6, passed 3-12-18)



§ 101.0680  FILING NET PROFIT TAXES; ELECTION TO BE SUBJECT TO PROVISIONS
OF CHAPTER.



   (A)   A taxpayer may elect to be subject to §§ 101.0680 to
101.0695 in lieu of the provisions set forth in the remainder of this
chapter. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, upon the
taxpayer's election, both of the following shall apply:



      (1)   The State Tax Commissioner shall serve as the sole
administrator of the municipal net profit tax for which the taxpayer as
defined in § 101.03 is liable for the term of the election;



      (2)   The Commissioner shall administer the tax pursuant to
R.C. §§ 718.80 to 718.95, §§ 101.0680 to 101.0695, and any applicable
provision of R.C. Chapter 5703.



   (B)   (1)   A taxpayer shall make the initial election on or
before the first day of the third month after the beginning of the taxpayer's
taxable year by notifying the Tax Commissioner and the village, on a form
prescribed by the Tax Commissioner.



      (2)   (a)   The election, once made by the taxpayer,
applies to the taxable year in which the election is made and to each
subsequent taxable year until the taxpayer notifies the Tax Commissioner and
the village of its termination of the election.



         (b)   A notification of termination shall be made, on a
form prescribed by the Tax Commissioner, on or before the first day of the
third month of any taxable year.



         (c)   Upon a timely and valid termination of the
election, the taxpayer is no longer subject to §§ 101.0680 to 101.0695, and
is instead subject to the provisions set forth in the remainder of this
chapter.



   (C)   The Tax Commissioner shall enforce and administer §§
101.0680 to 101.0695.  In addition to any other powers conferred upon the
Tax Commissioner by law, the Tax Commissioner may:



      (1)   Prescribe all forms necessary to administer those
sections;



      (2)   Adopt such rules as the Tax Commissioner finds necessary
to carry out those sections;



      (3)   Appoint and employ such personnel as are necessary to
carry out the duties imposed upon the Tax Commissioner by those sections.



   (D)   The Tax Commissioner shall not be considered a tax
administrator, as that term is defined in R.C. § 718.01 and § 101.03.



(Ord. 2018-3, passed 2-12-18)



§ 101.0681  DEFINITIONS.



   If a term used in §§ 101.0680 to 101.0695 that is not otherwise
defined in this chapter is used in a comparable context in both the laws of
the United States relating to federal income tax and in R.C. Title LVII and
the use is not consistent, then the use of the term in the laws of the United
States relating to federal income tax shall have control over the use of the
term in R.C. Title LVII, unless the term is defined in R.C. Chapter 5703, in
which case the definition in that chapter shall control. Any reference in this



chapter to the Internal Revenue Code includes other laws of the United States
related to federal income taxes. If a term is defined in both this section
and § 101.03, the definition in this section shall control for all uses of
that term in §§ 101.0680 to 101.0695.  As used in §§ 101.0680 to
101.0695 only:



   (A)   MUNICIPAL TAXABLE INCOME.  Income apportioned or sitused to
the municipal corporation under § 101.06, as applicable, reduced by any
pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to the person for the
municipal corporation.



   (B)   ADJUSTED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME, for a person required to file
as a C corporation, or for a person that has elected to be taxed as a C
corporation as described in division (D)(5) of R.C. § 718.01 and § 101.03,
means a C corporation's federal taxable income before net operating losses
and special deductions as determined under the Internal Revenue Code,
adjusted as follows:



      (1)   Deduct intangible income to the extent included in
federal taxable income. The deduction shall be allowed regardless of whether
the intangible income relates to assets used in a trade or business or assets
held for the production of income.



      (2)   Add an amount equal to 5% of intangible income deducted
under division (B)(1) of this section, but excluding that portion of
intangible income directly related to the sale, exchange, or other
disposition of property described in section 1221 of the Internal Revenue
Code.



      (3)   Add any losses allowed as a deduction in the computation
of federal taxable income if the losses directly relate to the sale,
exchange, or other disposition of an asset described in section 1221 or 1231
of the Internal Revenue Code.



      (4)   (a)   Except as provided in division (B)(4)(b) of
this section, deduct income and gain included in federal taxable income to
the extent the income and gain directly relate to the sale, exchange, or
other disposition of an asset described in section 1221 or 1231 of the
Internal Revenue Code.



         (b)   Division (B)(4)(a) of this section does not apply
to the extent the income or gain is income or gain described in section 1245
or 1250 of the Internal Revenue Code.



      (5)   Add taxes on or measured by net income allowed as a
deduction in the computation of federal taxable income.



      (6)   In the case of a real estate investment trust or
regulated investment company, add all amounts with respect to dividends to,
distributions to, or amounts set aside for or credited to the benefit of
investors and allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable
income.



      (7)   Deduct, to the extent not otherwise deducted or excluded
in computing federal taxable income, any income derived from a transfer
agreement or from the enterprise transferred under that agreement under R.C.
§ 4313.02.



      (8)   Deduct exempt income to the extent not otherwise
deducted or excluded in computing adjusted federal taxable income.



      (9)   Deduct any net profit of a pass-through entity owned
directly or indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's federal
taxable income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that net
profit in the group's federal taxable income in accordance with §
101.0686(E)(3)(b).



      (10)   Add any loss incurred by a pass-through entity owned
directly or indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer's federal
taxable income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that loss
in the group's federal taxable income in accordance with § 101.0686(E)(3)(b).



         If the taxpayer is not a C corporation, is not a
disregarded entity that has made the election described in division (L)(2) of
R.C. § 718.01, and is not a publicly traded partnership that has made the
election described in division (D)(5) of R.C. § 718.01, the taxpayer shall
compute adjusted federal taxable income under this section as if the taxpayer
were a C corporation, except guaranteed payments and other similar amounts
paid or accrued to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former
shareholder, member, or former member shall not be allowed as a deductible
expense unless such payments are in consideration for the use of capital and
treated as payment of interest under section 469 of the Internal Revenue Code
or United States Treasury regulations. Amounts paid or accrued to a qualified
self-employed retirement plan with respect to a partner, former partner,
shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member of the taxpayer,
amounts paid or accrued to or for health insurance for a partner, former
partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member, and
amounts paid or accrued to or for life insurance for a partner, former
partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member shall not
be allowed as a deduction.



         Nothing in division (B) of this section shall be construed
as allowing the taxpayer to add or deduct any amount more than once or shall
be construed as allowing any taxpayer to deduct any amount paid to or accrued
for purposes of federal self-employment tax.



   (C)   TAXPAYER.  Has the same meaning as in § 101.03, except that
"taxpayer" does not include natural persons or entities subject to the tax
imposed under R.C. Chapter 5745.  TAXPAYER may include receivers, assignees,
or trustees in bankruptcy when such persons are required to assume the role
of a taxpayer.



   (D)   TAX RETURN or RETURN.  The notifications and reports required
to be filed pursuant to §§ 101.0680 to 101.0695 for the purpose of
reporting municipal income taxes, and includes declarations of estimated tax.



   (E)   TAXABLE YEAR.  The calendar year or the taxpayer's fiscal
year ending during the calendar year, or fractional part thereof, upon which
the calculation of the taxpayer's adjusted federal taxable income is based
pursuant to this chapter. If a taxpayer's taxable year is changed for federal
income tax purposes, the taxable year for purposes of §§ 101.0680 to
101.0695 is changed accordingly but may consist of an aggregation of more
than one taxable year for federal income tax purposes. The Tax Commissioner
may prescribe by rule an appropriate period as the taxable year for a
taxpayer that has had a change of its taxable year for federal income tax
purposes, for a taxpayer that has two or more short taxable years for federal
income tax purposes as the result of a change of ownership, or for a new
taxpayer that would otherwise have no taxable year.



   (F)   ASSESSMENT.  A notice of underpayment or nonpayment of a tax
issued pursuant to § 101.0690.



(Ord. 2018-3, passed 2-12-18)



§ 101.0682  APPLICABILITY; TAXABLE SITUS; APPORTIONMENT.



   This section applies to any taxpayer that is engaged in a business or
profession in the village and that has made the election under § 101.0680.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B) of this section,
net profit from a business or profession conducted both within and without
the boundaries of the village shall be considered as having a taxable situs
in the village for purposes of municipal income taxation in the same
proportion as the average ratio of the following:



      (1)   The average original cost of the real property and
tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or
profession in the village during the taxable period to the average original
cost of all of the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the
taxpayer in the business or profession during the same period, wherever
situated.



         As used in the preceding paragraph, tangible personal or
real property shall include property rented or leased by the taxpayer and the
value of such property shall be determined by multiplying the annual rental
thereon by eight;



      (2)   Wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the
taxable period to individuals employed in the business or profession for
services performed in the village to wages, salaries, and other compensation
paid during the same period to individuals employed in the business or
profession, wherever the individual's services are performed, excluding
compensation from which taxes are not required to be withheld under § 101.05;



      (3)   Total gross receipts of the business or profession from
sales and rentals made and services performed during the taxable period in
the village to total gross receipts of the business or profession during the
same period from sales, rentals, and services, wherever made or performed.



   (B)   (1)   If the apportionment factors described in division
(A) of this section do not fairly represent the extent of a taxpayer's
business activity in the village, the taxpayer may request, or the Tax
Commissioner may require, that the taxpayer use, with respect to all or any
portion of the income of the taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method
involving one or more of the following:



         (a)   Separate accounting;



         (b)   The exclusion of one or more of the factors;



         (c)   The inclusion of one or more additional factors
that would provide for a more fair apportionment of the income of the
taxpayer to the municipal corporation;



         (d)   A modification of one or more of the factors.



      (2)   A taxpayer request to use an alternative apportionment
method shall be in writing and shall accompany a tax return, timely filed
appeal of an assessment, or timely filed amended tax return. The taxpayer may
use the requested alternative method unless the Tax Commissioner denies the
request in an assessment issued within the period prescribed by §
101.0690(A).



      (3)   The Tax Commissioner may require a taxpayer to use an
alternative apportionment method as described in division (B)(1) of this
section only by issuing an assessment to the taxpayer within the period
prescribed by § 101.0690(A).



   (C)   As used in division (A)(2) of this section, "wages, salaries,
and other compensation" includes only wages, salaries, or other compensation
paid to an employee for services performed at any of the following locations:



      (1)   A location that is owned, controlled, or used by, rented
to, or under the possession of one of the following:



         (a)   The employer;



         (b)   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of the
employer, or a related member of such a vendor, customer, client, or patient;



         (c)   A vendor, customer, client, or patient of a person
described in division (C)(1)(b) of this section, or a related member of such
a vendor, customer, client, or patient;



      (2)   Any location at which a trial, appeal, hearing,
investigation, inquiry, review, court-martial, or similar administrative,
judicial, or legislative matter or proceeding is being conducted, provided
that the compensation is paid for services performed for, or on behalf of,
the employer or that the employee's presence at the location directly or
indirectly benefits the employer;



      (3)   Any other location, if the Tax Commissioner determines
that the employer directed the employee to perform the services at the other
location in lieu of a location described in division (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this
section solely in order to avoid or reduce the employer's municipal income
tax liability. If the Tax Commissioner makes such a determination, the
employer may dispute the determination by establishing, by a preponderance of
the evidence, that the Tax Commissioner's determination was unreasonable.



   (D)   For the purposes of division (A)(3) of this section, receipts
from sales and rentals made and services performed shall be sitused to the
village as follows:



      (1)   Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal
property shall be sitused to the village only if, regardless of where title
passes, the property meets either of the following criteria:



         (a)   The property is shipped to or delivered within the
village from a stock of goods located within the village.



         (b)   The property is delivered within the village from
a location outside the village, provided the taxpayer is regularly engaged
through its own employees in the solicitation or promotion of sales within
the village and the sales result from such solicitation or promotion.



      (2)   Gross receipts from the sale of services shall be
sitused to the village to the extent that such services are performed in the
village.



      (3)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from
the sale of real property located in the village shall be sitused to the
village.



      (4)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from
rents and royalties from real property located in the village shall be
sitused to the village.



      (5)   Gross receipts from rents and royalties from tangible
personal property shall be sitused to the village based upon the extent to
which the tangible personal property is used in the village.



   (E)   Commissions received by a real estate agent or broker relating
to the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate shall be sitused to the
village in which the real estate is located. Net profit reported by the real
estate agent or broker shall be allocated to the village based upon the ratio
of the commissions the agent or broker received from the sale, purchase, or
lease of real estate located in the village to the commissions received from
the sale, purchase, or lease of real estate everywhere in the taxable year.



   (F)   If, in computing a taxpayer's adjusted federal taxable income,
the taxpayer deducted any amount with respect to a stock option granted to an
employee, and if the employee is not required to include in the employee's
income any such amount or a portion thereof because it is exempted from
taxation under the Codified Ordinances of the Village, the taxpayer shall add
the amount that is exempt from taxation to the taxpayer's net profit that was
apportioned to the village. In no case shall a taxpayer be required to add to
its net profit that was apportioned to the village any amount other than the
amount upon which the employee would be required to pay tax were the amount
related to the stock option not exempted from taxation.



      This division applies solely for the purpose of making an
adjustment to the amount of a taxpayer's net profit that was apportioned to
the village under this section.



   (G)   When calculating the ratios described in division (A) of this
section for the purposes of that division or division (B) of this section,
the owner of a disregarded entity shall include in the owner's ratios the
property, payroll, and gross receipts of such disregarded entity.



(Ord. 2018-3, passed 2-12-18)



§ 101.0684  INFORMATION PROVIDED TO TAX ADMINISTRATORS; CONFIDENTIALITY.



   (A)   Any information gained as a result of returns, investigations,
hearings, or verifications required or authorized by §§ 101.0680 to
101.0695 is confidential, and no person shall disclose such information,
except for official purposes, in accordance with a proper judicial order, or
as provided in R.C. § 4123.271 or 5703.21. The Tax Commissioner may furnish
the Internal Revenue Service with copies of returns filed. This section does
not prohibit the publication of statistics in a form which does not disclose
information with respect to particular taxpayers.



   (B)   In May and November of each year, the Tax Commissioner shall
provide the Village Tax Administrator with the following information for
every taxpayer that filed tax returns with the Commissioner under §§
101.0680 to 101.0695 and that had municipal taxable income apportionable to
the village under this chapter for any prior year:



      (1)   The taxpayer's name, address, and federal employer
identification number;



      (2)   The taxpayer's apportionment ratio for, and amount of
municipal taxable income apportionable to, the village pursuant to §
101.0682;



      (3)   The amount of any pre-2017 net operating loss
carryforward utilized by the taxpayer;



      (4)   Whether the taxpayer requested that any overpayment be
carried forward to a future taxable year;



      (5)   The amount of any credit claimed under R.C. § 718.94.



   (C)   Not later than 30 days after each distribution made to
municipal corporations under R.C. § 718.83, the Tax Commissioner shall
provide to the village a report stating the name and federal identification
number of every taxpayer that made estimated payments that are attributable
to the village and the amount of each such taxpayer's estimated payment.



   (D)   The information described under divisions (B) and (C) of this
section shall be provided to the individual or individuals designated by the
Village Tax Administrator under R.C. § 718.83(D).



   (E)   (1)   The village expects that the Tax Commissioner will,
pursuant to R.C. § 718.84(E), provide tax returns and other information it
receives in the performance of its administration of the municipal net
profits tax for taxpayers making the election provided in § 101.0680.  The
Tax Administrator shall review these returns and information, as well as the
information received pursuant to divisions (B) and (C) of this section, and
has discretion to refer any taxpayer for audit by the Tax Commissioner. Such
referral shall be made on a form prescribed by the Commissioner and shall
include any information that forms the basis for the referral.



      (2)   If the Tax Commissioner declines to audit a taxpayer
referred by the Tax Administrator under this section, the village reserves
its right to pursue any and all remedies, whether at law or in equity, to
ensure that the correct tax liability has been calculated and paid by the
taxpayer.



(Ord. 2018-3, passed 2-12-18)



§ 101.0685  FILING OF ANNUAL RETURN; REMITTANCE; DISPOSITION OF FUNDS.



   (A)   (1)   For each taxable year, every taxpayer shall file an
annual return. Such return, along with the amount of tax shown to be due on
the return less the amount paid for the taxable year under § 101.0688, shall
be submitted to the Tax Commissioner, on a form and in the manner prescribed
by the Commissioner, on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month
following the end of the taxpayer's taxable year.



      (2)   If a taxpayer has multiple taxable years ending within
one calendar year, the taxpayer shall aggregate the facts and figures
necessary to compute the tax due under this chapter, in accordance with §§
101.0681, 101.0682, and, if applicable, 101.0686 onto its annual return.



      (3)   The remittance shall be made payable to the Treasurer of
State and in the form prescribed by the Tax Commissioner. If the amount
payable with the tax return is $10 or less, no remittance is required.



   (B)   (1)   Each return required to be filed under this section
shall contain the signature of the taxpayer or the taxpayer's duly authorized
agent and of the person who prepared the return for the taxpayer, and shall
include the taxpayer's identification number. Each return shall be verified
by a declaration under penalty of perjury.



      (2)   (a)   The Tax Commissioner may require a taxpayer to
include, with each annual tax return, amended return, or request for refund
filed with the Commissioner under §§ 101.0680 to 101.0695, copies of any
relevant documents or other information.



         (b)   A taxpayer that files an annual tax return
electronically through the Ohio Business Gateway or in another manner as
prescribed by the Tax Commissioner shall either submit the documents required
under this division electronically as prescribed at the time of filing or, if
electronic submission is not available, mail the documents to the Tax
Commissioner. The Department of Taxation shall publish a method of
electronically submitting the documents required under this division on or
before January 1, 2019.



      (3)   After a taxpayer files a tax return, the Tax
Commissioner may request, and the taxpayer shall provide, any information,
statements, or documents required to determine and verify the taxpayer's
municipal income tax.



   (D)   (1)   (a)   Any taxpayer that has duly requested an
automatic extension for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return shall
automatically receive an extension for the filing of a tax return with the
Commissioner under this section. The extended due date of the return shall be
the fifteenth day of the tenth month after the last day of the taxable year
to which the return relates.



         (b)   A taxpayer that has not requested or received a
six-month extension for filing the taxpayer's federal income tax return may
request that the Commissioner grant the taxpayer a six-month extension of the
date for filing the taxpayer's municipal income tax return. If the
Commissioner receives the request on or before the date the municipal income
tax return is due, the Commissioner shall grant the taxpayer's extension
request.



         (c)   An extension of time to file under division (D)(1)
of this section is not an extension of the time to pay any tax due unless the
Tax Commissioner grants an extension of that date.



      (2)   If the Commissioner considers it necessary in order to
ensure payment of a tax imposed in accordance with § 101.01, the
Commissioner may require taxpayers to file returns and make payments
otherwise than as provided in this section, including taxpayers not otherwise
required to file annual returns.



   (E)   Each return required to be filed in accordance with this
section shall include a box that the taxpayer may check to authorize another
person, including a tax return preparer who prepared the return, to
communicate with the Tax Commissioner about matters pertaining to the return.
The return or instructions accompanying the return shall indicate that by
checking the box the taxpayer authorizes the Commissioner to contact the
preparer or other person concerning questions that arise during the
examination or other review of the return and authorizes the preparer or
other person only to provide the Commissioner with information that is
missing from the return, to contact the Commissioner for information about
the examination or other review of the return or the status of the taxpayer's
refund or payments, and to respond to notices about mathematical errors,
offsets, or return preparation that the taxpayer has received from the
Commissioner and has shown to the preparer or other person.



   (F)   When income tax returns or other documents require the
signature of a tax return preparer, the Tax Commissioner shall accept a
facsimile or electronic version of such a signature in lieu of a manual
signature.



(Ord. 2018-3, passed 2-12-18)



§ 101.06851  ELECTRONIC FILING.



   (A)   All taxpayers that have made the election allowed under §
101.0680 shall file any tax return or extension for filing a tax return, and
shall make payment of amounts shown to be due on such returns,
electronically, either through the Ohio Business Gateway or in another manner
as prescribed by the Tax Commissioner.



   (B)   A taxpayer may apply to the Commissioner, on a form prescribed
by the Commissioner, to be excused from the requirement to file returns and
make payments electronically. For good cause shown, the Commissioner may
excuse the applicant from the requirement and permit the applicant to file
the returns or make the payments by nonelectronic means.



   (C)   The Tax Commissioner may adopt rules establishing the
following:



      (1)   The format of documents to be used by taxpayers to file
returns and make payments by electronic means;



      (2)   The information taxpayers must submit when filing tax
returns by electronic means.



(Ord. 2018-3, passed 2-12-18)



§ 101.0686  CONSOLIDATED RETURNS.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      (1)   AFFILIATED GROUP OF CORPORATIONS means an affiliated
group as defined in section 1504 of the Internal Revenue Code, except that,
if such a group includes at least one incumbent local exchange carrier that
is primarily engaged in the business of providing local exchange telephone
service in this state, the affiliated group shall not include any incumbent
local exchange carrier that would otherwise be included in the group.



      (2)   CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL INCOME TAX RETURN means a
consolidated return filed for federal income tax purposes pursuant to section
1501 of the Internal Revenue Code.



      (3)   CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME means the
consolidated taxable income of an affiliated group of corporations, as
computed for the purposes of filing a consolidated federal income tax return,
before consideration of net operating losses or special deductions.
CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL TAXABLE INCOME does not include income or loss of an
incumbent local exchange carrier that is excluded from the affiliated group
under division (A)(1) of this section.



      (4)   INCUMBENT LOCAL EXCHANGE CARRIER has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 4927.01.



      (5)   LOCAL EXCHANGE TELEPHONE SERVICE has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 5727.01.



   (B)   (1)   A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of
corporations may elect to file a consolidated tax return for a taxable year
if at least one member of the affiliated group of corporations is subject to
municipal income tax in that taxable year and if the affiliated group of
corporations filed a consolidated federal income tax return with respect to
that taxable year. The election is binding for a five-year period beginning
with the first taxable year of the initial election unless a change in the
reporting method is required under federal law. The election continues to be
binding for each subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to
discontinue filing consolidated tax returns under division (B)(2) of this
section or a taxpayer receives permission from the Tax Commissioner. The Tax
Commissioner shall approve such a request for good cause shown.



      (2)   An election to discontinue filing consolidated tax
returns under this section must be made on or before the fifteenth day of the
fourth month of the year following the last year of a five-year consolidated
tax return election period in effect under division (B)(1) of this section.
The election to discontinue filing a consolidated tax return is binding for a
five-year period beginning with the first taxable year of the election.



      (3)   An election made under division (B)(1) or (B)(2) of this
section is binding on all members of the affiliated group of corporations
subject to a municipal income tax.



      (4)   When a taxpayer makes the election allowed under §
101.0680, a valid election made by the taxpayer under § 101.06(C)(2)(a) or
(C)(2)(b) is binding upon the Tax Commissioner for the remainder of the
five-year period.



      (5)   When an election made under § 101.0680 is terminated, a
valid election made under this section is binding upon the Tax Administrator
for the remainder of the five-year period.



   (C)   A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of
corporations that filed a consolidated federal income tax return for a
taxable year shall file a consolidated tax return for that taxable year if
the Tax Commissioner determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that
intercompany transactions have not been conducted at arm's length and that
there has been a distortive shifting of income or expenses with regard to
allocation of net profits to a municipal corporation. A taxpayer that is
required to file a consolidated tax return for a taxable year shall file a
consolidated tax return for all subsequent taxable years unless the taxpayer
requests and receives written permission from the Commissioner to file a
separate return or a taxpayer has experienced a change in circumstances.



   (D)   A taxpayer shall prepare a consolidated tax return in the same
manner as is required under the United States Department of Treasury
regulations that prescribe procedures for the preparation of the consolidated
federal income tax return required to be filed by the common parent of the
affiliated group of which the taxpayer is a member.



   (E)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (E)(2),
(E)(3), and (E)(4) of this section, corporations that file a consolidated tax
return shall compute adjusted federal taxable income, as defined in §
101.0681, by substituting "consolidated federal taxable income" for "federal
taxable income" wherever "federal taxable income" appears in that division
and by substituting "an affiliated group of corporation's" for "a C
corporation's" wherever "a C corporation's" appears in that division.



      (2)   No corporation filing a consolidated tax return shall
make any adjustment otherwise required under § 101.0681(B) to the extent
that the item of income or deduction otherwise subject to the adjustment has
been eliminated or consolidated in the computation of consolidated federal
taxable income.



      (3)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity
having at least 80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or
controlled, directly or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is
included in that affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a
taxable year, the corporation filing a consolidated tax return shall do one
of the following with respect to that pass-through entity's net profit or
loss for that taxable year:



         (a)   Exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or
loss from the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group
and, for the purpose of making the computations required in § 101.0682,
exclude the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through entity
in the computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused to a
municipal corporation. If the entity's net profit or loss is so excluded, the
entity shall be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of
the entity's net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated
federal taxable income of the affiliated group.



         (b)   Include the pass-through entity's net profit or
loss in the consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and,
for the purpose of making the computations required in § 101.0682, include
the property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through entity in the
computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused to a municipal
corporation. If the entity's net profit or loss is so included, the entity
shall not be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the
entity's net profits that are included in the consolidated federal taxable
income of the affiliated group.



      (4)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity
having less than 80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or
controlled, directly or indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is
included in that affiliated group's consolidated federal taxable income for a
taxable year, all of the following shall apply:



         (a)   The corporation filing the consolidated tax return
shall exclude the pass-through entity's net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purposes of making the computations required in § 101.0682, exclude the
property, payroll, and gross receipts of the pass-through entity in the
computation of the affiliated group's net profit sitused to a municipal
corporation;



         (b)   The pass-through entity shall be subject to
municipal income taxation as a separate taxpayer in accordance with §§
101.0680 to 101.0695 on the basis of the entity's net profits that would
otherwise be included in the consolidated federal taxable income of the
affiliated group.



   (F)   Corporations filing a consolidated tax return shall make the
computations required under § 101.0682 by substituting "consolidated federal
taxable income attributable to" for "net profit from" wherever "net profit
from" appears in that section and by substituting "affiliated group of
corporations" for "taxpayer" wherever "taxpayer" appears in that section.



   (G)   Each corporation filing a consolidated tax return is jointly
and severally liable for any tax, interest, penalties, fines, charges, or
other amounts applicable under §§ 101.0680 to 101.0695 or R.C. Chapter 5703
to the corporation, an affiliated group of which the corporation is a member
for any portion of the taxable year, or any one or more members of such an
affiliated group.



(Ord. 2018-3, passed 2-12-18)



§ 101.0687  FAILURE TO PAY TAX.



   If a taxpayer that has made the election allowed under § 101.0680
fails to pay any tax as required under §§ 101.0680 to 101.0695, or any
portion of that tax, on or before the date prescribed for its payment,
interest shall be assessed, collected, and paid, in the same manner as the
tax, upon such unpaid amount at the rate per annum prescribed by R.C. §
5703.47 from the date prescribed for its payment until it is paid or until
the date an assessment is issued under § 101.0690, whichever occurs first.



(Ord. 2018-3, passed 2-12-18)



§ 101.0688  DECLARATION OF ESTIMATED TAXES.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      (1)   COMBINED TAX LIABILITY means the total amount of a
taxpayer's income tax liabilities to all municipal corporations in this state
for a taxable year.



      (2)   ESTIMATED TAXES means the amount that the taxpayer
reasonably estimates to be the taxpayer's combined tax liability for the
current taxable year.



   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(4) of this
section, every taxpayer shall make a declaration of estimated taxes for the
current taxable year, on the form prescribed by the Tax Commissioner, if the
amount payable as estimated taxes is at least $200.



      (2)   Except as provided in division (B)(4) of this section, a
taxpayer having a taxable year of less than 12 months shall make a
declaration under rules prescribed by the Commissioner.



      (3)   The declaration of estimated taxes shall be filed on or
before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the beginning of the
taxable year or on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the
taxpayer becomes subject to tax for the first time.



      (4)   The Tax Commissioner may waive the requirement for
filing a declaration of estimated taxes for any class of taxpayers after
finding that the waiver is reasonable and proper in view of administrative
costs and other factors.



   (C)   Each taxpayer shall file the declaration of estimated taxes
with, and remit estimated taxes to, the Tax Commissioner at the times and in
the amounts prescribed in division (C)(1) of this section. Remitted taxes
shall be made payable to the Treasurer of State.



      (1)   The required portion of the combined tax liability for
the taxable year that shall be paid through estimated taxes shall be as
follows:



         (a)   On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month
after the beginning of the taxable year, 22.5% of the combined tax liability
for the taxable year;



         (b)   On or before the fifteenth day of the sixth month
after the beginning of the taxable year, 45% of the combined tax liability
for the taxable year;



         (c)   On or before the fifteenth day of the ninth month
after the beginning of the taxable year, 67.5% of the combined tax liability
for the taxable year;



         (d)   On or before the fifteenth day of the twelfth
month of the taxable year, 90% of the combined tax liability for the taxable
year.



      (2)   If the taxpayer determines that its declaration of
estimated taxes will not accurately reflect the taxpayer's tax liability for
the taxable year, the taxpayer shall increase or decrease, as appropriate,
its subsequent payments in equal installments to result in a more accurate
payment of estimated taxes.



      (3)   (a)   Each taxpayer shall report on the declaration
of estimated taxes the portion of the remittance that the taxpayer estimates
that it owes to each municipal corporation for the taxable year.



         (b)   Upon receiving a payment of estimated taxes under
this section, the Commissioner shall immediately forward the payment to the
Treasurer of State. The Treasurer shall credit the payment in the same manner
as in division (B) of R.C. § 718.85.



   (D)   (1)   In the case of any underpayment of estimated taxes,
there shall be added to the taxes an amount determined at the rate per annum
prescribed by R.C. § 5703.47 upon the amount of underpayment for the period
of underpayment, unless the underpayment is due to reasonable cause as
described in division (E) of this section. The amount of the underpayment
shall be determined as follows:



         (a)   For the first payment of estimated taxes each
year, 22.5% of the combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by
the date prescribed for that payment;



         (b)   For the second payment of estimated taxes each
year, 45% of the combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the
date prescribed for that payment;



         (c)   For the third payment of estimated taxes each
year, 67.5% of the combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by
the date prescribed for that payment;



         (d)   For the fourth payment of estimated taxes each
year, 90% of the combined tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the
date prescribed for that payment.



      (2)   The period of the underpayment shall run from the day
the estimated payment was required to be made to the date on which the
payment is made. For purposes of this section, a payment of estimated taxes
on or before any payment date shall be considered a payment of any previous
underpayment only to the extent the payment of estimated taxes exceeds the
amount of the payment presently due.



      (3)   All amounts collected under this section shall be
considered as taxes collected under §§ 101.0680 to 101.0695 and shall be
credited and distributed to municipal corporations in accordance with R.C. §
718.83.



   (E)   An underpayment of any portion of a combined tax liability
shall be due to reasonable cause and the penalty imposed by this section
shall not be added to the taxes for the taxable year if any of the following
apply:



      (1)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at
least 90% of the combined tax liability for the current taxable year,
determined by annualizing the income received during the year up to the end
of the month immediately preceding the month in which the payment is due.



      (2)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at
least 100% of the tax liability shown on the return of the taxpayer for the
preceding taxable year, provided that the immediately preceding taxable year
reflected a period of 12 months and the taxpayer filed a municipal income tax
return for that year.



(Ord. 2018-3, passed 2-12-18)



§ 101.0689  ADDITIONAL PENALTIES.



   (A)   In addition to any other penalty imposed by §§ 101.0680 to
101.0695 or R.C. Chapter 5703, the following penalties shall apply:



      (1)   If a taxpayer required to file a tax return under §§
101.0680 to 101.0695 fails to make and file the return within the time
prescribed, including any extensions of time granted by the Tax Commissioner,
the Commissioner may impose a penalty not exceeding $25 per month or fraction
of a month, for each month or fraction of a month elapsing between the due
date, including extensions of the due date, and the date on which the return
is filed. The aggregate penalty, per instance, under this division shall not
exceed $150.



      (2)   If a person required to file a tax return electronically
under §§ 101.0680 to 101.0695 fails to do so, the Commissioner may impose a
penalty not to exceed the following:



         (a)   For each of the first two failures, 5% of the
amount required to be reported on the return;



         (b)   For the third and any subsequent failure, 10% of
the amount required to be reported on the return.



      (3)   If a taxpayer that has made the election allowed under
§ 101.0680 fails to timely pay an amount of tax required to be paid under
this chapter, the Commissioner may impose a penalty equal to 15% of the
amount not timely paid.



      (4)   If a taxpayer files what purports to be a tax return
required by §§ 101.0680 to 101.0695 that does not contain information upon
which the substantial correctness of the return may be judged or contains
information that on its face indicates that the return is substantially
incorrect, and the filing of the return in that manner is due to a position
that is frivolous or a desire that is apparent from the return to delay or
impede the administration of §§ 101.0680 to 101.0695, a penalty of up to
$500 may be imposed.



      (5)   If a taxpayer makes a fraudulent attempt to evade the
reporting or payment of the tax required to be shown on any return required
under §§ 101.0680 to 101.0695, a penalty may be imposed not exceeding the
greater of $1,000 or 100% of the tax required to be shown on the return.



      (6)   If any person makes a false or fraudulent claim for a
refund under § 101.0691, a penalty may be imposed not exceeding the greater
of $1,000 or 100% of the claim. Any penalty imposed under this division, any
refund issued on the claim, and interest on any refund from the date of the
refund, may be assessed under § 101.0690 without regard to any time
limitation for the assessment imposed by division (A) of that section.



   (B)   For purposes of this section, the tax required to be shown on
a tax return shall be reduced by the amount of any part of the tax paid on or
before the date, including any extensions of the date, prescribed for filing
the return.



   (C)   Each penalty imposed under this section shall be in addition
to any other penalty imposed under this section. All or part of any penalty
imposed under this section may be abated by the Tax Commissioner. The
Commissioner may adopt rules governing the imposition and abatement of such
penalties.



   (D)   All amounts collected under this section shall be considered
as taxes collected under §§ 101.0680 to 101.0695 and shall be credited and
distributed to municipal corporations in the same proportion as the
underlying tax liability is required to be distributed to such municipal
corporations under R.C. § 718.83.



(Ord. 2018-3, passed 2-12-18)



§ 101.0690  ASSESSMENTS AGAINST TAXPAYER.



   (A)   If any taxpayer required to file a return under §§ 101.0680
to 101.0695 fails to file the return within the time prescribed, files an
incorrect return, or fails to remit the full amount of the tax due for the
period covered by the return, the Tax Commissioner may make an assessment
against the taxpayer for any deficiency for the period for which the return
or tax is due, based upon any information in the Commissioner's possession.



      The Tax Commissioner shall not make or issue an assessment
against a taxpayer more than three years after the later of the date the
return subject to assessment was required to be filed or the date the return
was filed. Such time limit may be extended if both the taxpayer and the
Commissioner consent in writing to the extension. Any such extension shall
extend the three-year time limit in § 101.0691 for the same period of time.
There shall be no bar or limit to an assessment against a taxpayer that fails
to file a return subject to assessment as required by §§ 101.0680 to
101.0695, or that files a fraudulent return. The Commissioner shall give the
taxpayer assessed written notice of the assessment as provided in R.C. §
5703.37.  With the notice, the Commissioner shall provide instructions on
how to petition for reassessment and request a hearing on the petition.



   (B)   Unless the taxpayer assessed files with the Tax Commissioner
within 60 days after service of the notice of assessment, either personally
or by certified mail, a written petition for reassessment signed by the
authorized agent of the taxpayer assessed having knowledge of the facts, the
assessment becomes final, and the amount of the assessment is due and payable
from the taxpayer to the Treasurer of State. The petition shall indicate the
taxpayer's objections, but additional objections may be raised in writing if
received by the Commissioner prior to the date shown on the final
determination. If the petition has been properly filed, the Commissioner
shall proceed under R.C. § 5703.60.



   (C)   After an assessment becomes final, if any portion of the
assessment remains unpaid, including accrued interest, a certified copy of
the Tax Commissioner's entry making the assessment final may be filed in the
office of the clerk of the court of common pleas in the county in which the
taxpayer has an office or place of business in this state, the county in
which the taxpayer's statutory agent is located, or Franklin county.



      Immediately upon the filing of the entry, the clerk shall enter a
judgment against the taxpayer assessed in the amount shown on the entry. The
judgment may be filed by the clerk in a loose-leaf book entitled "special
judgments for municipal income taxes," and shall have the same effect as
other judgments. Execution shall issue upon the judgment upon the request of
the Tax Commissioner, and all laws applicable to sales on execution shall
apply to sales made under the judgment.



      If the assessment is not paid in its entirety within 60 days
after the day the assessment was issued, the portion of the assessment
consisting of tax due shall bear interest at the rate per annum prescribed by
R.C. § 5703.47 from the day the Commissioner issues the assessment until the
assessment is paid or until it is certified to the attorney general for
collection under R.C. § 131.02, whichever comes first. If the unpaid portion
of the assessment is certified to the attorney general for collection, the
entire unpaid portion of the assessment shall bear interest at the rate per
annum prescribed by R.C. § 5703.47 from the date of certification until the
date it is paid in its entirety. Interest shall be paid in the same manner as
the tax and may be collected by issuing an assessment under this section.



   (D)   All money collected under this section shall be credited to
the municipal income tax fund and distributed to the municipal corporation to
which the money is owed based on the assessment issued under this section.



   (E)   If the Tax Commissioner believes that collection of the tax
will be jeopardized unless proceedings to collect or secure collection of the
tax are instituted without delay, the Commissioner may issue a jeopardy
assessment against the taxpayer liable for the tax. Immediately upon the
issuance of the jeopardy assessment, the Commissioner shall file an entry
with the clerk of the court of common pleas in the manner prescribed by
division (C) of this section. Notice of the jeopardy assessment shall be
served on the taxpayer assessed or the taxpayer's legal representative in the
manner provided in R.C. § 5703.37 within five days of the filing of the
entry with the clerk. The total amount assessed is immediately due and
payable, unless the taxpayer assessed files a petition for reassessment in
accordance with division (B) of this section and provides security in a form
satisfactory to the Commissioner and in an amount sufficient to satisfy the
unpaid balance of the assessment. Full or partial payment of the assessment
does not prejudice the Commissioner's consideration of the petition for
reassessment.



   (F)   Notwithstanding the fact that a petition for reassessment is
pending, the taxpayer may pay all or a portion of the assessment that is the
subject of the petition. The acceptance of a payment by the Treasurer of
State does not prejudice any claim for refund upon final determination of the
petition.



      If upon final determination of the petition an error in the
assessment is corrected by the Tax Commissioner, upon petition so filed or
pursuant to a decision of the Board of Tax Appeals or any court to which the
determination or decision has been appealed, so that the amount due from the
taxpayer under the corrected assessment is less than the portion paid, there
shall be issued to the taxpayer, its assigns, or legal representative a
refund in the amount of the overpayment as provided by § 101.0691, with
interest on that amount as provided by that section.



(Ord. 2018-3, passed 2-12-18)



§ 101.0691  REFUND APPLICATIONS.



   (A)   An application to refund to a taxpayer the amount of taxes
paid on any illegal, erroneous, or excessive payment of tax under §§
101.0680 to 101.0695, including assessments, shall be filed with the Tax
Commissioner within three years after the date of the illegal, erroneous, or
excessive payment of the tax, or within any additional period allowed by §
101.0690(A). The application shall be filed in the form prescribed by the Tax
Commissioner.



   (B)   (1)   On the filing of a refund application, the Tax
Commissioner shall determine the amount of refund to which the applicant is
entitled. The amount determined shall be based on the amount overpaid per
return or assessment. If the amount is greater than $10 and not less than
that claimed, the Commissioner shall certify that amount to the Director of
Budget and Management and the Treasurer of State for payment from the tax
refund fund created in R.C. § 5703.052.



If the amount is greater than $10 but less than that claimed, the
Commissioner shall proceed in accordance with R.C. § 5703.70.



      (2)   Upon issuance of a refund under this section, the
Commissioner shall notify each municipal corporation of the amount refunded
to the taxpayer attributable to that municipal corporation, which shall be
deducted from the municipal corporation's next distribution under R.C. §
718.83.



   (C)   Any portion of a refund determined under division (B) of this
section that is not issued within 90 days after such determination shall bear
interest at the rate per annum prescribed by R.C. § 5703.47 from the 91st
day after such determination until the day the refund is paid or credited. On
an illegal or erroneous assessment, interest shall be paid at that rate from
the date of payment on the illegal or erroneous assessment until the day the
refund is paid or credited.



(Ord. 2018-3, passed 2-12-18)



§ 101.0692  AMENDED RETURNS.



   (A)   If any of the facts, figures, computations, or attachments
required in an annual return filed by a taxpayer that has made the election
allowed under § 101.0680 and used to determine the tax due under §§
101.0680 to 101.0695 must be altered as the result of an adjustment to the
taxpayer's federal income tax return, whether initiated by the taxpayer or
the Internal Revenue Service, and such alteration affects the taxpayer's tax
liability under those sections, the taxpayer shall file an amended return
with the Tax Commissioner in such form as the Commissioner requires. The
amended return shall be filed not later than 60 days after the adjustment is
agreed upon or finally determined for federal income tax purposes or after
any federal income tax deficiency or refund, or the abatement or credit
resulting therefrom, has been assessed or paid, whichever occurs first. If a
taxpayer intends to file an amended consolidated municipal income tax return,
or to amend its type of return from a separate return to a consolidated
return, based on the taxpayer's consolidated federal income tax return, the
taxpayer shall notify the Commissioner before filing the amended return.



   (B)   In the case of an underpayment, the amended return shall be
accompanied by payment of any combined additional tax due together with any
penalty and interest thereon. An amended return required by this section is a
return subject to assessment under § 101.0690 for the purpose of assessing
any additional tax due under this section, together with any applicable
penalty and interest. The amended return shall not reopen those facts,
figures, computations, or attachments from a previously filed return no
longer subject to assessment that are not affected, either directly or
indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer's federal tax return.



   (C)   In the case of an overpayment, an application for refund may
be filed under this division within the 60-day period prescribed for filing
the amended return, even if that period extends beyond the period prescribed
in § 101.0691, if the application otherwise conforms to the requirements of
that section. An application filed under this division shall claim refund of
overpayments resulting from alterations to only those facts, figures,
computations, or attachments required in the taxpayer's annual return that
are affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the
taxpayer's federal income tax return unless it is also filed within the time
prescribed in § 101.0691. The application shall not reopen those facts,
figures, computations, or attachments that are not affected, either directly
or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer's federal income tax return.



(Ord. 2018-3, passed 2-12-18)



§ 101.0693  EXAMINATION OF RECORDS AND OTHER DOCUMENTS AND PERSONS.



   (A)   The Tax Commissioner, or any authorized agent or employee
thereof, may examine the books, papers, records, and federal and state income
tax returns of any taxpayer or other person that is subject to §§ 101.0680
to 101.0695 for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made or,
if no return was filed, to ascertain the tax due as required under those
sections. Upon written request by the Commissioner or a duly authorized agent
or employee thereof, every taxpayer or other person subject to this section
is required to furnish the opportunity for the Commissioner, authorized
agent, or employee to investigate and examine such books, papers, records,
and federal and state income tax returns at a reasonable time and place
designated in the request.



   (B)   The records and other documents of any taxpayer or other
person that is subject to §§ 101.0680 to 101.0695 shall be open to the Tax
Commissioner's inspection during business hours and shall be preserved for a
period of six years following the end of the taxable year to which the
records or documents relate, unless the Commissioner, in writing, consents to
their destruction within that period, or by order requires that they be kept
longer. The Commissioner may require any person, by notice served on that
person, to keep such records as the Commissioner determines necessary to show
whether or not that person is liable, and the extent of such liability, for
the income tax levied by a municipal corporation.



   (C)   The Tax Commissioner may examine under oath any person that
the Commissioner reasonably believes has knowledge concerning any income that
was or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction tending to
affect such income. The Commissioner may, for this purpose, compel any such
person to attend a hearing or examination and to produce any books, papers,
records, and federal income tax returns in such person's possession or
control. The person may be assisted or represented by an attorney,
accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner at any such hearing or
examination. This division does not authorize the practice of law by a person
who is not an attorney.



   (D)   No person issued written notice by the Tax Commissioner
compelling attendance at a hearing or examination or the production of books,
papers, records, or federal income tax returns under this section shall fail
to comply.



(Ord. 2018-3, passed 2-12-18)



§ 101.0694  CREDITS.



   (A)   A credit, granted by resolution or ordinance of the village
pursuant to § 101.06(D) or (E), shall be available to a taxpayer that has
made the election allowed under § 101.0680, against the municipal
corporation's tax on income. A municipal corporation shall submit the
following information to the Tax Commissioner on or before the later of
January 31, 2018, or the 31st day of January of the first year in which the
taxpayer is eligible to receive the credit:



      (1)   A copy of the agreement entered into by the village and
taxpayer under § 101.06(D) or (E);



      (2)   A copy of the ordinance or resolution authorizing the
agreement entered into between the village and the taxpayer.



   (B)   (1)   Each taxpayer that claims a credit shall submit, with
the taxpayer's tax return, documentation issued by the village granting the
credit that confirms the eligibility of the taxpayer for the credit, the
amount of the credit for which the taxpayer is eligible, and the tax year to
which the credit is to be applied.



      (2)   Such documentation shall be provided in the form
prescribed by the Tax Commissioner.



      (3)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize
the Tax Commissioner to enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to grant a
credit, to determine if a taxpayer meets the conditions of a tax credit
agreement entered into by the village and taxpayer under § 101.06(D) or (E),
or to modify the terms or conditions of any such existing agreement.



(Ord. 2018-3, passed 2-12-18)



§ 101.0695  RECKLESS VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, whoever
recklessly violates § 101.0684(A) shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree and shall be subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or
imprisonment for a term of up to six months, or both.



   (B)   Each instance of access or disclosure in violation of §
101.0684(A) constitutes a separate offense.



   (C)   These specific penalties shall not be construed to prevent the
village from prosecuting any and all other offenses that may apply.



(Ord. 2018-3, passed 2-12-18)



§ 101.07  DECLARATION OF ESTIMATED TAX.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      (1)   ESTIMATED TAXES means the amount that the taxpayer
reasonably estimates to be the taxpayer's tax liability for a municipal
corporation's income tax for the current taxable year.



      (2)   TAX LIABILITY means the total taxes due to a municipal
corporation for the taxable year, after allowing any credit to which the
taxpayer is entitled, and after applying any estimated tax payment,
withholding payment, or credit from another taxable year.



   (B)   (1)   Every taxpayer shall make a declaration of estimated
taxes for the current taxable year, on the form prescribed by the Tax
Administrator, if the amount payable as estimated taxes is at least $200. For
the purposes of this section:



         (a)   Taxes withheld from qualifying wages shall be
considered as paid to the municipal corporation for which the taxes were
withheld in equal amounts on each payment date. If the taxpayer establishes
the dates on which all amounts were actually withheld, the amounts withheld
shall be considered as paid on the dates on which the amounts were actually
withheld.



         (b)   An overpayment of tax applied as a credit to a
subsequent taxable year is deemed to be paid on the date of the postmark
stamped on the cover in which the payment is mailed or, if the payment is
made by electronic funds transfer, the date the payment is submitted. As used
in this division, "date of the postmark" means, in the event there is more
than one date on the cover, the earliest date imprinted on the cover by the
postal service.



         (c)   A taxpayer having a taxable year of less than 12
months shall make a declaration under rules prescribed by the Tax
Administrator.



         (d)   Taxes withheld by a casino operator or by a
lottery sales agent under R.C. § 718.031 are deemed to be paid to the
municipal corporation for which the taxes were withheld on the date the taxes
are withheld from the taxpayer's winnings.



      (2)   Taxpayers filing joint returns shall file joint
declarations of estimated taxes.



      (3)   The declaration of estimated taxes shall be filed on or
before the date prescribed for the filing of municipal income tax returns
under § 101.09(A)(7) or on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month
of the first taxable year after the taxpayer becomes subject to tax for the
first time.



      (4)   Taxpayers reporting on a fiscal year basis shall file a
declaration on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the
beginning of each fiscal year or period.



      (5)   The original declaration or any subsequent amendment may
be increased or decreased on or before any subsequent quarterly payment day
as provided in this section.



   (C)   (1)   The required portion of the tax liability for the
taxable year that shall be paid through estimated taxes made payable to the
village or Tax Administrator, including the application of tax refunds to
estimated taxes and withholding on or before the applicable payment date,
shall be as follows:



         (a)   On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month
after the beginning of the taxable year, 22.5% of the tax liability for the
taxable year;



         (b)   On or before the fifteenth day of the sixth month
after the beginning of the taxable year, 45% of the tax liability for the
taxable year;



         (c)   On or before the fifteenth day of the ninth month
after the beginning of the taxable year, 67.5% of the tax liability for the
taxable year;



         (d)   On or before the fifteenth day of the first month
following the end of the taxable year, 90% of the tax liability for the
taxable year.



      (2)   A taxpayer may amend a declaration under rules
prescribed by the Tax Administrator. When an amended declaration has been
filed, the unpaid balance shown due on the amended declaration shall be paid
in equal installments on or before the remaining payment dates. The amended
declaration must be filed on the next applicable due date as outlined in
divisions (C)(1)(a) through (d) of this section.



      (3)   On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month of
the year following that for which the declaration or amended declaration was
filed, an annual return shall be filed and any balance which may be due shall
be paid with the return in accordance with § 101.09(A).



         (a)   For taxpayers who are individuals, or who are not
individuals and are reporting and filing on a calendar year basis, the annual
tax return is due on the same date as the filing of the federal tax return,
unless extended pursuant to R.C. § 5747.08(G).



         (b)   For taxpayers who are not individuals, and are
reporting and filing on a fiscal year basis or any period other than a
calendar year, the annual return is due on the fifteenth day of the fourth
month following the end of the taxable year or period.



      (4)   An amended declaration is required whenever the
taxpayer's estimated tax liability changes during the taxable year. A change
in estimated tax liability may either increase or decrease the estimated tax
liability for the taxable year.



   (D)   (1)   In the case of any underpayment of any portion of a
tax liability, penalty and interest may be imposed pursuant to § 101.10 upon
the amount of underpayment for the period of underpayment, unless the
underpayment is due to reasonable cause as described in division (E) of this
section. The amount of the underpayment shall be determined as follows:



         (a)   For the first payment of estimated taxes each
year, 22.5% of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date
prescribed for that payment;



         (b)   For the second payment of estimated taxes each
year, 45% of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date
prescribed for that payment;



         (c)   For the third payment of estimated taxes each
year, 67.5% of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date
prescribed for that payment;



         (d)   For the fourth payment of estimated taxes each
year, 90% of the tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date
prescribed for that payment.



      (2)   The period of the underpayment shall run from the day
the estimated payment was required to be made to the date on which the
payment is made. For purposes of this section, a payment of estimated taxes
on or before any payment date shall be considered a payment of any previous
underpayment only to the extent the payment of estimated taxes exceeds the
amount of the payment presently required to be paid to avoid any penalty.



   (E)   An underpayment of any portion of tax liability determined
under division (D) of this section



shall be due to reasonable cause and the penalty imposed by this section
shall not be added to the taxes for the taxable year if any of the following
apply:



      (1)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at
least 90% of the tax liability for the current taxable year, determined by
annualizing the income received during the year up to the end of the month
immediately preceding the month in which the payment is due.



      (2)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at
least 100% of the tax liability shown on the return of the taxpayer for the
preceding taxable year, provided that the immediately preceding taxable year
reflected a period of twelve months and the taxpayer filed a return with the
municipal corporation under § 101.09(A) for that year.



      (3)   The taxpayer is an individual who resides in the village
but was not domiciled there on the first day of January of the calendar year
that includes the first day of the taxable year.



   (F)   The Tax Administrator may waive the requirement for filing a
declaration of estimated taxes for any class of taxpayers after finding that
the waiver is reasonable and proper in view of administrative costs and other
factors.



(R.C. § 718.08)  (Ord. 2015-12, passed 11-9-15; Am. Ord. 2018-6, passed
3-12-18)



§ 101.08  CREDIT FOR TAX PAID.



   (A)   Credit for tax paid to another municipality.



      (1)   Limitation on amount paid. Where a resident of the
village is subject to a municipal income tax in another municipality by
reason of that municipality being the situs of the resident’s employment,
the resident shall not pay a total municipal income tax on the same income
greater than the tax imposed at the higher rate.



      (2)   Credits and limitations. Every resident who earns or
receives taxable income for work done or services performed or rendered
outside of the Village, if the resident has paid a municipal income tax on
the same income taxable under this chapter to another municipality, shall be
allowed a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter of the amount so
paid by the resident or on his or her behalf to such other municipality for
taxes paid in the same tax year. The credit shall not exceed the tax assessed
by this chapter in the same tax year on such income earned in such other
municipality or municipalities where the tax is paid. Credits may not be
carried forward to future years.



      (3)   Claim for credit or refund. A claim for credit or refund
shall be made in such a manner as the Administrator may provide by regulation.



   (B)   Refundable credit for qualifying loss. A refundable credit
shall be allowed against the income tax imposed by the Village for each
qualifying loss sustained by a taxpayer during the taxable year, as provided
under R.C. § 718.021 which is incorporated herein by reference.



   (C)   Credit for person working in joint economic development
district or zone. The village shall grant a credit against its tax on income
to a resident of the village who works in a joint economic development zone
created under R.C. § 715.691 or a joint economic development district
created under R.C. §§ 715.70, 715.71, or 715.72 to the same extent that it
grants a credit against its tax on income to its residents who are employed
in another municipal corporation, pursuant to § 101.08(A).



(R.C. § 718.16)



   (D)   Credit for tax beyond statute for obtaining refund.



      (1)   Income tax that has been deposited or paid to the
village, but should have been deposited or paid to another municipal
corporation, is allowable by the village as a refund, but is subject to the
three-year limitation on refunds as provided in § 101.09(F).



      (2)   Income tax that should have been deposited or paid to
the village, but was deposited or paid to another municipal corporation,
shall be subject to collection and recovery by the village. To the extent a
refund of such tax or withholding is barred by the limitation on refunds as
provided in § 101.09(F), the village will allow a non-refundable credit
equal to the tax or withholding paid to the other municipality against the
income tax the village claims is due. If the village’s tax rate is higher,
the tax representing the net difference of the tax rates is also subject to
collection by the village, along with any penalty and interest accruing
during the period of nonpayment.



      (3)   No carryforward of credit will be permitted when the
overpayment is beyond the three-year limitation for refunding of same as
provided in § 101.09(F).



      (4)   Nothing in this section requires the village to allow
credit for tax paid to another municipal corporation if the village has
reduced credit for tax paid to another municipal corporation. Section
101.08(A) prevails if there is any conflict with this section.



(R.C. § 718.121)  (Ord. 2015-12, passed 11-9-15)



§ 101.09  ANNUAL RETURN.



   (A)   Return and payment of tax.



      (1)   (a)   An annual return with respect to the income tax
levied on municipal taxable income by the village shall be completed and
filed by every taxpayer for any taxable year for which the taxpayer is
subject to the tax, regardless of whether or not income tax is due.



         (b)   The Tax Administrator shall accept on behalf of
all nonresident individual taxpayers a return filed by an employer, agent of
an employer, or other payer located in the village under § 101.05(A)(3) when
the nonresident individual taxpayer’s sole income subject to the tax is the
qualifying wages reported by the employer, agent of an employer, or other
payer, and no additional tax is due to the village.



         (c)   All resident individual taxpayers shall file an
annual municipal income tax return with the village, regardless of income or
liability.



      (2)   If an individual is deceased, any return or notice
required of that individual shall be completed and filed by that decedent’s
executor, administrator, or other person charged with the property of that
decedent.



      (3)   If an individual is unable to complete and file a return
or notice required by the village in accordance with this chapter, the return
or notice required of that individual shall be completed and filed by the
individual’s duly authorized agent, guardian, conservator, fiduciary, or
other person charged with the care of the person or property of that
individual. Such duly authorized agent, guardian, conservator, fiduciary, or
other person charged with the care of the person or property of that
individual shall provide, with the filing of the return, appropriate
documentation to support that they are authorized to file a return or notice
on behalf of the taxpayer. This notice shall include any legally binding
authorizations, and contact information including name, address, and phone
number of the duly authorized agent, guardian, conservator, fiduciary, or
other person.



      (4)   Returns or notices required of an estate or a trust
shall be completed and filed by the fiduciary of the estate or trust. Such
fiduciary shall provide, with the filing of the return, appropriate
documentation to support that they are authorized to file a return or notice
on behalf of the taxpayer. This notice shall include any legally binding
authorizations, and contact information including name, address, and phone
number of the fiduciary.



      (5)   No municipal corporation shall deny spouses the ability
to file a joint return.



      (6)   (a)   Each return required to be filed under this
section shall contain the signature of the taxpayer or the taxpayer’s duly
authorized agent and of the person who prepared the return for the taxpayer,
and shall include the taxpayer’s social security number or taxpayer
identification number. Each return shall be verified by a declaration under
penalty of perjury.



         (b)   A taxpayer who is an individual is required to
include, with each annual return, amended return, or request for refund
required under this section, copies of only the following documents: all of
the taxpayer’s Internal Revenue Service form W-2, “Wage and Tax
Statements,” including all information reported on the taxpayer’s federal
W-2, as well as taxable wages reported or withheld for any municipal
corporation; the taxpayer’s Internal Revenue Service form 1040; and, with
respect to an amended tax return or refund request, any other documentation
necessary to support the refund request or the adjustments made in the
amended return. An individual taxpayer who files the annual return required
by this section electronically is not required to provide paper copies of any
of the foregoing to the Tax Administrator unless the Tax Administrator
requests such copies after the return has been filed.



         (c)   A taxpayer that is not an individual is required
to include, with each annual net profit return, amended net profit return, or
request for refund required under this section, copies of only the following
documents: the taxpayer’s Internal Revenue Service form 1041, form 1065,
form 1120, form 1120-REIT, form 1120F, or form 1120S, and, with respect to an
amended tax return or refund request, any other documentation necessary to
support the refund request or the adjustments made in the amended return.



         (d)   A taxpayer that is not an individual and that
files an annual net profit return electronically through the Ohio business
gateway or in some other manner shall either mail the documents required
under this division to the Tax Administrator at the time of filing or, if
electronic submission is available, submit the documents electronically
through the Ohio business gateway or a portal provided by the village. The
department of taxation shall publish a method of electronically submitting
the documents required under this division through the Ohio business gateway
on or before January 1, 2016. The department shall transmit all documents
submitted electronically under this division to the appropriate Tax
Administrator.



         (e)   After a taxpayer files a tax return, the Tax
Administrator shall request, and the taxpayer shall provide, any information,
statements, or documents required by the village to determine and verify the
taxpayer’s municipal income tax liability. The requirements imposed under
division (A)(6) of this section apply regardless of whether the taxpayer
files on a generic form or on a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator.



         (f)   Any other documentation, including schedules,
other municipal income tax returns, or other supporting documentation
necessary to verify credits, income, losses, or other pertinent factors on
the return shall also be included to avoid delay in processing, or
disallowance by the Tax Administrator of undocumented credits or losses.



      (7)   (a)   1.   Except as otherwise provided in this
chapter, each individual income tax return required to be filed under this
section shall be completed and filed as required by the Tax Administrator on
or before the date prescribed for the filing of state individual income tax
returns under R.C. § 5747.08(G). The taxpayer shall complete and file the
return or notice on forms prescribed by the Tax Administrator or on generic
forms, together with remittance made payable to the Village or Tax
Administrator.



            2.   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter,
each annual net profit income tax return required to be filed under this
section by a taxpayer that is not an individual shall be completed and filed
as required by the Tax Administrator on or before the fifteenth day of the
fourth month following the end of the taxpayer’s taxable year or period.
The taxpayer shall complete and file the return or notice on forms prescribed
by the Tax Administrator or on generic forms, together with remittance made
payable to the village or Tax Administrator.



            3.   In the case of individual income tax return
required to be filed by an individual, and net profit income tax return
required to be filed by a taxpayer who is not an individual, no remittance is
required if the amount shown to be due is ten dollars or less.



         (b)   If the Tax Administrator considers it necessary in
order to ensure the payment of the tax imposed by the village in accordance
with this chapter, the Tax Administrator may require taxpayers to file
returns and make payments otherwise than as provided in this division (A),
including taxpayers not otherwise required to file annual returns.



         (c)   With respect to taxpayers to whom § 101.09(B)
applies, to the extent that any provision in this division conflicts with any
provision in § 101.09(B), the provision in § 101.09(B) shall prevail.



      (8)   (a)   For taxable years beginning after 2015, the
village shall not require a taxpayer to remit tax with respect to net profits
if the amount due is $10 or less.



         (b)   Any taxpayer not required to remit tax to the
Village for a taxable year pursuant to division (A)(8)(a) of this section
shall file with the Village an annual net profit return under division
(A)(6)(c) and (d) of this section.



      (9)   This division shall not apply to payments required to be
made under § 101.05(A)(2)(a)2.



         (a)   If any report, claim, statement, or other document
required to be filed, or any payment required to be made, within a prescribed
period or on or before a prescribed date under this chapter is delivered
after that period or that to the Tax Administrator or other municipal
official with which the report, claim, statement, or other document is
required to be filed, or to which the payment is required to be made, the
date of the postmark stamped on the cover in which the report, claim,
statement, or other document, or payment is mailed shall be deemed to be the
date of delivery or the date of payment. “The date of postmark” means, in
the event there is more than one date on the cover, the earliest date
imprinted on the cover by the postal service.



         (b)   If a payment is required to be made by electronic
funds transfer, the payment is considered to be made when the payment is
credited to an account designated by the Tax Administrator for the receipt of
tax payments, except that, when a payment made by electronic funds transfer
is delayed due to circumstances not under the control of the taxpayer, the
payment is considered to be made when the taxpayer submitted the payment. For
purposes of this division (A), SUBMITTED THE PAYMENT means the date which the
taxpayer has designated for the delivery of payment, which may or may not be
the same date as the date the payment was initiated by the taxpayer.



      (10)   The amounts withheld for the village by an employer,
the agent of an employer, or other payer as described in § 101.05(A) shall
be allowed to the recipient of the compensation as credits against payment of
the tax imposed on the recipient unless the amounts withheld were not
remitted to the village and the recipient colluded with the employer, agent,
or other payer in connection with the failure to remit the amounts withheld.



      (11)   Each return required by the village to be filed in
accordance with this section shall include a box that the taxpayer may check
to authorize another person, including a tax return preparer who prepared the
return, to communicate with the Tax Administrator about matters pertaining to
the return. The return or instructions accompanying the return shall indicate
that by checking the box the taxpayer authorizes the Tax Administrator to
contact the preparer or other person concerning questions that arise during
the examination or other review of the return and authorizes the preparer or
other person only to provide the Tax Administrator with information that is
missing from the return, to contact the Tax Administrator for information
about the examination or other review of the return or the status of the
taxpayer’s refund or payments, and to respond to notices about mathematical
errors, offsets, or return preparation that the taxpayer has received from
the Tax Administrator and has shown to the preparer or other person.
Authorization by the taxpayer of another person to communicate with the Tax
Administrator about matters pertaining to the return does not preclude the
Tax Administrator from contacting the taxpayer regarding such matters.



      (12)   The Tax Administrator of the village shall accept for
filing a generic form of any income tax return, report, or document required
by the village in accordance with this chapter, provided that the generic
form, once completed and filed, contains all of the information required by
ordinances, resolutions, or rules adopted by the village or Tax
Administrator, and provided that the taxpayer or tax return preparer filing
the generic form otherwise complies with the provisions of this chapter and
of the village’s ordinance or resolution governing the filing of returns,
reports, or documents.



      (13)   When income tax returns, reports, or other documents
require the signature of a tax return preparer, the Tax Administrator shall
accept a facsimile of such a signature in lieu of a manual signature.



      (14)   A Person may notify the Tax Administrator that the
person does not expect to be a taxpayer with respect to the municipal
corporation for a taxable year if both of the following conditions apply:



         (a)   The person was required to file a tax return with
the municipal corporation for the immediately preceding taxable year because
the person performed services at a worksite location within the municipal
corporation, and the person has filed all appropriate and required returns
and remitted all applicable income tax and withholding payments as provided
by this chapter. The Tax Administrator is not required to accept an affidavit
from a taxpayer who has not complied with the provisions of this chapter.



         (b)   The person no longer provides services in the
municipal corporation, and does not expect to be subject to the municipal
corporation’s income tax for the taxable year. The person shall provide the
notice in a signed affidavit that briefly explains the person’s
circumstances, including the location of the previous worksite location and
the last date on which the person performed services or made any sales within
the municipal corporation. The affidavit also shall include the following
statement: “The affiant has no plans to perform any services within the
municipal corporation, make any sales in the municipal corporation, or
otherwise become subject to the tax levied by the municipal corporation
during the taxable year. If the affiant does become subject to the tax levied
by the municipal corporation for the taxable year, the affiant agrees to be
considered a taxpayer and to properly register as a taxpayer with the
municipal corporation, if such a registration is required by the municipal
corporation’s resolutions, ordinances, or rules.” The person shall sign
the affidavit under penalty of perjury.



         (c)   If a person submits an affidavit described above
of this section, the Tax Administrator shall not require the person to file
any tax return for the taxable year unless the Tax Administrator possesses
information that conflicts with the affidavit or if the circumstances
described in the affidavit change, or the taxpayer has engaged in activity
which results in work being performed, services provided, sales made, or
other activity that results in municipal taxable income reportable to the
Village in the taxable year. It shall be the responsibility of the taxpayer
to comply with the provisions of this chapter relating to the reporting and
filing of municipal taxable income on an annual municipal income tax return,
even if an affidavit has been filed with the Tax Administrator for the
taxable year. Nothing in division (A)(14) of this section prohibits the Tax
Administrator from performing an audit of the person.



(R.C. § 718.05)



   (B)   Return and payment of tax; individuals serving in combat zone.



      (1)   Each member of the national guard of any state and each
member of a reserve component of the armed forces of the United States called
to active duty pursuant to an executive order issued by the President of the
United States or an act of the Congress of the United States, and each
civilian serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency
operation in support of the armed forces, may apply to the Tax Administrator
for both an extension of time for filing of the return and an extension of
time for payment of taxes required by the village in accordance with this
chapter during the period of the member’s or civilian’s duty service and
for 180 days thereafter. The application shall be filed on or before the one
hundred eightieth day after the member’s or civilian’s duty terminates.
An applicant shall provide such evidence as the Tax Administrator considers
necessary to demonstrate eligibility for the



extension.



      (2)   (a)   If the Tax Administrator ascertains that an
applicant is qualified for an extension under this section, the Tax
Administrator shall enter into a contract with the applicant for the payment
of the tax in installments that begin on the one hundred eighty-first day
after the applicant’s active duty or service terminates. Except as provided
in division (B)(2)(c) of this section, the Tax Administrator may prescribe
such contract terms as the Tax Administrator considers appropriate.



         (b)   If the Tax Administrator ascertains that an
applicant is qualified for an extension under this section, the applicant
shall neither be required to file any return, report, or other tax document
nor be required to pay any tax otherwise due to the village before the one
hundred eighty-first day after the applicant’s active duty or service
terminates.



         (c)   Taxes paid pursuant to a contract entered into
under division (B)(2)(a) of this section are not delinquent. The Tax
Administrator shall not require any payments of penalties or interest in
connection with those taxes for the extension period.



      (3)   (a)   Nothing in this division denies to any person
described in this division the application of divisions (B)(1) and (2) of
this section.



         (b)   1.   A qualifying taxpayer who is eligible for
an extension under the Internal Revenue Code shall receive both an extension
of time in which to file any return, report, or other tax document and an
extension of time in which to make any payment of taxes required by the
village in accordance with this chapter. The length of any extension granted
under division (B)(3)(b)1. of this section shall be equal to the length of
the corresponding extension that the taxpayer receives under the Internal
Revenue Code. As used in this section, “qualifying taxpayer” means a
member of the national guard or a member of a reserve component of the armed
forces of the United States called to active duty pursuant to either an
executive order issued by the President of the United States or an act of the
Congress of the United States, or a civilian serving as support personnel in
a combat zone or contingency operation in support of the armed forces.



            2.   Taxes the payment of which is extended in
accordance with division (B)(3)(b)1. of this section are not delinquent
during the extension period. Such taxes become delinquent on the first day
after the expiration of the extension period if the taxes are not paid prior
to that date. The Tax Administrator shall not require any payment of
penalties or interest in connection with those taxes for the extension
period. The Tax Administrator shall not include any period of extension
granted under division (B)(3)(b)1. of this section in calculating the penalty
or interest due on any unpaid tax.



      (4)   For each taxable year to which division (B)(1), (2), or
(3) of this section applies to a taxpayer, the provisions of divisions
(B)(2)(b) and (c) or (B)(3) of this section, as applicable, apply to the
spouse of that taxpayer if the filing status of the spouse and the taxpayer
is married filing jointly for that year.



(R.C. § 718.052)



   (C)   Use of Ohio Business Gateway; types of filings authorized.



      (1)   Any taxpayer subject to municipal income taxation with
respect to the taxpayer’s net profit from a business or profession may file
any municipal income tax return or, estimated municipal income tax return, or
extension for filing a municipal income tax return, and may make payment of
amounts shown to be due on such returns, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.



      (2)   Any employer, agent of an employer, or other payer may
report the amount of municipal income tax withheld from qualifying wages, and
may make remittance of such amounts, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.



      (3)   Nothing in this section affects the due dates for filing
employer withholding tax returns or deposit of any required tax.



      (4)   The use of the Ohio Business Gateway by municipal
corporations, taxpayers, or other persons does not affect the legal rights of
municipalities or taxpayers as otherwise permitted by law. The State of Ohio
shall not be a party to the administration of municipal income taxes or to an
appeal of a municipal income tax matter, except as otherwise specifically
provided by law.



      (5)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting
or removing the authority of any municipal corporation to administer, audit,
and enforce the provisions of its municipal income tax.



(R.C. § 718.051)



   (D)   Extension of time to file.



      (1)   Any taxpayer that has duly requested an automatic
six-month extension for filing the taxpayer’s federal income tax return
shall automatically receive an extension for the filing of a municipal income
tax return. The extended due date of the municipal income tax return shall be
the fifteenth day of the tenth month after the last day of the taxable year
to which the return relates.



      (2)   Any taxpayer that qualifies for an automatic federal
extension for a period other than six months for filing the taxpayer’s
federal income tax return shall automatically receive an extension for the
filing of a municipal income tax return. The extended due date of the
municipal income tax return shall be the same as that of the extended federal
income tax return.



      (3)   A taxpayer that has not requested or received a six
month extension for filing the taxpayer’s federal income tax return may
request that the Tax Administrator grant the taxpayer a six month extension
of the date for filing the taxpayer’s municipal income tax return. If the
request is received by the Tax Administrator on or before the date the
municipal income tax return is due, the Tax Administrator shall grant the
taxpayer’s requested extension.



      (4)   An extension of time to file under this chapter is not
an extension of the time to pay any tax due unless the Tax Administrator
grants an extension of that date.



      (5)   If the State Tax Commissioner extends for all taxpayers
the date for filing state income tax returns under § 5747.08(G), a taxpayer
shall automatically receive an extension for the filing of a municipal income
tax return. The extended due date of the municipal income tax return shall be
the same as the extended due date of the state income tax return.



(R.C. § 718.05)



   (E)   Amended returns.



      (1)   (a)   A taxpayer shall file an amended return with
the Tax Administrator in such form as the Tax Administrator requires if any
of the facts, figures, computations, or attachments required in the
taxpayer’s annual return to determine the tax due levied by the village in
accordance with this chapter must be altered.



         (b)   Within 60 days after the final determination of
any federal or state tax liability affecting the taxpayer’s municipal tax
liability, that taxpayer shall make and file an amended municipal return
showing income subject to the municipal income tax based upon such final
determination of federal or state tax liability, and pay any additional
municipal income tax shown due thereon or make a claim for refund of any
overpayment, unless the tax or overpayment is $10 or less.



         (c)   If a taxpayer intends to file an amended
consolidated municipal income tax return, or to amend its type of return from
a separate return to a consolidated return, based on the taxpayer’s
consolidated federal income tax return, the taxpayer shall notify the Tax
Administrator before filing the amended return.



      (2)   (a)   In the case of an underpayment, the amended
return shall be accompanied by payment of any combined additional tax due
together with any penalty and interest thereon. If the combined tax shown to
be due is $10 or less, such amount need not accompany the amended return.
Except as provided under division (E)(2)(b) of this section, the amended
return shall not reopen those facts, figures, computations, or attachments
from a previously filed return that are not affected, either directly or
indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer’s federal or state income tax
return unless the applicable statute of limitations for civil actions or
prosecutions under § 101.19 has not expired for a previously filed return.



         (b)   The additional tax to be paid shall not exceed the
amount of tax that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and
attachments were reopened.



      (3)   (a)   In the case of an overpayment, a request for
refund may be filed under this division within the period prescribed by §
101.19(A)(2) for filing the amended return even if it is filed beyond the
period prescribed in that division if it otherwise conforms to the
requirements of that division. If the amount of the refund is ten dollars or
less, no refund need be paid by the village to the taxpayer. Except as set
forth in division (E)(3)(b) of this section, a request filed under this
division shall claim refund of overpayments resulting from alterations to
only those facts, figures, computations, or attachments required in the
taxpayer’s annual return that are affected, either directly or indirectly,
by the adjustment to the taxpayer’s federal or state income tax return
unless it is also filed within the time prescribed in § 101.09(F). Except as
set forth in division (E)(3)(b) of this section, the request shall not reopen
those facts,



figures, computations, or attachments that are not affected, either directly
or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer’s federal or state income
tax return.



         (b)   The amount to be refunded shall not exceed the
amount of refund that would be due if all facts, figures, computations, and
attachments were reopened.



(R.C. §§ 718.12, 718.41)



   (F)   Refunds.



      (1)   Upon receipt of a request for a refund, the Tax
Administrator shall refund to employers, agents of employers, other payers,
or taxpayers, with respect to any income or withholding tax levied by the
village:



         (a)   Overpayments of more than ten dollars;



         (b)   Amounts paid erroneously if the refund requested
exceeds ten dollars.



      (2)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter,
returns setting forth a request for refund shall be filed with the Tax
Administrator, within three years after the tax was due or paid, whichever is
later. Any documentation that substantiates the taxpayer’s claim for a
refund must be included with the return filing. Failure to remit all
documentation, including schedules, other municipal income tax returns, or
other supporting documentation necessary to verify credits, income, losses or
other pertinent factors on the return will cause delay in processing, and/or
disallowance of undocumented credits or losses.



         (b)   On filing of the refund request, the Tax
Administrator shall determine the amount of refund due and certify such
amount to the appropriate municipal corporation official for payment. Except
as provided in division (F)(2)(c) of this section, the administrator shall
issue an assessment to any taxpayer whose request for refund is fully or
partially denied. The assessment shall state the amount of the refund that
was denied, the reasons for the denial, and instructions for appealing the
assessment.



         (c)   If a Tax Administrator denies in whole or in part
a refund request included within the taxpayer’s originally filed annual
income tax return, the Tax Administrator shall notify the taxpayer, in
writing, of the amount of the refund that was denied, the reasons for the
denial, and instructions for requesting an assessment that may be appealed
under § 101.18.



      (3)   A request for a refund that is received after the last
day for filing specified in division (F)(2) of this section shall be
considered to have been filed in a timely manner if any of the following
situations exist:



         (a)   The request is delivered by the postal service,
and the earliest postal service postmark on the cover in which the request is
enclosed is not later than the last day for filing the request.



         (b)   The request is delivered by the postal service,
the only postmark on the cover in which the request is enclosed was affixed
by a private postal meter, the date of that postmark is not later than the
last day for filing the request, and the request is received within seven
days of such last day.



         (c)   The request is delivered by the postal service, no
postmark date was affixed to the cover in which the request is enclosed or
the date of the postmark so affixed is not legible, and the request is
received within seven days of the last day for making the request.



      (4)   Interest shall be allowed and paid on any overpayment by
a taxpayer of any municipal income tax obligation from the date of the
overpayment until the date of the refund of the overpayment, except that if
any overpayment is refunded within ninety days after the final filing date of
the annual return or ninety days after the completed return is filed,
whichever is later, no interest shall be allowed on the refund. For the
purpose of computing the payment of interest on amounts overpaid, no



amount of tax for any taxable year shall be considered to have been paid
before the date on which the return on which the tax is reported is due,
without regard to any extension of time for filing that return. Interest
shall be paid at the interest rate described in § 101.10(A)(4).



      (5)   As used in this division (F), WITHHOLDING TAX has the
same meaning as in § 101.10.



(R.C. § 718.19)  (Ord. 2015-12, passed 11-9-15)



§ 101.10  PENALTY, INTEREST, FEES, AND CHARGES.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      (1)   APPLICABLE LAW means this chapter, the resolutions,
ordinances, codes, directives, instructions, and rules adopted by the village
provided such resolutions, ordinances, codes, directives, instructions, and
rules impose or directly or indirectly address the levy, payment, remittance,
or filing requirements of a municipal income tax.



      (2)   FEDERAL SHORT-TERM RATE means the rate of the average
market yield on outstanding marketable obligations of the United States with
remaining periods to maturity of three years or less, as determined under
section 1274 of the Internal Revenue Code, for July of the current year.



      (3)   INCOME TAX, ESTIMATED INCOME TAX, and WITHHOLDING TAX
mean any income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding tax imposed by a
municipal corporation pursuant to applicable law, including at any time
before or after January 1, 2016.



      (4)   INTEREST RATE AS DESCRIBED IN DIVISION (A) OF THIS
SECTION means the federal short-term rate, rounded to the nearest whole
number percent, plus 5%. The rate shall apply for the calendar year next
following the July of the year in which the federal short-term rate is
determined in accordance with division (A)(2) of this section.



      (5)   RETURN includes any tax return, report, reconciliation,
schedule, and other document required to be filed with a Tax Administrator or
municipal corporation by a taxpayer, employer, any agent of the employer, or
any other payer pursuant to applicable law, including at any time before or
after January 1, 2016.



      (6)   UNPAID ESTIMATED INCOME TAX means estimated income tax
due but not paid by the date the tax is required to be paid under applicable
law.



      (7)   UNPAID INCOME TAX means income tax due but not paid by
the date the income tax is required to be paid under applicable law.



      (8)   UNPAID WITHHOLDING TAX means withholding tax due but not
paid by the date the withholding tax is required to be paid under applicable
law.



      (9)   WITHHOLDING TAX includes amounts an employer, any agent
of an employer, or any other payer did not withhold in whole or in part from
an employee's qualifying wages, but that, under applicable law, the employer,
agent, or other payer is required to withhold from an employee's qualifying
wages.



   (B)   (1)   This section shall apply to the following:



         (a)   Any return required to be filed under applicable
law for taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016;



         (b)   Income tax, estimated income tax, and withholding
tax required to be paid or remitted to the village on or after January 1,
2016 for taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016.



      (2)   This section does not apply to returns required to be
filed or payments required to be made before January 1, 2016, regardless of
the filing or payment date. Returns required to be filed or payments required
to be made before January 1, 2016, but filed or paid after that date shall be
subject to the ordinances or rules, as adopted from time to time before
January 1, 2016 of this village.



   (C)   The village shall impose on a taxpayer, employer, any agent of
the employer, and any other payer, and will attempt to collect, the interest
amounts and penalties prescribed in this section when the taxpayer, employer,
any agent of the employer, or any other payer for any reason fails, in whole
or in part, to make to the village timely and full payment or remittance of
income tax, estimated income tax, or withholding tax or to file timely with
the village any return required to be filed.



      (1)   Interest shall be imposed at the rate defined as
"interest rate as described in division (A) of this section," per annum, on
all unpaid income tax, unpaid estimated income tax, and unpaid withholding
tax. This imposition of interest shall be assessed per month, or fraction of
a month.



      (2)   With respect to unpaid income tax and unpaid estimated
income tax, a penalty equal to 15% of the amount not timely paid shall be
imposed.



      (3)   With respect to any unpaid withholding tax, a penalty
equal to not exceeding 50% of the amount not timely paid shall be imposed.



      (4)   With respect to returns other than estimated income tax
returns, the village shall impose a monthly penalty of $25 for each failure
to timely file each return, regardless of the liability shown thereon for
each month, or any fraction thereof, during which the return remains unfiled
regardless of the liability shown thereon. The penalty shall not exceed a
total of $150 in assessed penalty for each failure to timely file a return.



   (D)   With respect to income taxes, estimated income taxes,
withholding taxes, and returns, the village shall not impose, seek to
collect, or collect any penalty, amount of interest, charges or additional
fees not described in this section.



   (E)   With respect to income taxes, estimated income taxes,
withholding taxes, and returns, the village shall not refund or credit any
penalty, amount of interest, charges, or additional fees that were properly
imposed or collected before January 1, 2016.



   (F)   The Tax Administrator may, in the Tax Administrator's sole
discretion, abate or partially abate penalties or interest imposed under this
section when the Tax Administrator deems such abatement or partial abatement
to be appropriate. Such abatement or partial abatement shall be properly
documented and maintained on the record of the taxpayer who received benefit
of such abatement or partial abatement.



   (G)   The village may impose on the taxpayer, employer, any agent of
the employer, or any other payer the village's post-judgment collection costs
and fees, including attorney's fees.



(R.C. § 718.27)  (Ord. 2015-12, passed 11-9-15; Am. Ord. 2018-6, passed
3-12-18)



§ 101.11  AUDIT.



   (A)   At or before the commencement of an audit, as defined in §
101.03, the Tax Administrator shall provide to the taxpayer a written
description of the roles of the Tax Administrator and of the taxpayer during
an audit and a statement of the taxpayer’s rights, including any right to
obtain a refund of an overpayment of tax. At or before the commencement of an
audit, the Tax Administrator shall inform the taxpayer when the audit is
considered to have commenced.



   (B)   Except in cases involving suspected criminal activity, the Tax
Administrator shall conduct an audit of a taxpayer during regular business
hours and after providing reasonable notice to the taxpayer. A taxpayer who
is unable to comply with a proposed time for an audit on the grounds that the
proposed time would cause inconvenience or hardship must offer reasonable
alternative dates for the audit.



   (C)   (1)   At all stages of an audit by the Tax Administrator, a
taxpayer is entitled to be assisted or represented by an attorney,
accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner. The Tax Administrator
shall prescribe a form by which a taxpayer may designate such a person to
assist or represent the taxpayer in the conduct of any proceedings resulting
from actions by the Tax Administrator. If a taxpayer has not submitted such a
form, the Tax Administrator may accept other evidence, as the Tax
Administrator considers appropriate, that a person is the authorized
representative of a taxpayer.



      (2)   A taxpayer may refuse to answer any questions asked by
the person conducting an audit until the taxpayer has an opportunity to
consult with the taxpayer’s attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax
practitioner. This division does not authorize the practice of law by a
person who is not an attorney.



   (D)   A taxpayer may record, electronically or otherwise, the audit
examination.



   (E)   The failure of the Tax Administrator to comply with a
provision of this section shall neither excuse a taxpayer from payment of any
taxes owed by the taxpayer nor cure any procedural defect in a taxpayer’s
case.



   (F)   If the Tax Administrator fails to substantially comply with
the provisions of this section, the Tax Administrator, upon application by
the taxpayer, shall excuse the taxpayer from penalties and interest arising
from the audit.



(R.C. § 718.36)  (Ord. 2015-12, passed 11-9-15)



§ 101.12  ROUNDING.



   A person may round to the nearest whole dollar all amounts the person
is required to enter on any return, report, voucher, or other document
required under this chapter. Any fractional part of a dollar that equals or
exceeds $0.50 shall be rounded to the next whole dollar, and any fractional
part of a dollar that is less than $0.50 shall be dropped, rounding down to
the nearest whole dollar. If a person chooses to round amounts entered on a
document, the person shall round all amounts entered on the document.



(R.C. § 718.25)  (Ord. 2015-12, passed 11-9-15)



§ 101.13  AUTHORITY AND POWERS OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   Authority of Tax Administrator; administrative powers of the
Tax Administrator. The Tax Administrator has the authority to perform all
duties and functions necessary and appropriate to implement the provisions of
this chapter, including without limitation:



      (1)   Exercise all powers whatsoever of an inquisitorial
nature as provided by law, including, the right to inspect books, accounts,
records, memorandums, and federal and state income tax returns, to examine
persons under oath, to issue orders or subpoenas for the production of books,
accounts, papers, records, documents, and testimony, to take depositions, to
apply to a court for attachment proceedings as for contempt, to approve
vouchers for the fees of officers and witnesses, and to administer oaths;
provided that the powers referred to in this division of this section shall
be exercised by the Tax Administrator only in connection with the performance
of the duties respectively assigned to the Tax Administrator under a
municipal corporation income tax ordinance or resolution adopted in
accordance with this chapter;



      (2)   Appoint agents and prescribe their powers and duties;



      (3)   Confer and meet with officers of other municipal
corporations and states and officers of the United States on any matters
pertaining to their respective official duties as provided by law;



      (4)   Exercise the authority provided by law, including orders
from bankruptcy courts, relative to remitting or refunding taxes, including
penalties and interest thereon, illegally or erroneously imposed or
collected, or for any other reason overpaid, and, in addition, the Tax
Administrator may investigate any claim of overpayment and make a written
statement of the Tax Administrator’s findings, and, if the Tax
Administrator finds that there has been an overpayment, approve and issue a
refund payable to the taxpayer, the taxpayer’s assigns, or legal
representative as provided in this chapter;



      (5)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to
consenting to the compromise and settlement of tax claims;



      (6)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to the
use of alternative apportionment methods by taxpayers in accordance with §
101.06(B);



      (7)   Make all tax findings, determinations, computations,
assessments and orders the Tax Administrator is by law authorized and
required to make and, pursuant to time limitations provided by law, on the
Tax Administrator’s own motion, review, redetermine, or correct any tax
findings, determinations, computations, assessments or orders the Tax
Administrator has made, but the Tax Administrator shall not review,
redetermine, or correct any tax finding, determination, computation,
assessment or order which the Tax Administrator has made for which an appeal
has been filed with the Local Board of Tax Review or other appropriate
tribunal, unless such appeal or application is withdrawn by the appellant or
applicant, is dismissed, or is otherwise final;



      (8)   Destroy any or all returns or other tax documents in the
manner authorized by law;



      (9)   Enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to simplify the
withholding obligations described in § 101.05(A).



(R.C. § 718.24)



   (B)   Authority of Tax Administrator; compromise of claim and
payment over time.



      (1)   As used in this division (B), CLAIM means a claim for an
amount payable to the village that arises pursuant to the municipal income
tax imposed in accordance with this chapter.



      (2)   The Tax Administrator may do either of the following if
such action is in the best interests of the Village:



         (a)   Compromise a claim;



         (b)   Extend for a reasonable period the time for
payment of a claim by agreeing to accept monthly or other periodic payments,
upon such terms and conditions as the Tax Administrator may require.



      (3)   The Tax Administrator’s rejection of a compromise or
payment-over-time agreement proposed by a person with respect to a claim
shall not be appealable.



      (4)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect
to a claim shall be binding upon and shall inure to the benefit of only the
parties to the compromise or agreement, and shall not extinguish or otherwise
affect the liability of any other person.



      (5)   (a)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement
with respect to a claim shall be void if the taxpayer defaults under the
compromise or agreement or if the compromise or agreement was obtained by
fraud or by misrepresentation of a material fact. Any amount that was due
before the compromise or agreement and that is unpaid shall remain due, and
any penalties or interest that would have accrued in the absence of the
compromise or agreement shall continue to accrue and be due.



         (b)   The Tax Administrator shall have sole discretion
to determine whether or not penalty, interest, charges or applicable fees
will be assessed through the duration of any compromise or payment-over-time
agreement.



      (6)   The Tax Administrator may require that the taxpayer
provide detailed financial documentation and information, in order to
determine whether or not a payment-over-time agreement will be authorized.
The taxpayer’s failure to provide the necessary and required information by
the Tax Administrator shall preclude consideration of a payment-over-time
agreement.



(R.C. § 718.28)



   (C)   Authority of Tax Administrator; right to examine.



      (1)   The Tax Administrator, or any authorized agent or
employee thereof may examine the books, papers, records, and federal and
state income tax returns of any employer, taxpayer, or other person that is
subject to, or that the Tax Administrator believes is subject to, the
provisions of this chapter for the purpose of verifying the accuracy of any
return made or, if no return was filed, to ascertain the tax due under this
chapter. Upon written request by the Tax Administrator or a duly authorized
agent or employee thereof, every employer, taxpayer, or other person subject
to this section is required to furnish the opportunity for the Tax
Administrator, authorized agent, or employee to investigate and examine such
books, papers, records, and federal and state income tax returns at a
reasonable time and place designated in the request.



      (2)   The records and other documents of any taxpayer,
employer, or other person that is subject to, or that a Tax Administrator
believes is subject to, the provisions of this chapter shall be open to the
Tax Administrator’s inspection during business hours and shall be preserved
for a period of six years following the end of the taxable year to which the
records or documents relate, unless the Tax Administrator, in writing,
consents to their destruction within that period, or by order requires that
they be kept longer. The Tax Administrator of a municipal corporation may
require any person, by notice served on that person, to keep such records as
the Tax Administrator determines necessary to show whether or not that person
is liable, and the extent of such liability, for the income tax levied by the
village or for the withholding of such tax.



      (3)   The Tax Administrator may examine under oath any person
that the Tax Administrator reasonably believes has knowledge concerning any
income that was or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction
tending to affect such income. The Tax Administrator may, for this purpose,
compel any such person to attend a hearing or examination and to produce any
books, papers, records, and federal and state income tax returns in such
person’s possession or control. The person may be assisted or represented
by an attorney, accountant, bookkeeper, or other tax practitioner at any such
hearing or examination. This division does not authorize the practice of law
by a person who is not an attorney.



      (4)   No person issued written notice by the Tax Administrator
compelling attendance at a hearing or examination or the production of books,
papers, records, or federal and state income tax returns under this section
shall fail to comply.



(R.C. § 718.23)



   (D)   Authority of Tax Administrator; requiring identifying
information.



      (1)   The Tax Administrator may require any person filing a
tax document with the Tax Administrator to provide identifying information,
which may include the person’s social security number, federal employer
identification number, or other identification number requested by the Tax
Administrator. A person required by the Tax Administrator to provide
identifying information that has experienced any change with respect to that
information shall notify the Tax Administrator of the change before, or upon,
filing the next tax document requiring the identifying information.



      (2)   (a)   If the Tax Administrator makes a request for
identifying information and the Tax Administrator does not receive valid
identifying information within thirty days of making the request, nothing in
this chapter prohibits the Tax Administrator from imposing a penalty upon the
person to whom the request was directed pursuant to § 101.10, in addition to
any applicable penalty described in § 101.99.



         (b)   If a person required by the Tax Administrator to
provide identifying information does not notify the Tax Administrator of a
change with respect to that information as required under division (D)(1) of
this section within 30 days after filing the next tax document requiring such
identifying information, nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax
Administrator from imposing a penalty pursuant to § 101.10.



         (c)   The penalties provided for under divisions
(D)(2)(a) and (b) of this section may be billed and imposed in the same
manner as the tax or fee with respect to which the identifying information is
sought and are in addition to any applicable criminal penalties described in
§ 101.99 for a violation of § 101.15, and any other penalties that may be
imposed by the Tax Administrator by law.



(R.C. § 718.26)  (Ord. 2015-12, passed 11-9-15)



§ 101.14  CONFIDENTIALITY.



   (A)   Any information gained as a result of returns, investigations,
hearings, or verifications required or authorized by R.C. § 718 or by the
charter or ordinance of the village is confidential, and no person shall
access or disclose such information except in accordance with a proper
judicial order or in connection with the performance of that person’s
official duties or the official business of the village as authorized by R.C.
§ 718 or the charter or ordinance authorizing the levy. The Tax
Administrator or a designee thereof may furnish copies of returns filed or
otherwise received under this chapter and other related taxjnformation to the
Internal Revenue Service, the State Tax Commissioner, and Tax Administrators
of other municipal corporations.



   (B)   This section does not prohibit the village from publishing or
disclosing statistics in a form that does not disclose information with
respect to particular taxpayers.



(R.C. § 718.13)  (Ord. 2015-12, passed 11-9-15)



§ 101.15  FRAUD.



   No person shall knowingly make, present, aid, or assist in the
preparation or presentation of a false or fraudulent report, return,
schedule, statement, claim, or document authorized or required by municipal
corporation ordinance or state law to be filed with the Tax Administrator, or
knowingly procure, counsel, or advise the preparation or presentation of such
report, return, schedule, statement, claim, or document, or knowingly change,
alter, or amend, or knowingly procure, counsel or advise such change,
alteration, or amendment of the records upon which such report, return,
schedule, statement, claim, or document is based with intent to defraud the
Village or the Tax Administrator.



(R.C. § 718.35)  (Ord. 2015-12, passed 11-9-15)



§ 101.16  OPINION OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR.



   (A)   An “opinion of the Tax Administrator” means an opinion
issued under this section with respect to prospective municipal income tax
liability. It does not include ordinary correspondence of the Tax
Administrator.



   (B)   A taxpayer may submit a written request for an opinion of the
Tax Administrator as to whether or how certain income, source of income, or a
certain activity or transaction will be taxed. The written response of the
Tax Administrator shall be an “opinion of the Tax Administrator” and
shall bind the Tax Administrator, in accordance with divisions (C), (G), and
(H) of this section, provided all of the following conditions are satisfied:



      (1)   The taxpayer’s request fully and accurately describes
the specific facts or circumstances relevant to a determination of the
taxability of the income, source of income, activity, or transaction, and, if
an activity or transaction, all parties involved in the activity or
transaction are clearly identified by name, location, or other pertinent
facts.



      (2)   The request relates to a tax imposed by the village in
accordance with this chapter.



      (3)   The Tax Administrator’s response is signed by the Tax
Administrator and designated as an “opinion of the Tax Administrator.”



   (C)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator shall remain in effect and
shall protect the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and who
reasonably relies on it from liability for any taxes, penalty, or interest
otherwise chargeable on the activity or transaction specifically held by the
Tax Administrator’s opinion to be taxable in a particular manner or not to
be subject to taxation for any taxable years that may be specified in the
opinion, or until the earliest of the following dates:



      (1)   The effective date of a written revocation by the Tax
Administrator sent to the taxpayer by certified mail, return receipt
requested. The effective date of the revocation shall be the taxpayer’s
date of receipt or one year after the issuance of the opinion, whichever is
later;



      (2)   The effective date of any amendment or enactment of a
relevant section of the Ohio Revised Code, uncodified state law, or the
village’s income tax ordinance that would substantially change the analysis
and conclusion of the opinion of the Tax Administrator;



      (3)   The date on which a court issues an opinion establishing
or changing relevant case law with respect to the Ohio Revised Code,
uncodified state law, or the village’s income tax ordinance;



      (4)   If the opinion of the Tax Administrator was based on the
interpretation of federal law, the effective date of any change in the
relevant federal statutes or regulations, or the date on which a court issues
an opinion establishing or changing relevant case law with respect to federal
statutes or regulations;



      (5)   The effective date of any change in the taxpayer’s
material facts or circumstances;



      (6)   The effective date of the expiration of the opinion, if
specified in the opinion.



   (D)   (1)   A taxpayer is not relieved of tax liability for any
activity or transaction related to a request for an opinion that contained
any misrepresentation or omission of one or more material facts.



      (2)   If the taxpayer knowingly has misrepresented the
pertinent facts or omitted material facts with intent to defraud the village
in order to obtain a more favorable opinion, the taxpayer may be in violation
of § 101.15.



   (E)   If a Tax Administrator provides written advice under this
section, the opinion shall include a statement that:



      (1)   The tax consequences stated in the opinion may be
subject to change for any of the reasons stated in division (C) of this
section;



      (2)   It is the duty of the taxpayer to be aware of such
changes.



   (F)   A Tax Administrator may refuse to offer an opinion on any
request received under this section.



   (G)   This section binds a Tax Administrator only with respect to
opinions of the Tax Administrator issued on or after January 1, 2016.



   (H)   An opinion of a Tax Administrator binds that Tax Administrator
only with respect to the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and does
not bind the Tax Administrator of any other municipal corporation.



   (I)   The Tax Administrator shall make available the text of all
opinions issued under this section, except those opinions prepared for a
taxpayer who has requested that the text of the opinion remain confidential.
In no event shall the text of an opinion be made available until the Tax
Administrator has removed all information that identifies the taxpayer and
any other parties involved in the activity or transaction.



   (J)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator issued under this section
or a refusal to offer an opinion under division (F) may not be appealed.



(R.C. § 718.38)  (Ord. 2015-12, passed 11-9-15)



§ 101.17  ASSESSMENT; APPEAL BASED ON PRESUMPTION OF DELIVERY.



   (A)   (1)   The Tax Administrator shall serve an assessment
either by personal service, by certified mail, or by a delivery service
authorized under R.C. § 5703.056.



      (2)   The Tax Administrator may deliver the assessment through
alternative means as provided in this section, including, but not limited to,
delivery by secure electronic mail. Such alternative delivery method must be
authorized by the person subject to the assessment.



      (3)   Once service of the assessment has been made by the Tax
Administrator or other municipal official, or the designee of either, the
person to whom the assessment is directed may protest the ruling of that
assessment by filing an appeal with the Local Board of Tax Review within
sixty days after the receipt of service. The delivery of an assessment of the
Tax Administrator as prescribed in R.C. § 718.18 is prima facie evidence
that delivery is complete and that the assessment is served.



   (B)   (1)   A person may challenge the presumption of delivery
and service as set forth in this division. A person disputing the presumption
of delivery and service under this section bears the burden of proving by a
preponderance of the evidence that the address to which the assessment was
sent was not an address with which the person was associated at the time the
Tax Administrator originally mailed the assessment by certified mail. For the
purposes of this section, a person is associated with an address at the time
the Tax Administrator originally mailed the assessment if, at that time, the
person was residing, receiving legal documents, or conducting business at the
address; or if, before that time, the person had conducted business at the
address and, when the assessment was mailed, the person’s agent or the
person’s affiliate was conducting business at the address. For the purposes
of this section, a person’s affiliate is any other person that, at the time
the assessment was mailed, owned or controlled at least twenty per cent, as
determined by voting rights, of the addressee’s business.



      (2)   If a person elects to appeal an assessment on the basis
described in division (B)(1) of this section, and if that assessment is
subject to collection and is not otherwise appealable, the person must do so
within 60 days after the initial contact by the Tax Administrator or other
municipal official, or the designee of either, with the person. Nothing in
this division prevents the Tax Administrator or other official from entering
into a compromise with the person if the person does not actually file such
an appeal with the Local Board of Tax Review.



(R.C. § 718.18)  (Ord. 2015-12, passed 11-9-15)



§ 101.18  LOCAL BOARD OF TAX REVIEW; APPEAL TO LOCAL BOARD OF TAX REVIEW.



   (A)   (1)   The legislative authority of the village shall
maintain a Local Board of Tax Review to hear appeals as provided in R.C.
Chapter 718.



      (2)   The Local Board of Tax Review shall consist of three
members. Two members shall be appointed by Village Council, and may not be
employees, elected officials, or contractors with the village at any time
during their term or in the five years immediately preceding the date of
appointment. One member shall be appointed by the Village Manager. This
member may be an employee of the village, but may not be the director of
finance or equivalent officer, or the Tax Administrator or other similar
official or an employee directly involved in municipal tax matters, or any
direct subordinate thereof.



      (3)   The term for members of the Local Board of Tax Review
appointed by Village Council shall be two years. There is no limit on the
number of terms that a member may serve should the member be reappointed by
the Council. The board member appointed by the Village Manager shall serve at
the discretion of the Manager.



      (4)   Members of the board of tax review appointed by Council
may be removed by Council as set forth in R.C. § 718.11(A)(4).



      (5)   A member of the board who, for any reason, ceases to
meet the qualifications for the position prescribed by this section shall
resign immediately by operation of law.



      (6)   A vacancy in an unexpired term shall be filled in the
same manner as the original appointment within 60 days of when the vacancy
was created. Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the
expiration of the term for which the member’s predecessor was appointed
shall hold office for the remainder of such term. No vacancy on the board
shall impair the power and authority of the remaining members to exercise all
the powers of the board.



      (7)   If a member is temporarily unable to serve on the board
due to a conflict of interest, illness, absence, or similar reason, the
Council or Village Manager that appointed the member shall appoint another
individual to temporarily serve on the board in the member’s place. This
appointment shall be subject to the same requirements and limitations as are
applicable to the appointment of the member temporarily unable to serve.



   (B)   Whenever the Tax Administrator issues an assessment, the Tax
Administrator shall notify the taxpayer in writing at the same time of the
taxpayer’s right to appeal the assessment, the manner in which the taxpayer
may appeal the assessment, and the address to which the appeal should be
directed, and to whom the appeal should be directed.



   (C)   Any person who has been issued an assessment may appeal the
assessment to the board by filing a request with the board. The request shall
be in writing, shall specify the reason or reasons why the assessment should
be deemed incorrect or unlawful, and shall be filed within 60 days after the
taxpayer receives the assessment.



   (D)   The Local Board of Tax Review shall schedule a hearing to be
held within 60 days after receiving an appeal of an assessment under division
(C) of this section, unless the taxpayer requests additional time to prepare
or waives a hearing. If the taxpayer does not waive the hearing, the taxpayer
may appear before the board and/or may be represented by an attorney at law,
certified public accountant, or other representative. The board may allow a
hearing to be continued as jointly agreed to by the parties. In such a case,
the hearing must be completed within 120 days after the first day of the
hearing unless the parties agree otherwise.



   (E)   The board may affirm, reverse, or modify the Tax
Administrator’s assessment or any part of that assessment. The board shall
issue a final determination on the appeal within 90 days after the board’s
final hearing on the appeal, and send a copy of its final determination by
ordinary mail to all of the parties to the appeal within 15 days after
issuing the final determination. The taxpayer or the Tax Administrator may
appeal the board’s final determination as provided in R.C. § 5717.011.



   (F)   The Local Board of Tax Review created pursuant to this section
shall adopt rules governing its procedures, including a schedule of related
costs, and shall keep a record of its transactions. The rules governing the
Local Board of Tax Review procedures shall be in writing, and may be amended
as needed by the Local Board of Tax Review. Such records are not public
records available for inspection under R.C. § 149.43. For this reason, any
documentation, copies of returns or reports, final determinations, or working
papers for each case must be maintained in a secure location under the
control of the Tax Administrator. No member of the Local Board of Tax Review
may remove such documentation, copies of returns or reports, final
determinations, or working papers from the hearing. Hearings requested by a
taxpayer before a Local Board of Tax Review created pursuant to this section
are not meetings of a public body subject to R.C. § 121.22. For this reason,
such hearings shall not be open to the public, and only those parties to the
case may be present during the hearing.



(R.C. § 718.11)  (Ord. 2015-12, passed 11-9-15)



§ 101.19  ACTIONS TO RECOVER; STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.



   (A)   (1)   (a)   Civil actions to recover municipal income
taxes and penalties and interest on municipal income taxes shall be brought
within the latter of:



            1.   Three years after the tax was due or the
return was filed, whichever is later; or



            2.   One year after the conclusion of the
qualifying deferral period, if any.



         (b)   The time limit described in division (A)(1)(a) of
this section may be extended at any time if both the Tax Administrator and
the employer, agent of the employer, other payer, or taxpayer consent in
writing to the extension. Any extension shall also extend for the same period
of time the time limit described in division (C) of this section.



      (2)   As used in this section, QUALIFYING DEFERRAL PERIOD
means a period of time beginning and ending as follows:



         (a)   Beginning on the date a person who is aggrieved by
an assessment files with a Local Board of Tax Review the request described in
§ 101.18. That date shall not be affected by any subsequent decision,
finding, or holding by any administrative body or court that the Local Board
of Tax Review with which the aggrieved person filed the request did not have
jurisdiction to affirm, reverse, or modify the assessment or any part of that
assessment.



         (b)   Ending the later of the sixtieth day after the
date on which the final determination of the Local Board of Tax Review
becomes final or, if any party appeals from the determination of the Local
Board of Tax Review, the sixtieth day after the date on which the final
determination of the Local Board of Tax Review is either ultimately affirmed
in whole or in part or ultimately reversed and no further appeal of either
that affirmation, in whole or in part, or that reversal is available or taken.



   (B)   Prosecutions for an offense made punishable under a resolution
or ordinance imposing an income tax shall be commenced within three years
after the commission of the offense, provided that in the case of fraud,
failure to file a return, or the omission of 25% or more of income required
to be reported, prosecutions may be commenced within six years after the
commission of the offense.



   (C)   A claim for a refund of municipal income taxes shall be
brought within the time limitation provided in § 101.09(F).



   (D)   (1)   Notwithstanding the fact that an appeal is pending,
the petitioner may pay all or a portion of the assessment that is the subject
of the appeal. The acceptance of a payment by the village does not prejudice
any claim for refund upon final determination of the appeal.



      (2)   If upon final determination of the appeal an error in
the assessment is corrected by the Tax Administrator, upon an appeal so filed
or pursuant to a final determination of the Local Board of Tax Review created
under § 101.18, of the Ohio Board of Tax Appeals, or any court to which the
decision of the Ohio Board of Tax Appeals has been appealed, so that the
amount due from the party assessed under the corrected assessment is less
than the amount paid, there shall be issued to the appellant or to the
appellant’s assigns or legal representative a refund in the amount of the
overpayment as provided by § 101.09(F), with interest on that amount as
provided by division (D) of this section.



   (E)   No civil action to recover municipal income tax or related
penalties or interest shall be brought during either of the following time
periods:



      (1)   The period during which a taxpayer has a right to appeal
the imposition of that tax or interest or those penalties;



      (2)   The period during which an appeal related to the
imposition of that tax or interest or those penalties is pending.



(R.C. § 718.12)



(Ord. 2015-12, passed 11-9-15)



§ 101.20  ADOPTION OF RULES.



   (A)   Pursuant to R.C. § 718.30, the village, pursuant to this
chapter, grants authority to the Tax Administrator to adopt rules to
administer the income tax imposed by the village. Such rules shall not
conflict with or be inconsistent with any provision of this chapter or the
Ohio Revised Code.



   (B)   All rules adopted under this section shall be published and
posted on the internet according to R.C. § 718.07.



(R.C. § 718.30)  (Ord. 2015-12, passed 11-9-15)



§ 101.21  MISCELLANEOUS.



   Rental properties. Any property owner that rents or leases property in
Amberley Village shall notify the Tax Administrator of the identify of
tenant(s) within 30 days of occupancy.



(Ord. 2015-12, passed 11-9-15)



§ 101.97  COLLECTION AFTER TERMINATION OF CHAPTER.



   (A)   This chapter shall continue in full force and effect insofar
as the levy of taxes is concerned until repealed, and insofar as the
collection of taxes levied hereunder and actions and proceedings for
collecting any tax so levied or enforcing any provisions of this chapter are
concerned, it shall continue in full force and effect until all of the taxes
levied in the aforesaid period are fully paid and any and all suits and
prosecutions for the collection of taxes or for the punishment of violations
of this chapter have been fully terminated, subject to the limitations
contained in § 101.19.



   (B)   Annual returns due for all or any part of the last effective
year of this chapter shall be due on the date provided in § 101.09(A) as
though the same were continuing.



(Ord. 2015-12, passed 11-9-15)



§ 101.98  SAVINGS CLAUSE.



   If any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter, or any tax
imposed against, or exemption from tax granted to, any taxpayer or forms of
income specified herein is found to be unconstitutional, illegal or invalid,
such unconstitutionality, illegality, or invalidity shall affect only such
clause, sentence, section or part of this chapter so found and shall not
affect or impair any of the remaining provisions, sentences, clauses,
sections or other parts of this chapter. It is hereby declared to be the
intention of the legislative authority of the village that this chapter would
have been adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence,
clause, section or part thereof not been included in this chapter.



(Ord. 2015-12, passed 11-9-15)



§ 101.99  VIOLATIONS; PENALTY.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, whoever
violates § 101.15, § 101.14(A), or § 101.05(A) by failing to remit
municipal income taxes deducted and withheld from an employee, shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be subject to a fine of
not more than one thousand dollars or imprisonment for a term of up to six
months, or both. In addition, the violation is punishable by dismissal from
office or discharge from employment, or both.



   (B)   Any person who discloses information received from the
Internal Revenue Service in violation of Internal Revenue Code §§ 7213(a),
7213A, or 7431 shall be guilty of a felony of the fifth degree and shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $5,000 plus the costs of prosecution, or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years, or both. In addition, the
violation is punishable by dismissal from office or discharge from
employment, or both.



   (C)   Each instance of access or disclosure in violation of §
101.14(A) constitutes a separate offense.



   (D)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter for which no
penalty is otherwise provided is guilty of a minor misdemeanor on a first
offense. If the offender has previously been convicted of a violation of this
chapter or of Chapter 93 of the Municipal Code of Ordinances, any new
violation of this chapter is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. By way of an
illustrative enumeration, violations of this chapter shall include but not be
limited to the following acts, conduct, and/or omissions:



      (1)   Fail, neglect or refuse to make any return or
declaration required by this chapter;



      (2)   Knowingly make any incomplete return;



      (3)   Willfully fail, neglect, or refuse to pay the tax,
penalties, and interest, or any combination thereof, imposed by this chapter;



      (4)   Cause to not be remitted the city income tax withheld
from qualifying wages of employees to the village municipal corporation as
required by § 101.05(A);



      (5)   Neglect or refuse to withhold or remit municipal income
tax from employees;



      (6)   Refuse to permit the Tax Administrator or any duly
authorized agent or employee to examine his or her books, records, papers,
federal and state income tax returns, or any documentation relating to the
income or net profits of a taxpayer;



      (7)   Fail to appear before the Tax Administrator and to
produce his or her books, records, papers, federal and state income tax
returns, or any documentation relating to the income or net profits of a
taxpayer upon order or subpoena of the Tax Administrator;



      (8)   Refuse to disclose to the Tax Administrator any
information with respect to such person’s income or net profits, or in the
case of a person responsible for maintaining information relating to his or
her employers’ income or net profits, such person’s employer’s income
or net profits;



      (9)   Fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter or
any order or subpoena of the Tax Administrator;



      (10)   To avoid imposition or collection of municipal income
tax, willfully give to an employer or prospective employer false information
as to his or her true name, correct social security number and residence
address, or willfully fail to promptly notify an employer or a prospective
employer of any change in residence address and date thereof;



      (11)   Fail, as an employer, agent of an employer, or other
payer, to maintain proper records of employees residence addresses, total
qualifying wages paid and municipal tax withheld, or to knowingly give the
Tax Administrator false information;



      (12)   Willfully fail, neglect, or refuse to make any payment
of estimated municipal income tax for any taxable year or any part of any
taxable year in accordance with this chapter;



      (13)   Attempt to do anything whatsoever to avoid the payment
of the whole or any part of the tax, penalties or interest imposed by this
chapter;



      (14)   For purposes of this section, any violation that does
not specify a culpable mental state or intent, shall be one of strict
liability and no culpable mental state or intent shall be required for a
person to be guilty of that violation; or



      (15)   For purposes of this section, the term “person”
shall, in addition to the meaning prescribed in § 101.03, include in the
case of a corporation, association, pass-through entity or unincorporated
business entity not having any resident owner or officer within the city, any
employee or agent of such corporation, association, pass-through entity or
unincorporated business entity who has control or supervision over or is
charged with the responsibility of filing the municipal income tax returns
and making the payments of the municipal income tax as required by this
chapter.



(R.C. § 718.99)  (Ord. 2015-12, passed 11-9-15)



CHAPTER 102:  HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION; DIVERSITY AND INCLUSION



Section



   102.01   Statement of intent



   102.02   Definitions



   102.03   Human Rights Commission; purpose



   102.04   Human Rights Commission; members



   102.05   Human Rights Commission; organization



   102.06   Human Rights Commission; meetings



   102.07   Human Rights Commission; powers and duties



   102.08   Public contracts



   102.09   Construction; nonexclusive remedies



§ 102.01 STATEMENT OF INTENT.



   (A)   It is the intent of Amberley Village to protect and safeguard
the right and opportunity of all persons to be free from all forms of
discrimination, including discrimination based on one's membership in a
protected class such as age, race, color, religion, ethnicity, national
origin, ancestry, disability, marital status, family status, military status,
sex, gender identity or expression, or sexual orientation ("protected
class"). The purpose of this chapter is to promote the public health and
welfare of all persons who live in, work in, or visit the village.



   (B)   It is important to ensure equal access to employment, housing,
public accommodations, and education in the village. The denial of these
rights to persons in a protected class is contrary to the principles of
freedom and equality of opportunity and is destructive to a free and
democratic society.



(Ord. 2018-4, passed 4-9-18)



§ 102.02  DEFINITIONS.



   All words utilized in this chapter shall be ascribed their ordinary
meaning unless otherwise defined herein.



(Ord. 2018-4, passed 4-9-18)



§ 102.03  HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION; PURPOSE.



   A non-partisan Human Rights Commission is hereby established to be
known as the Amberley Village Human Rights Commission (the "Commission"). The
purpose of the Commission is not to penalize, but to encourage and endeavor
to bring about mutual understanding and respect among all persons, and to
safeguard the right and opportunity of all persons to be free from all forms
of discrimination.



(Ord. 2018-4, passed 4-9-18)



§ 102.04  HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION; MEMBERS.



   (A)   The Human Rights Commission shall be comprised of five members
appointed as follows: one member shall be appointed by the Village Manager;
one member shall be appointed by the Village Mayor; and three members shall
be appointed by a majority vote of Village Council. All members of the
Commission shall be residents of the Village.



   (B)   Members of the Commission shall serve voluntarily and without
compensation, except for reimbursement of any reasonable and necessary
expenses incurred in performance for the Commission. No member shall be a
current employee, officer, elected official, agent, or contractor with the
village.



   (C)   Except for members' initial terms which shall be staggered,
each member shall serve a term of three years commencing on the effective
date of this chapter. Members shall be eligible for reappointment; however,
no member shall serve more than three consecutive terms. Members shall serve
beyond the end of a term until a replacement is appointed by the respective
authority. A member shall be deemed to have abandoned the position and
resigned upon missing three consecutive regular meetings of the Commission
without being excused by the Commission as reflected in the minutes. Any
vacancy shall be filled by the authority which made the initial appointment
for the position. Members appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve the
remainder of the term of the vacant position.



(Ord. 2018-4, passed 4-9-18)



§ 102.05  HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION; ORGANIZATION.



   The Human Rights Commission is a non-legislative public body of the
village. The Commission shall convene the initial organizational meeting of
appointed members at its earliest opportunity. The Commission shall organize
at its initial meeting by electing one member as Chair and one member as
Vice-Chair. The Commission may select additional members to serve as officers
if found to be necessary and proper for the effective organization and
operation of the Commission. Each officer shall serve for a term of one year
or until a successor officer is duly elected.



(Ord. 2018-4, passed 4-9-18)



§ 102.06  HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION; MEETINGS.



   (A)   The Human Rights Commission shall convene at least once each
year to elect officers and as otherwise requested by a member of the
Commission, the Village Manager, the Village Mayor, or the Village Council.
Any three members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the
transaction of business. The Commission may act upon a majority vote of
members present at a meeting. The Commission shall report to the Village
Council at least twice every 12 months.



   (B)   Meetings of the Commission must be public according to the
Ohio Sunshine Laws. Public notice of any meetings must be provided at least
48 hours in advance, and minutes must be maintained. Any documents, evidence,
and other records maintained or created by the Commission or submitted to the
Commission, are public records subject to the Ohio Public Records Act.



(Ord. 2018-4, passed 4-9-18)



§ 102.07  HUMAN RIGHTS COMMISSION; POWERS AND DUTIES.



   The Human Rights Commission is hereby authorized and empowered as
follows:



   (A)   The Commission may create and modify rules regarding its
meetings, hearings, and procedures to carry out its functions. At its
discretion, the Commission may accept volunteer services, including volunteer
services of private legal counsel.



   (B)   The Commission may create committees and sub-committees
comprised of members and other volunteers, which in its judgment will aid in
effectuating the purposes of the Commission, including, but not limited to: a
committee formed to study the problem of discrimination; a committee formed
to foster good will, cooperation and conciliation among the diverse groups
and population of the village; and a committee formed to make recommendations
to the Commission for the development and implementation of programs of
formal and informal education and public awareness.



   (C)   The Commission may, with the consent and approval of the
Village Manager, call upon other officers, (departments and agencies of the
village government to assist in its programs and projects. The Commission may
recommend to Village Council policies, procedures, practices and legislation
in all relevant matters.



   (D)   The Commission may enlist the cooperation of racial,
religious, ethnic, community and civic organizations, and other identifiable
groups of the village, in its programs and campaigns devoted to the education
and advancement of tolerance, understanding and equal protection of the law
for all groups and individuals regardless of membership in a protected class.



   (E)   The Commission may seek and accept contributions, financial or
otherwise, on behalf of the village from any person including but not limited
to any private, public, governmental, charitable, religious, labor, civic or
benevolent organizations, in furtherance of its mission.



   (F)   The Commission may formulate and develop programs and
opportunities (i.e. forums, workshops, research, and publications) to collect
and disseminate information regarding the work of the Commission, to minimize
or eliminate discrimination, and to promote good will among all persons who
live in, work in, or visit the village.



   (G)   The Commission shall develop a program to receive and report
complaints from persons who live in, work in, or visit the village. In its
discretion the Commission may seek to conciliate any complaint with the
express written consent of the complainant in order to ensure equal access to
employment, housing, public accommodations, and education in the village.



   (H)   The Commission shall cooperate and work with relevant federal,
state and local government offices and agencies.



(Ord. 2018-4, passed 4-9-18)



§ 102.08  PUBLIC CONTRACTS.



   The village shall give consideration to all contractors who have a
stated inclusive policy against discrimination that is substantially similar
to the village's policy as set forth in this chapter.



(Ord. 2018-4, passed 4-9-18)



§ 102.09  CONSTRUCTION; NONEXCLUSIVE REMEDIES.



   (A)   This chapter shall be liberally construed to accomplish its
objectives and purposes. If any provision of this chapter is held invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect or invalidate the other provisions
hereof, all of which are declared and shall be construed to be separate and
severable.



   (B)   This chapter does not create or establish a cause of action in
any court of law or equity and shall not prevent any person from exercising
any right or seeking any remedy otherwise entitled to under any other law,
regulation, or policy. All remedies provided by this chapter are in addition
to, and not in lieu of, other remedies.



(Ord. 2018-4, passed 4-9-18)



TITLE XI: BUSINESS REGULATIONS



      Chapter




         110.   AMUSEMENTS





         111.   GARAGE, LAWN, AND BASEMENT SALES





         112.   VENDORS, PEDDLERS, AND SOLICITORS




CHAPTER 110: AMUSEMENTS



Section



   110.01   Approval for park, playground, amusement, or recreational
plans



   110.02   Plans to be submitted to Council Planning Commission



   110.03   Supervisory powers of village



§ 110.01  APPROVAL FOR PARK, PLAYGROUND, AMUSEMENT OR RECREATIONAL PLANS.



   No person, association, group, body, private corporation, municipal
corporation or other governmental agency shall establish, operate, or
maintain directly or indirectly, any land for park, playground, recreational
or amusement purposes within the territorial limits of the village, without
the approval and consent, expressed by ordinance, of the Village Council. 



('69 Code, § 110.01)  (Ord. 48, passed 5-3-43)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 110.02  PLANS TO BE SUBMITTED TO COUNCIL PLANNING COMMISSION.



   Before approving the establishment, operation or maintenance of any
public park, playground, recreational center, or amusement ground, Council
shall require the filing of complete plans and specifications indicating in
detail the type of park, playground, recreational center, or amusement ground
sought to be established, the nature of improvements to be made thereon, and
the use to be made thereof.  The plans and specifications shall first be
submitted to the Planning Commission for approval before consideration by
Council.  If such ownership, operation or maintenance is disapproved by the
Planning Commission, Council shall have the right to override the disapproval
by vote of two-thirds of its members.



('69 Code, § 110.02)  (Ord. 48, passed 5-3-43)



§ 110.03  SUPERVISORY POWERS OF VILLAGE.



   Any ordinance enacted hereafter in accordance with the terms of this
chapter, granting approval for the ownership, establishment, operation and
maintenance of any area within the territorial limits of the village for
park, playground, recreational, or amusement purposes, shall set forth the
provisions and conditions upon which approval is granted and shall retain to
the village full supervisory power.



('69 Code, § 110.03)  (Ord. 48, passed 5-3-43)



CHAPTER 111: GARAGE, LAWN, AND BASEMENT SALES



Section



   111.01   Definition



   111.02   Permit required



   111.03   Limitations on number of permits; time restrictions



   111.04   Advertising; posting of signs



 



   111.99   Penalty



§ 111.01  DEFINITION.



   For purposes of this chapter, the following definition shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   GARAGE SALE,LAWN SALE, or BASEMENT SALE.  The sale of personal items
owned by the property owner or persons living within his dwelling which are
advertised and sold at a public sale.



(Ord. C-445, passed 8-8-77)



§ 111.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   (A)   No garage sale, lawn sale, or basement sale shall be permitted
without first obtaining a permit from the office of the Village Manager.



   (B)   Operating a garage sale, lawn sale, or basement sale without a
permit is prima-facie evidence of a violation of this chapter.



(Ord. C-445, passed 8-8-77)



§ 111.03  LIMITATIONS ON NUMBER OF PERMITS; TIME RESTRICTIONS.



   The office of the Village Manager shall be authorized to issue such
permit no more than once in a six-month period to each household. Any permit
issued shall be valid for two consecutive days to be specified in the permit
and shall be valid only during daylight hours.



(Ord. C-445, passed 8-8-77)



§ 111.04  ADVERTISING; POSTING OF SIGNS.



   No advertisement or direction sign for a garage sale, lawn sale, or
basement sale shall be posted on village property or in a manner which would
restrict a right-of-way of a public highway or village street.  Signs shall
not be posted on the property of another without the express permission of
the property owner.



(Ord. C-445, passed 8-8-77)



§ 111.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.



(Ord. C-445, passed 8-8-77; Am. Ord. C-568, passed 10-9-84)



CHAPTER 112: VENDORS, PEDDLERS, AND SOLICITORS



Section



   112.01   Definitions



Prohibited Acts



   112.15   Compliance with health regulations, inspections required



   112.16   Commercial solicitation



   112.17   Revocation



 



   112.99   Penalty



§ 112.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For purposes of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have
the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.



   SOLICITOR.  Any person who engages in solicitation as defined in this
chapter. The term solicitor includes, but is not limited to, hawkers,
peddlers, salespersons, itinerant merchants, transient vendors of service,
transient photograph or magazine solicitors.



   TO SOLICIT or SOLICITATION.  The practice of going into and upon
private or public property to call at dwellings or other establishments, by
solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants, transient vendors of
service, transient photograph or magazine solicitors, or any other person
calling upon said properties with the intention of influencing the occupant
of said place or dwelling to purchase any article, or with the intention of
influencing the occupant to take or not to take action for any commercial
purposes, without prior appointment or permission from the occupant of the
dwelling, or without having been requested or invited so to do by the
occupant of the place or dwelling.



(Ord. 2015-8, passed 8-10-15)



Statutory reference:



   Power of municipality to regulate transient dealers, R.C. 715.64



PROHIBITED ACTS



§ 112.15  COMPLIANCE WITH HEALTH REGULATIONS, INSPECTIONS REQUIRED.



   (A)   No peddler, hawker, or solicitor shall vend or offer for sale
any goods, wares, merchandise, produce or supplies, which are subject to
inspection or regulation of any village, city, state or federal health
authorities, unless such regulations or inspections have been fully met and
complied with.



   (B)   Each sale, attempted sale or solicitation made by any person
without complying with this chapter's provisions shall constitute a separate
offense.



('69 Code, § 112.02)  (Ord. C-69, passed 12-10-56)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.16  COMMERCIAL SOLICITATION.



   Solicitation is only permitted in the village if the solicitor complies
with the following provisions:



   (A)   Preregistration.



      (1)   No person may solicit in the village without first
registering with the Village Police Department. All solicitors must provide
the following information on a form provided by the Department to enable it
to identify and contact the solicitor and, if applicable, the person,
company, or entity the solicitor represents:



         (a)   For each solicitor, the solicitor's name, address,
and phone number, and presentation of a valid U.S. state-issued driver's
license or identification.



         (b)   If applicable, the name, address, and phone number
of the person, company, or entity the solicitor represents.



         (c)   The time period during which the solicitor will be
soliciting in the village.  Solicitation activities are limited to the
period identified in the registration. Any extension of time must be
communicated to the Police Department in writing before further solicitation
is permitted.



         (d)   Whether the solicitor has been convicted in any
jurisdiction for a felony, crime involving moral turpitude, or an offense
requiring the solicitor to register as a sexual offender.



      (2)   By providing such information to the village, the
solicitor grants the village with authority to take reasonable steps to
verify the accuracy of the information.  Such information shall also be
provided by the solicitor upon request of an owner or occupant during the
course of solicitation.



   (B)   Permission from the property owner or occupant.  No solicitor
may enter upon property unless the solicitor has permission from the owner or
occupant. Permission is not granted if any of the following conditions are
present:



      (1)   The owner or occupant has signed up on the Police
Department's Do Not Solicit List.



      (2)   A sign is posted anywhere on the property that indicates
solicitation is not permitted or welcome, including but not limited to signs
stating words to the effect of “No Solicitors” or “No Solicitation.”



      (3)   The owner or occupant has communicated to the solicitor
that the owner or occupant does not want to speak to the solicitor or want
the solicitor on the premises.



   (C)   Do Not Solicit List.  The Police Department shall maintain a
“Do Not Solicit List” containing the names of owners, occupants, or
residents that choose to not welcome solicitors on their property.  The list
shall only identify the physical address of the property.  The Do Not
Solicit List shall be provided at no charge to any person or company
requesting a copy of the list.



(Ord. 2015-8, passed 8-10-15)  Penalty, see § 112.99



§ 112.17  REVOCATION.



   Permission to solicit in the village under this chapter may be revoked
by the Village Manager for the following reasons:



   (A)   Failure of the solicitor to follow the Village Code or other
local, state, or federal laws.



   (B)   Fraud, misrepresentation, or false statements provided to the
village or to persons to which solicitation is directed.



   (C)   Conviction of the solicitor of any felony, crime involving
moral turpitude, or any offense requiring the solicitor to register as a
sexual offender.



   (D)   Conduct constituting a breach of peace, or to be a menace to
the health, safety or general welfare of the village or its residents, or
conduct that is excessively aggressive or hostile to the occupant or any
other person.



   (E)   Trespass, or the registrant's refusal to promptly leave the
property of a person when so requested.



(Ord. 2015-8, passed 8-10-15)



§ 112.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, or corporation in violation of this chapter shall be
guilty of a minor misdemeanorfor the first offense, and of a misdemeanor of
the 4th degree for each subsequent offense.  Employers, firms, and
corporations shall be vicariously liable for the acts of their employees or
agents acting on their behalf.



(Ord. 2015-8, passed 8-10-15)



TITLE XIII: GENERAL OFFENSES



      Chapter




         130.   GENERAL PROVISIONS





         131.   OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY





         132.   OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE





         133.   OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS





         134.   GAMBLING





         135.   OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS





         136.   OFFENSES AGAINST JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION





         137.   WEAPONS CONTROL





         138.   DRUG OFFENSES




CHAPTER 130: GENERAL PROVISIONS



Section



   130.01   Application of Title XIII



   130.02   Definitions



   130.03   Classification of offenses



   130.04   Common law offenses abrogated



   130.05   Rules of construction



   130.06   Limitation of criminal prosecutions



   130.07   Requirements for criminal liability; voluntary intoxication



   130.08   Culpable mental states



   130.09   Organizational criminal liability



   130.10   Personal accountability for organizational conduct



   130.11   Attempt



   130.12   Complicity



   130.13   Considerations in imposing penalties



   130.14   Criminal law jurisdiction



   130.15   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by
Police Department



   130.16   Self-defense: limitations on duty to retreat prior to using
force



 



   130.99   Penalty for Title XIII



§ 130.01  APPLICATION OF TITLE XIII.



   (A)   Title XIII of this code of ordinances embodies and prescribes
penalties for offenses, against the municipality, not classifiable in
previous titles and chapters.  The word MISDEMEANORS as used in this title
is not exhaustive, and does not imply that offenses found elsewhere in this
code of ordinances are not also misdemeanors and punishable as such.



   (B)   Each act or omission for which a penalty of fine or
imprisonment, or both, is provided under this title or elsewhere in this code
of ordinances is declared a violation of ordinance and unlawful, and is made
a misdemeanor, upon conviction whereof, the penalty or penalties so provided
shall be imposed by the court.



§ 130.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CONTRABAND. Any property that is illegal for a person to acquire or
possess under a statute, ordinance, or rule, or that a trier of fact lawfully
determines to be illegal to possess by reason of the property's involvement
in an offense. CONTRABAND includes, but is not limited to, all of the
following:



      (1)   Any controlled substance, as defined in R.C. § 3719.01,
or any device or paraphernalia related thereto;



      (2)   Any unlawful gambling device or paraphernalia;



      (3)   Any dangerous ordnance or obscene material.



   DANGEROUS OFFENDER. A person who has committed an offense, whose
history, character and condition reveal a substantial risk that he or she
will be a danger to others, and whose conduct has been characterized by a
pattern of repetitive, compulsive or aggressive behavior with heedless
indifference to the consequences.



   DEADLY FORCE. Any force that carries a substantial risk that it will
proximately result in the death of any person.



   FORCE. Any violence, compulsion, or constraint physically exerted by
any means upon or against a person or thing.



   LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. Any of the following:



      (1)   A sheriff, deputy sheriff, constable, police officer of
a township or joint police district, marshal, deputy marshal, municipal
police officer, member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing
authority under R.C. § 3735.31(D) or state highway patrol trooper.



      (2)   An officer, agent, or employee of the state or any of
its agencies, instrumentalities, or political subdivisions, upon whom, by
statute, a duty to conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is
imposed and the authority to arrest violators is conferred, within the limits
of such statutory duty and authority.



      (3)   The Mayor, in a capacity as chief conservator of the
peace within the municipality.



      (4)   A member of an auxiliary police force organized by the
county, township, or municipal law enforcement authorities, within the scope
of the member's appointment or commission.



      (5)   A person lawfully called pursuant to R.C. § 311.07 to
aid a sheriff in keeping the peace, for the purposes and during the time when
the person is called.



      (6)   A person appointed by a Mayor pursuant to R.C. § 737.01
as a special patrolling officer during a riot or emergency, for the purposes
and during the time when the person is appointed.



      (7)   A member of the organized militia of this state or the
armed forces of the United States, lawfully called to duty to aid civil
authorities in keeping the peace or protect against domestic violence.



      (8)   A prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney,
secret service officer, or municipal prosecutor.



      (9)   A veterans' home police officer appointed under R.C. §
5907.02.



      (10)   A member of a police force employed by a regional
transit authority under R.C. § 306.35(Y).



      (11)   A special police officer employed by a port authority
under R.C. §§ 4582.04 or 4582.28.



      (12)   The House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms if the
House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms has arrest authority pursuant to
R.C. § 101.311(E)(1) and an Assistant House of Representatives Sergeant at
Arms.



      (13)   A special police officer employed by a municipal
corporation at a municipal airport, or other municipal air navigation
facility, that has scheduled operations, as defined in 14 C.F.R. § 119.3, as
amended, and that is required to be under a security program and is governed
by aviation security rules of the Transportation Security Administration of
the United States Department of Transportation as provided in 49 C.F.R. parts
1542 and 1544, as amended.



   NOT GUILTY BY REASON OF INSANITY. A person is NOT GUILTY BY REASON OF
INSANITY relative to a charge of an offense only if the person proves, in the
manner specified in R.C. § 2901.05, that at the time of the commission of
the offense, he or she did not know, as a result of a severe mental disease
or defect, the wrongfulness of his or her acts.



   OFFENSE OF VIOLENCE.



      (1)   A violation of R.C. §§ 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03,
2903.04, 2903.11, 2903.12,2903.13, 2903.15, 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22,
2905.01, 2905.02, 2905.11, 2905.32, 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.05, 2909.02,
2909.03, 2909.24, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2917.01, 2917.02, 2917.03,
2917.31, 2919.25, 2921.03, 2921.04, 2921.34, or 2923.161, of division (A)(1)
of R.C. § 2903.34, of division (A)(1), (2) or (3) of R.C. § 2911.12, or of
division (B)(1), (2), (3) or (4) of R.C. § 2919.22, or felonious sexual
penetration in violation of former R.C. § 2907.12;



      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance
or law of this or any other state or of the United States, substantially
equivalent to any section, division or offense listed in division (1) of this
definition;



      (3)   An offense, other than a traffic offense, under an
existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or
of the United States, committed purposely or knowingly, and involving
physical harm to persons or a risk of serious physical harm to persons;



      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing, any offense under division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.



   PERSON.



      (1)   (a)   Subject to division (2) of this definition, as
used in any section contained in Title XIII of this code that sets forth a
criminal offense, PERSON includes all of the following:



            1.   An individual, corporation, business trust,
estate, trust, partnership and association.



            2.   An unborn human who is viable.



         (b)   As used in any section contained in Title XIII of
this code that does not set forth a criminal offense, PERSON includes an
individual, corporation, business trust, estate, partnership and association.



         (c)   As used in division (1)(a)2. of this definition,
"unborn human" means an individual organism of the species Homo sapiens from
fertilization until live birth. "Viable" means the stage of development of a
human fetus at which there is a realistic probability of maintaining and
nourishing of a life outside the womb with or without temporary artificial
life-sustaining support.



      (2)   Notwithstanding division (1)(a) of this definition, in
no case shall the portion of the definition of the term PERSON that is set
forth in division (1)(a)2. of this definition be applied or construed in any
section contained in Title XIII of this code that sets forth a criminal
offense in any of the following manners:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (2)(a) of
this definition, in a manner so that the offense prohibits or is construed as
prohibiting any pregnant woman or her physician from performing an abortion
with the consent of the pregnant woman, with the consent of the pregnant
woman implied by law in a medical emergency, or with the approval of one
otherwise authorized by law to consent to medical treatment on behalf of the
pregnant woman. An abortion that violates the conditions described in the
immediately preceding sentence may be punished as a violation of R.C. §§
2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.05, 2903.06, 2903.08, 2903.11,
2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.14, 2903.21 or 2903.22, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, as applicable. An abortion that does not
violate the conditions described in the second immediately preceding sentence
but that does violate R.C. §§ 2919.12, 2919.13(B), 2919.151, 2919.17 or
2919.18, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, may be punished
as a violation of such section, as applicable. Consent is sufficient under
this division if it is of the type otherwise adequate to permit medical
treatment to the pregnant woman, even if it does not comply with R.C. §
2919.12.



         (b)   In a manner so that the offense is applied or is
construed as applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman
that occurs while she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the
following:



            1.   Her delivery of a stillborn baby.



            2.   Her causing, in any other manner, the death
in utero of a viable, unborn human that she is carrying.



            3.   Her causing the death of her child who is
born alive but who dies from one or more injuries that are sustained while
the child is a viable, unborn human.



            4.   Her causing her child who is born alive to
sustain one or more injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human.



            5.   Her causing, threatening to cause, or
attempting to cause, in any other manner, an injury, illness, or other
psychological illness or condition, regardless of its duration or gravity, to
a viable, unborn human that she is carrying.



   PHYSICAL HARM TO PERSONS. Any injury, illness, or other physiological
impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.



   PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY. Any tangible or intangible damage to
property that, in any degree, results in loss to its value or interferes with
its use or enjoyment. PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY does not include wear and
tear occasioned by normal use.



   PRIVILEGE. An immunity, license, or right conferred by law, or bestowed
by express or implied grant, or arising out of status, position, office, or
relationship, or growing out of necessity.



   PROPERTY.



      (1)   Any property, real or personal, tangible or intangible,
and any interest or license in that property. PROPERTY includes, but is not
limited to, cable television service, other telecommunications service,
telecommunications devices, information service, computers, data, computer
software, financial instruments associated with computers, other documents
associated with computers, or copies of the documents, whether in machine or
human-readable form, trade secrets, trademarks, copyrights, patents, and
property protected by a trademark, copyright or patent. "Financial
instruments associated with computers" include, but are not limited to,
checks, drafts, warrants, money orders, notes of indebtedness, certificates
of deposit, letters of credit, bills of credit or debit cards, financial
transaction authorization mechanisms, marketable securities, or any computer
system representations of any of them.



      (2)   As used in this definition, "trade secret" has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 1333.61, and "telecommunications service" and
"information service" have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.



      (3)   As used in this definition and in the definition of
"contraband" in this section, "cable television service," "computer,"
"computer network," "computer software," "computer system," "data," and
"telecommunications device" have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.



   REPEAT OFFENDER. A person who has a history of persistent criminal
activity and whose character and condition reveal a substantial risk that he
or she will commit another offense. It is prima facie evidence that a person
is a repeat offender if any of the following applies:



      (1)   Having been convicted of one or more offenses of
violence, as defined in R.C. § 2901.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant
to sentence for one or more of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent
offense of violence;



      (2)   Having been convicted of one or more sexually oriented
offenses, as defined in R.C. § 2950.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant
to sentence for one or more of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent
sexually oriented offense;



      (3)   Having been convicted of one or more theft offenses, as
defined in R.C. § 2913.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence
for one or more of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent theft
offense;



      (4)   Having been convicted of one or more felony drug abuse
offenses, as defined in R.C. § 2925.01, and having been imprisoned pursuant
to sentence for one or more of those offenses, he or she commits a subsequent
felony drug abuse offense;



      (5)   Having been convicted of two or more felonies, and
having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for any such offense, he or she
commits a subsequent offense;



      (6)   Having been convicted of three or more offenses of any
type or degree other than traffic offenses, alcoholic intoxication offenses,
or minor misdemeanors, and having been imprisoned pursuant to sentence for
any such offense, he or she commits a subsequent offense.



   RISK. A significant possibility, as contrasted with a remote
possibility, that a certain result may occur or that certain circumstances
may exist.



   SCHOOL, SCHOOL BUILDING, and SCHOOL PREMISES. Have the same meanings as
in R.C. § 2925.01.



   SCHOOL ACTIVITY. Any activity held under the auspices of a board of
education of a city, local, exempted village, joint vocational, or
cooperative education school district; a governing authority of a community
school established under R.C. Chapter 3314; a governing board of an
educational service center; or the governing body of a nonpublic school for
which the State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under R.C. §
3301.07.



   SCHOOL BUS. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.



   SCHOOL SAFETY ZONE. Consists of a school, school building, school
premises, school activity, and school bus.



   SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO PERSONS. Any of the following:



      (1)   Any mental illness or condition of such gravity as would
normally require hospitalization or prolonged psychiatric treatment;



      (2)   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of
death;



      (3)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent
incapacity, whether partial or total, or that involves some temporary,
substantial incapacity;



      (4)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent
disfigurement, or that involves some temporary, serious disfigurement;



      (5)   Any physical harm that involves acute pain of such
duration as to result in substantial suffering, or that involves any degree
of prolonged or intractable pain.



   SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO PROPERTY. Any physical harm to property that
does either of the following:



      (1)   Results in substantial loss to the value of the
property, or requires a substantial amount of time, effort, or money to
repair or replace;



      (2)   Temporarily prevents the use or enjoyment of the
property, or substantially interferes with its use or enjoyment for an
extended period of time.



   SUBSTANTIAL RISK. A strong possibility, as contrasted with a remote or
significant possibility, that a certain result may occur or that certain
circumstances may exist.



(R.C. §§ 2901.01, 2935.36(E))



('69 Code, § 130.01)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



§ 130.03  CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENSES.



   As used in this Title:



   (A)   Offenses include misdemeanors of the first, second, third, and
fourth degree, minor misdemeanors, and offenses not specifically classified.



   (B)   Regardless of the penalty that may be imposed, any offense
specifically classified as a misdemeanor is a misdemeanor.



   (C)   Any offense not specifically classified is a misdemeanor if
imprisonment for not more than one year may be imposed as a penalty.



   (D)   Any offense not specifically classified is a minor misdemeanor
if the only penalty that may be imposed is one of the following:



      (1)   For an offense committed prior to January 1, 2004, a
fine not exceeding $100;



      (2)   For an offense committed on or after January 1, 2004, a
fine not exceeding one hundred fifty dollars, community service under R.C. §
2929.27(D), or a financial sanction other than a fine under R.C. § 2929.28.



(R.C. § 2901.02)



('69 Code, § 130.02)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



§ 130.04  COMMON LAW OFFENSES ABROGATED.



   (A)   No conduct constitutes a criminal offense against the
municipality unless it is defined as an offense in this code.



   (B)   An offense is defined when one or more sections of this code
state a positive prohibition or enjoin a specific duty, and provide a penalty
for violation of such prohibition or failure to meet such duty.



   (C)   This section does not affect the power of a court to punish
for contempt or to employ any sanction authorized by law to enforce an order,
civil judgment or decree.



(R.C. § 2901.03)  ('69 Code, § 130.03)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



§ 130.05  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C) or (D) of this
section, sections of this code defining offenses or penalties shall be
strictly construed against the municipality and liberally construed in favor
of the accused.



   (B)   Rules of criminal procedure and sections of this code
providing for criminal procedure shall be construed so as to effect the fair,
impartial, speedy, and sure administration of justice.



   (C)   Any provision of a section of this code that refers to a
previous conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of a section of this
code, the Revised Code or a division of a section of this code or the Revised
Code shall be construed to also refer to a previous conviction of or plea of
guilty to a substantially equivalent offense under an existing or former law
of this municipality, state, another state, or the United States or under an
existing or former municipal ordinance.



   (D)   Any provision of this code that refers to a section, or to a
division of a section, of this code that defines or specifies a criminal
offense shall be construed to also refer to an existing or former law of this
state, another state, or the United States, to an existing or former
municipal ordinance, or to an existing or former division of any such
existing or former law or ordinance that defines or specifies, or that
defined or specified, a substantially equivalent offense.



(R.C. § 2901.04) ('69 Code, § 130.04)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



§ 130.06  LIMITATION OF CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS.



   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(2), (A)(3) or
(A)(4) of this section or as otherwise provided in this section, a
prosecution shall be barred unless it is commenced within the following
periods after an offense is committed:



         (a)   For a felony, six years;



         (b)   For a misdemeanor other than a minor misdemeanor,
two years;



         (c)   For a minor misdemeanor, six months.



      (2)   There is no period of limitation for the prosecution of
a violation of R.C. § 2903.01 or R.C. § 2903.02.



      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (B) to (J) of
this section, a prosecution of any of the following offenses shall be barred
unless it is commenced within 20 years after the offense is committed:



         (a)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.03, 2903.04, 2905.01,
2905.32, 2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.21, 2909.02, 2909.22, 2909.23, 2909.24,
2909.26, 2909.27, 2909.28, 2909.29, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2911.12, or
2917.02, a violation of R.C. § 2903.11 or 2903.12 if the victim is a peace
officer, a violation of R.C. § 2903.13 that is a felony, or a violation of
former R.C. § 2907.12.



         (b)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or
complicity in committing a violation set forth in division (A)(3)(a) of this
section.



      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (D) to (L) of
this section, a prosecution of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03 or a
conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in committing a
violation of either section shall be barred unless it is commenced within 25
years after the offense is committed.



   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2) of
this section, if the period of limitation provided in division (A)(1) or
(A)(3) of this section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for an
offense of which an element is fraud or breach of fiduciary duty within one
year after discovery of the offense either by an aggrieved person or by the
aggrieved person's legal representative who is not a party to the offense.



      (2)   If the period of limitation provided in division (A)(1)
or (A)(3) of this section has expired, prosecution for a violation of R.C. §
2913.49 shall be commenced within five years after discovery of the offense
either by an aggrieved person or the aggrieved person’s legal
representative who is not a party to the offense.



   (C)   (1)   If the period of limitation provided in division
(A)(1) or (A)(3) of this section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced
for the following offenses during the following specified periods of time:



         (a)   For an offense involving misconduct in office by a
public servant, at any time while the accused remains a public servant, or
within two years thereafter;



         (b)   For an offense by a person who is not a public
servant but whose offense is directly



related to the misconduct in office of a public servant, at any time while
that public servant remains a public servant, or within two years thereafter.



      (2)   As used in this division:



         (a)   The phrase OFFENSE IS DIRECTLY RELATED TO THE
MISCONDUCT IN OFFICE OF A PUBLIC SERVANT includes, but is not limited to, a
violation of R.C. § 101.71, 101.91, 121.61 or 2921.13, 102.03(F) or (H),
2921.02(A), 2921.43(A) or (B), or 3517.13(F) or (G), that is directly related
to an offense involving misconduct in office of a public servant, or a
violation of any municipal ordinance substantially equivalent to those Ohio
Revised Code sections listed in this division (C)(2)(a).



         (b)   PUBLIC SERVANT has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2921.01.



   (D)   (1)   If a DNA record made in connection with the criminal
investigation of the commission of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03
is determined to match another DNA record that is of an identifiable person
and if the time of the determination is later than 25 years after the offense
is committed, prosecution of that person for a violation of the section may
be commenced within five years after the determination is complete.



      (2)   If a DNA record made in connection with the criminal
investigation of the commission of a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03
is determined to match another DNA record that is of an identifiable person
and if the time of the determination is within 25 years after the offense is
committed, prosecution of that person for a violation of the section may be
commenced within the longer of 25 years after the offense is committed or
five years after the determination is complete.



      (3)   As used in this division, DNA RECORD has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 109.573.



   (E)   An offense is committed when every element of the offense
occurs.  In the case of an offense of which an element is a continuing
course of conduct, the period of limitation does not begin to run until such
course of conduct or the accused's accountability for it terminates,
whichever occurs first.



   (F)   A prosecution is commenced on the date an indictment is
returned or an information filed, or on the date a lawful arrest without a
warrant is made, or on the date a warrant, summons, citation, or other
process is issued, whichever occurs first. A prosecution is not commenced by
the return of an indictment or the filing of an information unless reasonable
diligence is exercised to issue and execute process on the same. A
prosecution is not commenced upon issuance of a warrant, summons, citation,
or other process unless reasonable diligence is exercised to execute the same.



   (G)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when
the corpus delicti remains undiscovered.



   (H)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when
the accused purposely avoids prosecution. Proof that the accused departed
this municipality or conceals the accused's identity or whereabouts is prima
facie evidence of the accused's purpose to avoid prosecution.



   (I)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time a
prosecution against the accused based on the same conduct is pending in this
state, even though the indictment, information, or process that commenced the
prosecution is quashed or the proceedings on the indictment, information, or
process are set aside or reversed on appeal which commenced the prosecution
is quashed or the proceedings thereon are set aside or reversed on appeal.



   (J)   The period of limitation for a violation of this Title or
Title XXIX of the Ohio Revised Code that involves a physical or mental wound,
injury, disability, or condition of a nature that reasonably indicates abuse
or neglect of a child under 18 years of age or of a child with a
developmental disability or physical impairment under 21 years of age shall
not begin to run until either of the following occurs:



      (1)   The victim of the offense reaches the age of majority.



      (2)   A public children services agency, or a municipal or
county peace officer that is not the parent or guardian of the child, in the
county in which the child resides or in which the abuse or neglect is
occurring or has occurred has been notified that abuse or neglect is known,
suspected, or believed to have occurred.



   (K)   As used in this section, PEACE OFFICER has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 2935.01.



   (L)   The amendments to divisions (A) and (D) of this section apply
to a violation of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.03 committed on and after July 16,
2015, and apply to a violation of either of those sections committed prior to
July 16, 2015, if prosecution for that violation was not barred under this
section as it existed on July 15, 2015.



(R.C. § 2901.13)  ('69 Code, § 130.05)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



Statutory reference:



   Limitation for income tax violations, see R.C. § 718.12



§ 130.07  REQUIREMENTS FOR CRIMINAL LIABILITY; VOLUNTARY INTOXICATION.



   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, a person
is not guilty of an offense unless both of the following apply:



      (1)   The person's liability is based on conduct that includes
either a voluntary act, or an omission to perform an act or duty that the
person is capable of performing;



      (2)   The person has the requisite degree of culpability for
each element as to which a culpable mental state is specified by the section
defining the offense.



   (B)   When the language defining an offense does not specify any
degree of culpability, and plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict
criminal liability for the conduct described in the section, then culpability
is not required for a person to be guilty of the offense. The fact that one
division of a section plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict liability
for an offense defined in that division does not by itself plainly indicate a
purpose to impose strict criminal liability for an offense defined in other
divisions of the section that do not specify a degree of culpability.



   (C)   (1)   When language defining an element of an offense that
is related to knowledge or intent or to which mens rea could fairly be
applied neither specifies culpability nor plainly indicates a purpose to
impose strict liability, the element of the offense is established only if a
person acts recklessly.



      (2)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to
offenses defined in R.C. Title XLV.



      (3)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not relieve the
prosecution of the burden of proving the culpable mental state required by
any definition incorporated into the offense.



   (D)   Voluntary intoxication may not be taken into consideration in
determining the existence of a mental state that is an element of a criminal
offense.  Voluntary intoxication does not relieve a person of a duty to act
if failure to act constitutes a criminal offense. Evidence that a person was
voluntarily intoxicated may be admissible to show whether or not the person
was physically capable of performing the act with which the person is charged.



   (E)   As used in this section:



   CULPABILITY.  Purpose, knowledge, recklessness, or negligence, as
defined in R.C. § 2901.22.



   INTOXICATION.  Includes but is not limited to intoxication resulting
from the ingestion of alcohol, a drug, or alcohol and a drug.



   INVOLUNTARY ACTS.  Reflexes, convulsions, body movements during
unconsciousness or sleep, and body movements that are not otherwise a product
of the actor's volition are involuntary acts.



   POSSESSION.  A voluntary act if the possessor knowingly procured or
received the thing possessed, or was aware of the possessor's control of the
thing possessed for a sufficient time to have ended possession.



(R.C. § 2901.21)  ('69 Code, § 130.06)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



§ 130.08  CULPABLE MENTAL STATES.



   (A)   A person acts purposely when it is the person’s specific
intention to cause a certain result, or, when the gist of the offense is a
prohibition against conduct of a certain nature, regardless of what the
offender intends to accomplish thereby, it is the offender’s specific
intention to engage in conduct of that nature.



   (B)   A person acts knowingly, regardless of purpose, when the
person is aware that the person’s conduct will probably cause a certain
result or will probably be of a certain nature. A person has knowledge of
circumstances when the person is aware that such circumstances probably
exist. When knowledge of the existence of a particular fact is an element of
an offense, such knowledge is established if a person subjectively believes
that there is a high probability of its existence and fails to make inquiry
or acts with a conscious purpose to avoid learning the fact.



   (C)   A person acts recklessly when, with heedless indifference to
the consequences, the person disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk
that the person’s conduct is likely to cause a certain result or is likely
to be of a certain nature. A person is reckless with respect to circumstances
when, with heedless indifference to the consequences, the person disregards a
substantial and unjustifiable risk that such circumstances are likely to
exist.



   (D)   A person acts negligently when, because of a substantial lapse
from due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that the
person’s conduct may



cause a certain result or may be of a certain nature.  A person is negligent
with respect to circumstances when, because of a substantial lapse from due
care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that such circumstances
may exist.



   (E)   When the section defining an offense provides that negligence
suffices to establish an element thereof, then recklessness, knowledge, or
purpose is also sufficient culpability for such element.  When recklessness
suffices to establish an element of an offense, then knowledge or purpose is
also sufficient culpability for such element.  When knowledge suffices to
establish an element of an offense, then purpose is also sufficient
culpability for such element.



(R.C. § 2901.22)  ('69 Code, § 130.07)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



§ 130.09  ORGANIZATIONAL CRIMINAL LIABILITY.



   (A)   An organization may be convicted of an offense under any of
the following circumstances:



      (1)   The offense is a minor misdemeanor committed by an
officer, agent, or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and
within the scope of the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s office or
employment, except that if the section defining the offense designates the
officers, agents, or employees for whose conduct the organization is
accountable or the circumstances under which it is accountable, those
provisions shall apply.



      (2)   A purpose to impose organizational liability plainly
appears in the section defining the offense, and the offense is committed by
an officer, agent, or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and
within the scope of the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s office or
employment, except that if the section defining the offense designates the
officers, agents, or employees for whose conduct the organization is
accountable or the circumstances under which it is accountable, those
provisions shall apply.



      (3)   The offense consists of an omission to discharge a
specific duty imposed by law on the organization.



      (4)   If, acting with the kind of culpability otherwise
required for the commission of the offense, its commission was authorized,
requested, commanded, tolerated, or performed by the board of directors,
trustees, partners, or by a high managerial officer, agent, or employee
acting in behalf of the organization and within the scope of such a board’s
or person’s office or employment.



   (B)   If strict liability is imposed for the commission of an
offense, a purpose to impose organizational liability shall be presumed,
unless the contrary plainly appears.



   (C)   In a prosecution of an organization for an offense other than
one for which strict liability is imposed, it is a defense that the high
managerial officer, agent, or employee having supervisory responsibility over
the subject matter of the offense exercised due diligence to prevent its
commission.  This defense is not available if it plainly appears
inconsistent with the purpose of the section defining the offense.



   (D)   As used in this section, ORGANIZATION means a corporation for
profit or not for profit, partnership, limited partnership, joint venture,
unincorporated nonprofit association, estate, trust, or other commercial or
legal entity.  ORGANIZATION does not include an entity organized as or by a
governmental agency for the execution of a governmental program.



(R.C. § 2901.23)  ('69 Code, § 130.08)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



§ 130.10  PERSONAL ACCOUNTABILITY FOR ORGANIZATIONAL CONDUCT.



   (A)   An officer, agent, or employee of an organization, as defined
in R.C. § 2901.23, may be prosecuted for an offense committed by such
organization, if he or she acts with the kind of culpability required for the
commission of the offense, and any of the following apply:



      (1)   In the name of the organization or in its behalf, he or
she engages in conduct constituting the offense, or causes another to engage
in such conduct, or tolerates such conduct when it is of a type for which he
or she has direct responsibility;



      (2)   He or she has primary responsibility to discharge a duty
imposed on the organization by law, and such duty is not discharged.



   (B)   When a person is convicted of an offense by reason of this
section, he or she is subject to the same penalty as if he or she had acted
in his or her own behalf.



(R.C. § 2901.24)  ('69 Code, § 130.09)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



§ 130.11  ATTEMPT.



   (A)   No person, purposely or knowingly, and when purpose or
knowledge is sufficient culpability for the commission of an offense, shall
engage in conduct that, if successful, would constitute or result in the
offense.



   (B)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that, in
retrospect, commission of the offense that was the object of the attempt was
either factually or legally impossible under the attendant circumstances, if
that offense could have been committed had the attendant circumstances been
as the actor believed them to be.



   (C)   No person who is convicted of committing a specific offense,
of complicity in the commission of an offense, or of conspiracy to commit an
offense, shall be convicted of an attempt to commit the same offense in
violation of this section.



   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section
that the actor abandoned his or her effort to commit the offense or otherwise
prevented its commission, under circumstances manifesting a complete and
voluntary renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.



   (E)   (1) Whoever violates this section is guilty of an attempt to
commit an offense.  An attempt to commit aggravated murder, murder, or an
offense for which the maximum penalty is imprisonment for life is a felony of
the first degree, to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. An attempt to
commit a drug abuse offense for which the penalty is determined by the amount
or number of unit doses of the controlled substance involved in the drug
abuse offense is an offense of the same degree as the drug abuse offense
attempted would be if that drug abuse offense had been committed and had
involved an amount or number of unit doses of the controlled substance that
is within the next lower range of controlled substance amounts than was
involved in the attempt. An attempt to commit any other offense is an offense
of the next lesser degree than the offense attempted.  In the case of an
attempt to commit an offense other than a violation of R.C. Chapter 3734 that
is not specifically classified, an attempt is a misdemeanor of the first
degree if the offense attempted is a felony, and a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree if the offense attempted is a misdemeanor.  In the case of an attempt
to commit a violation of any provision of R.C. Chapter 3734, other than R.C.
§ 3734.18, that relates to hazardous wastes, an attempt is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.  An attempt to commit a minor
misdemeanor, or to engage in conspiracy, is not an offense under this section.



      (2)   In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to
division (E)(1) of this section for an attempt to commit aggravated murder or
murder in violation of division (A) of this section, if the offender used a
motor vehicle as the means to attempt to commit the offense, the court shall
impose upon the offender a class two suspension of the offender's driver's
license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege as specified in R.C.
§ 4510.02(A)(2).



      (3)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to
attempted rape and also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a specification
of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1418, 2941.1419, or 2941.1420, the
offender shall be sentenced to a prison term or term of life imprisonment
pursuant to R.C. § 2971.03.



   (F)   As used in this section:



      DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.



      MOTOR VEHICLE has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.



(R.C. § 2923.02)  ('69 Code, § 130.11)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



Statutory reference:



   Conspiracy, see R.C. § 2923.01



   Solid and hazardous wastes, see R.C. Chapter 3734



§ 130.12  COMPLICITY.



   (A)   No person, acting with the kind of culpability required for
the commission of an offense, shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Solicit or procure another to commit the offense;



      (2)   Aid or abet another in committing the offense;



      (3)   Conspire with another to commit the offense in violation
of R.C. § 2923.01;



      (4)   Cause an innocent or irresponsible person to commit the
offense.



   (B)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that no person
with whom the accused was in complicity has been convicted as a principal
offender.



   (C)   No person shall be convicted of complicity under this section
unless an offense is actually committed, but a person may be convicted of
complicity in an attempt to commit an offense in violation of R.C. § 2923.02
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



   (D)   If an alleged accomplice of the defendant testifies against
the defendant in a case in which the defendant is charged with complicity in
the commission of or an attempt to commit an offense, an attempt to commit an
offense, or an offense, the court shall charge the jury in accordance with
R.C. § 2923.03(D).



   (E)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section
that, prior to the commission of or attempt to commit the offense, the actor
terminated his or her complicity, under circumstances manifesting a complete
and voluntary renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.



   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of complicity in the
commission of an offense, and shall be prosecuted and punished as if he or
she were a principal offender.  A charge of complicity may be stated in
terms of this section, or in terms of the principal offense.



(R.C. § 2923.03)  ('69 Code, § 130.12)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



Statutory reference:



   Conspiracy, see R.C. § 2923.01



§ 130.13  CONSIDERATIONS IN IMPOSING PENALTIES.



   (A)   (1)   Unless a mandatory jail term is required to be
imposed by R.C. §§ 1547.99(G), 4510.14(B), or 4511.19(G), or any other
provision of the Revised Code, or any municipal ordinance, a court that
imposes a sentence under this chapter upon an offender for a misdemeanor or
minor misdemeanor has discretion to determine the most effective way to
achieve the purposes and principles of sentencing set forth in § 130.99(B).



      (2)   Unless a specific sanction is required to be imposed or
is precluded from being imposed by the section setting forth an offense or
the penalty for an offense or by any provision of §§ 130.99 or 133.99 of
this Code or R.C. §§ 2929.23 to 2929.28, a court that imposes a sentence
upon an offender for a misdemeanor may impose on the offender any sanction or
combination of sanctions under § 130.99(C) to (G). The court shall not
impose a sentence that imposes an unnecessary burden on local government
resources.



   (B)   (1)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a
misdemeanor, the court shall consider all of the following factors:



         (a)   The nature and circumstances of the offense or
offenses;



         (b)   Whether the circumstances regarding the offender
and the offense or offenses indicate that the offender has a history of
persistent criminal activity and that the offender's character and condition
reveal a substantial risk that the offender will commit another offense;



         (c)   Whether the circumstances regarding the offender
and the offense or offenses indicate that the offender's history, character,
and condition reveal a substantial risk that the offender will be a danger to
others and that the offender's conduct has been characterized by a pattern of
repetitive, compulsive, or aggressive behavior with heedless indifference to
the consequences;



         (d)   Whether the victim's youth, age, disability, or
other factor made the victim particularly vulnerable to the offense or made
the impact of the offense more serious;



         (e)   Whether the offender is likely to commit future
crimes in general, in addition to the circumstances described in divisions
(B)(1)(b) and (c) of this section;



         (f)   Whether the offender has an emotional, mental, or
physical condition that is traceable to the offender’s service in the armed
forces of the United States and that was a contributing factor in the
offender’s commission of the offense or offenses;



         (g)   The offender’s military service record.



      (2)   In determining the appropriate sentence for a
misdemeanor, in addition to complying with division (B)(1) of this section,
the court may consider any other factors that are relevant to achieving the
purposes and principles of sentencing set forth in § 130.99(B).



   (C)   Before imposing a jail term as a sentence for a misdemeanor, a
court shall consider the appropriateness of imposing a community control
sanction or a combination of community control sanctions under § 130.99(D),
(E), (F), and (G). A court may impose the longest jail term authorized under
§ 130.99(C) only upon offenders who commit the worst forms of the offense or
upon offenders whose conduct and response to prior sanctions for prior
offenses demonstrate that the imposition of the longest jail term is
necessary to deter the offender from committing a future crime.



   (D)   (1)   A sentencing court shall consider any relevant oral
or written statement made by the victim, the defendant, the defense attorney,
or the prosecuting authority regarding sentencing for a misdemeanor. This
division does not create any rights to notice other than those rights
authorized by R.C. Chapter 2930.



      (2)   At the time of sentencing for a misdemeanor or as soon
as possible after sentencing, the court shall notify the victim of the
offense of the victim's right to file an application for an award of
reparations pursuant to R.C. §§ 2743.51 to 2743.72.



(R.C. § 2929.22)



('69 Code, § 130.13)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



§ 130.14  CRIMINAL LAW JURISDICTION.



   (A)   A person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in
this municipality if any of the following occur:



      (1)   The person commits an offense under the laws of this
municipality, any element of which takes place in this municipality;



      (2)   While in this municipality, the person attempts to
commit, or is guilty of complicity in the commission of, an offense in
another jurisdiction, which offense is an offense under both the laws of this
municipality and the other jurisdiction, or, while in this municipality, the
person conspires to commit an offense in another jurisdiction, which offense
is an offense under both the laws of this municipality and the other
jurisdiction, and a substantial overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy is
undertaken in this municipality by the person or another person involved in
the conspiracy, subsequent to the person's entrance into the conspiracy. In
any case in which a person attempts to commit, is guilty of complicity in the
commission of, or conspires to commit an offense in another jurisdiction as
described in this division, the person is subject to criminal prosecution and
punishment in this municipality for the attempt, complicity, or conspiracy,
and for any resulting offense that is committed or completed in the other
jurisdiction;



      (3)   While out of this municipality, the person conspires or
attempts to commit, or is guilty of complicity in the commission of, an
offense in this municipality;



      (4)   While out of this municipality, the person omits to
perform a legal duty imposed by the laws of this municipality, which omission
affects a legitimate interest of the municipality in protecting, governing or
regulating any person, property, thing, transaction, or activity in this
municipality;



      (5)   While out of this municipality, the person unlawfully
takes or retains property and subsequently brings any of the unlawfully taken
or retained property into this municipality;



      (6)   While out of this municipality, the person unlawfully
takes or entices another person and subsequently brings the other person into
this municipality;



      (7)   The person, by means of a computer, computer system,
computer network, telecommunication, telecommunications device,
telecommunications service, or information service, causes or knowingly
permits any writing, data, image or other telecommunication to be
disseminated or transmitted into this municipality in violation of the law of
this state or municipality.



   (B)   In homicide, the element referred to in division (A)(1) of
this section includes the act that causes death, the physical contact that
causes death, the death itself, or any other element that is set forth in the
offense in question. If any part of the body of a homicide victim is found in
this municipality, the death is presumed to have occurred within this
municipality.



   (C)   (1)   This municipality includes the land and water within
its boundaries and the air space above that land and water, with respect to
which this municipality has either exclusive or concurrent legislative
jurisdiction. Where the boundary between this municipality and another
jurisdiction is disputed, the disputed territory is conclusively presumed to
be within this municipality for purposes of this section.



      (2)   The courts of common pleas of Adams, Athens, Belmont,
Brown, Clermont, Columbiana, Gallia, Hamilton, Jefferson, Lawrence, Meigs,
Monroe, Scioto, and Washington counties have jurisdiction beyond the north or
northwest shore of the Ohio River extending to the opposite shore line,
between the extended boundary lines of any adjacent counties or adjacent
state. Each of those courts of common pleas has concurrent jurisdiction on
the Ohio River with any adjacent court of common pleas that borders on that
river and with any court of Kentucky or of West Virginia that borders on the
Ohio River and that has jurisdiction on the Ohio River under the law of
Kentucky or the law of West Virginia, whichever is applicable, or under
federal law.



   (D)   When an offense is committed under the laws of this
municipality, and it appears beyond a reasonable doubt that the offense or
any element of the offense took place either in this municipality or in
another jurisdiction or jurisdictions, but it cannot reasonably be determined
in which it took place, the offense or element is conclusively presumed to
have taken place in this municipality for purposes of this section.



   (E)   When a person is subject to criminal prosecution and
punishment in this municipality for an offense committed or completed outside
this municipality, the person is subject to all specifications for that
offense that would be applicable if the offense had been committed within
this municipality.



   (F)   Any act, conduct, or element that is a basis of a person being
subject under this section to criminal prosecution and punishment in this
municipality need not be committed personally by the person as long as it is
committed by another person who is in complicity or conspiracy with the
person.



   (G)   This section shall be liberally construed, consistent with
constitutional limitations, to allow this municipality the broadest possible
jurisdiction over offenses and persons committing offenses in, or affecting,
this municipality.



   (H)   For purposes of division (A)(2) of this section, an overt act
is substantial when it is of a character that manifests a purpose on the part
of the actor that the object of the conspiracy should be completed.



   (I)   As used in this section, COMPUTER, COMPUTER SYSTEM, COMPUTER
NETWORK, INFORMATION SERVICE, TELECOMMUNICATION, TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE,
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE, DATA and WRITING have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 2913.01.



(R.C. § 2901.11)



Statutory reference:



   State criminal law jurisdiction, see R.C. § 2901.11



§ 130.15  DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED OR FORFEITED PROPERTY HELD BY POLICE
DEPARTMENT.



   (A)   Safekeeping of property in custody.



      (1)   (a)   Any property that has been lost, abandoned,
stolen, seized pursuant to a search warrant, or otherwise lawfully seized or
forfeited and that is in the custody of the Police Department shall be kept
safely by the Police Department, pending the time it no longer is needed as
evidence or for another lawful purpose, and shall be disposed of pursuant to
this section or R.C. §§ 2981.12 and 2981.13.



         (b)   This section does not apply to the custody and
disposal of any of the following:



            1.   Vehicles subject to forfeiture under R.C.
Title 45, except as provided in division (B)(1)(f) of this section;



            2.   Abandoned junk motor vehicles or other
property of negligible value;



            3.   Property held by a department of
rehabilitation and correction institution that is unclaimed, that does not
have an identified owner, that the owner agrees to dispose of, or that is
identified by the department as having little value;



            4.   Animals taken, and devices used in unlawfully
taking animals, under R.C. § 1531.20;



            5.   Controlled substances sold by a peace officer
in the performance of the officer's official duties under R.C. § 3719.141;



            6.   Property recovered by a township law
enforcement agency under R.C. §§ 505.105 to 505.109;



            7.   Property held and disposed of under an
ordinance of the municipality or under R.C. §§ 737.29 to 737.33, except
that if the municipality has received notice of a citizens' reward program as
provided in division (B)(5) of this section and disposes of property under an
ordinance shall pay 25% of any moneys acquired from any sale or auction to
the citizens' reward program.



      (2)   (a)   The Police Department shall adopt and comply
with a written internal control policy that does all of the following:



            1.   Provides for keeping detailed records as to
the amount of property acquired by the Police Department and the date
property was acquired;



            2.   Provides for keeping detailed records of the
disposition of the property, which shall include, but not be limited to, both
of the following:



               a.   The manner in which it was disposed,
the date of disposition, detailed financial records concerning any property
sold, and the name of any person who received the property. The record shall
not identify or enable identification of the individual officer who seized
any item of property.



               b.   An itemized list of the specific
expenditures made with amounts that are gained from the sale of the property
and that are retained by the agency, including the specific amount expended
on each expenditure, except that the policy shall not provide for or permit
the identification of any specific expenditure that is made in an ongoing
investigation.



            3.   Complies with R.C. § 2981.13 if the Police
Department has a law enforcement trust fund or similar fund created under
that section.



         (b)   The records kept under the internal control policy
shall be open to public inspection during the Police Department’s regular
business hours. The policy adopted under this section is a public record open
for inspection under R.C. § 149.43.



      (3)   The Police Department, with custody of property to be
disposed of under this section or R.C. §§ 2981.12 or 2981.13, shall make a
reasonable effort to locate persons entitled to possession of the property,
to notify them of when and where it may be claimed, and to return the
property to them at the earliest possible time. In the absence of evidence
identifying persons entitled to possession, it is sufficient notice to
advertise in a newspaper of general circulation in the county and to briefly
describe the nature of the property in custody and inviting persons to view
and establish their right to it.



      (4)   As used in this section:



         CITIZENS' REWARD PROGRAM has the same meaning as in R.C. §
9.92.



         LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY includes correctional institutions.



         TOWNSHIP LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY means an organized police
department of a township, a township police district, a joint police
district, or the office of a township constable.



(R.C. § 2981.11)



   (B)   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property.



      (1)   Unclaimed or forfeited property in the custody of the
Police Department, other than property described in division (A)(1)(b) of
this section, shall be disposed of by order of any court of record that has
territorial jurisdiction over the municipality, as follows:



         (a)   Drugs shall be disposed of pursuant to R.C. §
3719.11 or placed in the custody of the Secretary of the Treasury of the
United States for disposal or use for medical or scientific purposes under
applicable federal law.



         (b)   Firearms and dangerous ordnance suitable for
police work may be given to a law enforcement agency for that purpose.
Firearms suitable for sporting use or as museum pieces or collectors’ items
may be sold at public auction pursuant to division (B)(2) of this section.
The Police Department may sell other firearms and dangerous ordnance to a
federally licensed firearms dealer in a manner that the court considers
proper. The Police Department shall destroy any firearms or dangerous
ordnance not given to a law enforcement agency or sold or shall send them to
the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation for destruction by
the Bureau.



         (c)   Obscene materials shall be destroyed.



         (d)   Beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol seized from
a person who does not hold a permit issued under R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303
or otherwise forfeited to the state for an offense under R.C. § 4301.45 or
R.C. § 4301.53 shall be sold by the Division of Liquor Control if the
Division determines that it is fit for sale or shall be placed in the custody
of the Investigations Unit in the Ohio Department of Public Safety and be
used for training relating to law enforcement activities. The Ohio Department
of Public Safety, with the assistance of the Division of Liquor Control,
shall adopt rules in accordance with R.C. Chapter 119 to provide for the
distribution to state or local law enforcement agencies upon their request.
If any tax imposed under R.C. Title 43 has not been paid in relation to the
beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol, any moneys acquired from the sale
shall first be used to pay the tax. All other money collected under this
division (B)(1)(d) shall be paid into the State Treasury. Any beer,
intoxicating liquor, or alcohol that the Division determines to be unfit for
sale shall be destroyed.



         (e)   Money received by an inmate of a correctional
institution from an unauthorized source or in an unauthorized manner shall be
returned to the sender, if known, or deposited in the inmates' industrial and
entertainment fund of the institution if the sender is not known.



         (f)   1.   Any mobile instrumentality forfeited under
R.C. Chapter 2981 may be given to the law enforcement agency that initially
seized the mobile instrumentality for use in performing its duties, if the
agency wants the mobile instrumentality. The agency shall take the mobile
instrumentality subject to any security interest or lien on the mobile
instrumentality.



            2.   Vehicles and vehicle parts forfeited under
R.C. §§ 4549.61 to 4549.63 may be given to a law enforcement agency for use
in performing its duties. Those parts may be incorporated into any other
official vehicle. Parts that do not bear vehicle identification numbers or
derivatives of them may be sold or disposed of as provided by rules of the
Director of Public Safety. Parts from which a vehicle identification number
or derivative of it has been removed, defaced, covered, altered, or destroyed
and that are not suitable for police work or incorporation into an official
vehicle shall be destroyed and sold as junk or scrap.



         (g)   Computers, computer networks, computer systems,
and computer software suitable for police work may be given to a law
enforcement agency for that purpose or disposed of under division (B)(2) of
this section.



         (h)   Money seized in connection with a violation of
R.C. § 2905.32, 2907.21, or 2907.22 shall be deposited in the Victims of
Human Trafficking Fund created by R.C. § 5101.87.



      (2)   Unclaimed or forfeited property that is not described in
division (B)(1) of this section or division (A)(1)(b) of this section, with
court approval, may be used by the law enforcement agency in possession of
it. If it is not used by the agency, it may be sold without appraisal at a
public auction to the highest bidder for cash or disposed of in another
manner that the court considers proper.



      (3)   Except as provided in divisions (B)(1) and (B)(5) of
this section and after compliance with division (B)(4) of this section when
applicable, any moneys acquired from the sale of property disposed of
pursuant to this section shall be placed in the general revenue fund of the
state, or the general fund of the municipality.



      (4)   If the property was in the possession of the Police
Department in relation to a delinquent child proceeding in a juvenile court,
10% of any moneys acquired from the sale of property disposed of under this
section shall be applied to one or more community addiction services
providers, as defined in R.C. § 5119.01. A juvenile court shall not specify
a services provider, except as provided in this division, unless the services
provider is in the same county as the court or in a contiguous county. If no
services provider is located in any of those counties, the juvenile court may
specify a services provider anywhere in Ohio. The remaining 90% of the
proceeds or cash shall be applied as provided in division (B)(3) of this
section.



      (5)   (a)   If the Board of County Commissioners recognizes
a citizens' reward program under R.C. § 9.92, the Board shall notify the
Police Department of the recognition by filing a copy of its resolution
conferring that recognition with the Police Department. When the Board
recognizes a citizens' reward program and the county includes a part, but not
all, of the territory of the municipality, the Board shall so notify the
Police Department of the recognition of the citizens' reward program only if
the county contains the highest percentage of the municipality's population.



         (b)   Upon being so notified, the Police Department
shall pay 25% of any forfeited proceeds or cash derived from each sale of
property disposed of pursuant to this section to the citizens' reward program
for use exclusively to pay rewards. No part of the funds may be used to pay
expenses associated with the program. If a citizens' reward program that
operates in more than one county or in another state in addition to this
state receives funds under this section, the funds shall be used to pay
rewards only for tips and information to law enforcement agencies concerning
offenses committed in the county from which the funds were received.



      (6)   Any property forfeited under R.C. Chapter 2981 not be
used to pay any fine imposed upon a person who is convicted of or pleads
guilty to an underlying criminal offense or a different offense arising out
of the same facts and circumstances.



      (7)   Any moneys acquired from the sale of personal effects,
tools, or other property seized because the personal effects, tools, or other
property were used in the commission of a violation of R.C. § 2905.32,
2907.21, or 2907.22 or derived from the proceeds of the commission of a
violation of R.C. § 2905.32, 2907.21, or 2907.22 and disposed of pursuant to
this division (B) shall be placed in the Victims of Human Trafficking Fund
created by R.C. § 5101.87.



(R.C. § 2981.12)



   (C)   Disposition of contraband, proceeds, or instrumentalities.
Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 2981.13, property ordered forfeited
as contraband, proceeds, or an instrumentality pursuant to R.C. Chapter 2981
shall be disposed of, used, or sold pursuant to division (B) of this section
or R.C. § 2981.12. If the property is to be sold under division (B) of this
section or R.C. § 2981.12, the prosecutor shall cause notice of the proposed
sale to be given in accordance with law.



(R.C. § 2981.13(A))



Statutory reference:



   Forfeiture of property generally, see R.C. Chapter 2981



§ 130.16  SELF-DEFENSE: LIMITATIONS ON DUTY TO RETREAT PRIOR TO USING FORCE.



   (A)   As used in this section, RESIDENCE and VEHICLE have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 2901.05.



   (B)   For purposes of any section of this code that sets forth a
criminal offense, a person who lawfully is in that person's residence has no
duty to retreat before using force in self-defense, defense of another, or
defense of that person's residence, and a person who lawfully is an occupant
of that person's vehicle or who lawfully is an occupant in a vehicle owned by
an immediate family member of the person has no duty to retreat before using
force in self defense or defense of another.



(R.C. § 2901.09)



§ 130.99  PENALTY FOR TITLE XIII.



   (A)   Except where otherwise specifically classified within the body
of the section of a chapter of this title, a violation of such section shall
be deemed a misdemeanor punishable upon conviction by a fine of not more than
$500, imprisonment of not more than six months, or both.



(R.C. § 715.67)



   (B)   Considerations in misdemeanor sentencing.



      (1)   A court that sentences an offender for a misdemeanor or
minor misdemeanor violation of any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, or of
any municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to a misdemeanor or
minor misdemeanor violation of a provision of the Ohio Revised Code, shall be
guided by the overriding purposes of misdemeanor sentencing. The overriding
purposes of misdemeanor sentencing are to protect the public from future
crime by the offender and others and to punish the offender. To achieve those
purposes, the sentencing court shall consider the impact of the offense upon
the victim and the need for changing the offender's behavior, rehabilitating
the defender, and making restitution to the victim of the offense, the
public, or the victim and the public.



      (2)   A sentence imposed for a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor violation of an Ohio Revised Code provision or for a violation of
a municipal ordinance that is subject to division (B)(1) of this section
shall be reasonably calculated to achieve the two overriding purposes of
misdemeanor sentencing set forth in division (B)(1) of this section,
commensurate with and not demeaning to the seriousness of the offender's
conduct and its impact upon the victim, and consistent with sentences imposed
for similar offenses committed by similar offenders.



      (3)   A court that imposes a sentence upon an offender for a
misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor violation of an Ohio Revised Code provision
or for a violation of a municipal ordinance that is subject to division
(B)(1) of this section shall not base the sentence upon the race, ethnic
background, gender, or religion of the offender.



      (4)   Divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) of this section shall not
apply to any offense that is disposed of by a traffic violations bureau of
any court pursuant to Traffic Rule 13 and shall not apply to any violation of
any provision of the Ohio Revised Code that is a minor misdemeanor and that
is disposed of without a court appearance. Divisions (B)(1) to (B)(3) of this
section do not affect any penalties established by the municipality for a
violation of its ordinances that are not substantially equivalent to a
misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor violation of a provision of the Ohio Revised
Code.



(R.C. § 2929.21)



   (C)   Misdemeanor jail terms.



      (1)   Except as provided in §§ 130.16 or 133.99 of this Code
or R.C. §§ 2929.22 or 2929.23 or division (C)(5) or (C)(6) of this section
and unless another term is required or authorized pursuant to law, if the
sentencing court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor
elects or is required to impose a jail term on the offender pursuant to this
chapter, the court shall impose a definite jail term that shall be one of the
following:



         (a)   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more
than 180 days;



         (b)   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more
than 90 days;



         (c)   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more
than 60 days;



         (d)   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more
than 30 days.



      (2)   (a)   A court that sentences an offender to a jail
term under division (C) of this section may permit the offender to serve the
sentence in intermittent confinement or may authorize a limited release of
the offender as provided in division (E)(2) of this section.  The court
retains jurisdiction over every offender sentenced to jail to modify the jail
sentence imposed at any time, but the court shall not reduce any mandatory
jail term.



         (b)   1.   If a prosecutor, as defined in R.C. §
2935.01, has filed a notice with the court that the prosecutor wants to be
notified about a particular case and if the court is considering modifying
the jail sentence of the offender in that case, the court shall notify the
prosecutor that the court is considering modifying the jail sentence of the
offender in that case. The prosecutor may request a hearing regarding the
court's consideration of modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that
case, and, if the prosecutor requests a hearing, the court shall notify the
eligible offender of the hearing.



            2.   If the prosecutor requests a hearing
regarding the court's consideration of modifying the jail sentence of the
offender in that case, the court shall hold the hearing before considering
whether or not to release the offender from the offender's jail sentence.



      (3)   If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under
division (C) of this section and the court assigns the offender to a county
jail that has established a county jail industry program pursuant to R.C. §
5147.30, the court shall specify, as part of the sentence, whether the
offender may be considered for participation in the program. During the
offender's term in the county jail, the court retains jurisdiction to modify
its specification regarding the offender's participation in the county jail
industry program.



      (4)   If a person sentenced to a jail term pursuant to
division (C) of this section, the court may impose as part of the sentence
pursuant to R.C. § 2929.28 a reimbursement sanction, and, if the local
detention facility in which the term is to be served is covered by a policy
adopted pursuant to R.C. §§ 307.93, 341.14, 341.19, 341.21, 341.23, 753.02,
753.04, 753.16, 2301.56, or 2947.19 and R.C. § 2929.37, both of the
following apply:



         (a)   The court shall specify both of the following as
part of the sentence:



            1.   If the person is presented with an itemized
bill pursuant to R.C. § 2929.37 for payment of the costs of confinement, the
person is required to pay the bill in accordance with that section.



            2.   If the person does not dispute the bill
described in division (C)(4)(a)1. of this section and does not pay the bill
by the times specified in R.C. § 2929.37, the clerk of the court may issue a
certificate of judgment against the person as described in that section.



         (b)   The sentence automatically includes any
certificate of judgment issued as described in division (C)(4)(a)2. of this
section.



      (5)   If an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of R.C. § 4511.19(B), or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, also is convicted of or also pleads guilty to a specification of
the type described in R.C. § 2941.1414 and if the court imposes a jail term
on the offender for the underlying offense, the court shall impose upon the
offender an additional definite jail term of not more than six months. The
additional jail term shall not be reduced pursuant to any provision of the
Revised Code. The offender shall serve the additional jail term consecutively
to and prior to the jail term imposed for the underlying offense and
consecutively to any other mandatory term imposed in relation to the offense.



      (6)   (a)   If an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty
to a misdemeanor violation of R.C. § 2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241, or 2907.25,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and to a specification
of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1421 and if the court imposes a jail
term on the offender for the misdemeanor violation, the court may impose upon
the offender an additional definite jail term as follows:



            1.   Subject to division (C)(6)(a)2. of this
section, an additional definite jail term of not more than 60 days;



            2.   If the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to one or more misdemeanor or felony violations of R.C.
§ 2907.22, 2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241, or 2907.25, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and also was convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a specification of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1421 regarding one
or more of those violations, an additional definite jail term of not more
than 120 days.



         (b)   In lieu of imposing an additional definite jail
term under division (C)(6)(a) of this section, the court may directly impose
on the offender a sanction that requires the offender to wear a real-time
processing, continual tracking electronic monitoring device during the period
of time specified by the court. The period of time specified by the court
shall equal the duration of an additional jail term that the court could have
imposed upon the offender under division (C)(6)(a) of this section. A
sanction imposed under this division shall commence on the date specified by
the court, provided that the sanction shall not commence until after the
offender has served the jail term imposed for the misdemeanor violation of
R.C. § 2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241, or 2907.25, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and any residential sanction imposed for the
violation under division (E) of this section or R.C. § 2929.26. A sanction
imposed under this division shall be considered to be a community control
sanction for purposes of division (D) or this section or R.C. § 2929.25, and
all provisions of this code and the Ohio Revised Code that pertain to
community control sanctions shall apply to a sanction imposed under this
division, except to the extent that they would by their nature be clearly
inapplicable. The offender shall pay all costs associated with a sanction
imposed under this division, including the cost of the use of the monitoring
device.



      (7)   If an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
misdemeanor violation of R.C. § 2903.13 and also is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a specification of the type described in R.C. § 2941.1423 that
charges that the victim of the violation was a woman whom the offender knew
was pregnant at the time of the violation, the court shall impose on the
offender a mandatory jail term that is a definite term of at least 30 days.



      (8)   If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under
this division (C), the sentencing court retains jurisdiction over the
offender and the jail term. Upon motion of either party or upon the court's
own motion, the court, in the court's sole discretion and as the
circumstances warrant, may substitute one or more community control sanctions
under division (E) or (F) of this section for any jail days that are not
mandatory jail days.



(R.C. § 2929.24)



   (D)   Misdemeanor community control sanctions.



      (1)   (a)   Except as provided in §§ 130.13 and 133.99 of
this Code or R.C. §§ 2929.22 and 2929.23 or when a jail term is required by
law, in sentencing an offender for a misdemeanor, other than a minor
misdemeanor, the sentencing court may do either of the following:



            1.   Directly impose a sentence that consists of
one or more community control sanctions authorized by divisions (E), (F), or
(G) of this section. The court may impose any other conditions of release
under a community control sanction that the court considers appropriate. If
the court imposes a jail term upon the offender, the court may impose any
community control sanction or combination of community control sanctions in
addition to the jail term.



            2.   Impose a jail term under division (C) of this
section from the range of jail terms suspend all or a portion of the jail
term imposed, and place the offender under a community control sanction or
combination of community control sanctions authorized under divisions (E),
(F), or (G) of this section.



         (b)   The duration of all community control sanctions
imposed upon an offender and in effect for an offender at any time shall not
exceed five years.



         (c)   At sentencing, if a court directly imposes a
community control sanction or combination of community control sanctions
pursuant to division (D)(1)(a)1. of this section, the court shall state the
duration of the community control sanctions imposed and shall notify the
offender that if any of the conditions of the community control sanctions are
violated the court may do any of the following:



            1.   Impose a longer time under the same community
control sanction if the total time under all of the offender's community
control sanctions does not exceed the five-year limit specified in division
(D)(1)(b) of this section;



            2.   Impose a more restrictive community control
sanction under division (E), (F), or (G) of this section, but the court is
not required to impose any particular sanction or sanctions;



            3.   Impose a definite jail term from the range of
jail terms authorized for the offense under division (C) of this section.



      (2)   If a court sentences an offender to any community
control sanction or combination of community control sanctions pursuant to
division (D)(1)(a)1. of this section, the sentencing court retains
jurisdiction over the offender and the period of community control for the
duration of the period of community control. Upon the motion of either party
or on the court's own motion, the court, in the court's sole discretion and
as the circumstances warrant, may modify the community control sanctions or
conditions of release previously imposed, substitute a community control
sanction or condition of release for another community control sanction or
condition of release previously imposed, or impose an additional community
control sanction or condition of release.



      (3)   (a)   If a court sentences an offender to any
community control sanction or combination of community control sanctions
authorized under division (E), (F), or (G) of this section, the court shall
place the offender under the general control and supervision of the court or
of a department of probation in the jurisdiction that serves the court for
purposes of reporting to the court a violation of any of the conditions of
the sanctions imposed. If the offender resides in another jurisdiction and a
department of probation has been established to serve the municipal court or
county court in that jurisdiction, the sentencing court may request the
municipal court or the county court to receive the offender into the general
control and supervision of that department of probation for purposes of
reporting to the sentencing court a violation of any of the conditions of the
sanctions imposed. The sentencing court retains jurisdiction over any
offender whom it sentences for the duration of the sanction or sanctions
imposed.



         (b)   The sentencing court shall require as a condition
of any community control sanction that the offender abide by the law and not
leave the state without the permission of the court or the offender's
probation officer. In the interests of doing justice, rehabilitating the
offender, and ensuring the offender's good behavior, the court may impose
additional requirements on the offender. The offender's compliance with the
additional requirements also shall be a condition of the community control
sanction imposed upon the offender.



      (4)   (a)   If the court imposing sentence upon an offender
sentences the offender to any community control sanction or combination of
community control sanctions authorized under division (E), (F), or (G) of
this section, and the offender violates any of the conditions of the
sanctions, the public or private person or entity that supervises or
administers the program or activity that comprises the sanction shall report
the violation directly to the sentencing court or to the department of
probation or probation officer with general control and supervision over the
offender. If the public or private person or entity reports the violation to
the department of probation or probation officer, the department or officer
shall report the violation to the sentencing court.



         (b)   If an offender violates any condition of a
community control sanction, the sentencing court may impose upon the violator
one or more of the following penalties:



            1.   A longer time under the same community
control sanction if the total time under all of the community control
sanctions imposed on the violator does not exceed the five-year limit
specified in division (D)(1)(b) of this section;



            2.   A more restrictive community control sanction;



            3.   A combination of community control sanctions,
including a jail term.



         (c)   If an offender was acting pursuant to R.C. §
2925.11(B)(2)(b), or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and in
so doing violated the conditions of a community control sanction based on a
minor drug possession offense, as defined in R.C. § 2925.11, the sentencing
court may consider the offender’s conduct in seeking or obtaining medical
assistance for another in good faith or for self or may consider the offender
being the subject of another person seeking or obtaining medical assistance
in accordance with that division as a mitigating factor before imposing any
of the penalties described in division (D)(4)(b) of this section.



         (d)   If the court imposes a jail term upon a violator
pursuant to division (D)(4)(b) of this section, the total time spent in jail
for the misdemeanor offense and the violation of a condition of the community
control sanction shall not exceed the maximum jail term available for the
offense for which the sanction that was violated was imposed. The court may
reduce the longer period of time that the violator is required to spend under
the longer sanction or the more restrictive sanction imposed under division
(D)(4)(b) of this section by all or part of the time the violator
successfully spent under the sanction that was initially imposed.



      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if an
offender, for a significant period of time, fulfills the conditions of a
community control sanction imposed pursuant to division (E), (F), or (G) of
this section in an exemplary manner, the court may reduce the period of time
under the community control sanction or impose a less restrictive community
control sanction. Fulfilling the conditions of a community control sanction
does not relieve the offender of a duty to make restitution under division
(G) of this section.



(R.C. § 2929.25)



   (E)   Community residential sanction.



      (1)   Except when a mandatory jail term is required by law,
the court imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a minor
misdemeanor, may impose upon the offender any community residential sanction
or combination of community residential sanctions under this division (E). 
Community residential sanctions include, but are not limited to, the
following:



         (a)   A term of up to 180 days in a halfway house or a
term in a halfway house not to exceed the longest jail term available for the
offense, whichever is shorter, if the political subdivision that would have
responsibility for paying the costs of confining the offender in a jail has
entered into a contract with the halfway house for use of the facility for
misdemeanor offenders;



         (b)   If the offender is an eligible offender, as
defined in R.C. § 307.932, a term in a community alternative sentencing
center or district community alternative sentencing center established and
operated in accordance with that section, in the circumstances specified in
that section, with one of the conditions of the sanction being that the
offender successfully complete the portion of the sentence to be served in
the center.



      (2)   A sentence to a community residential sanction under
division (E)(1)(b) of this section shall be in accordance with R.C. §
307.932. In all other cases, the court that sentences an offender to a
community residential sanction under this division (E) may do either or both
of the following:



         (a)   Permit the offender to serve the offender’s
sentence in intermittent confinement, overnight, on weekends or at any other
time or times that will allow the offender to continue at the offender’s
occupation or care for the offender’s family;



         (b)   Authorize the offender to be released so that the
offender may seek or maintain employment, receive education or training,
receive treatment, perform community service, or otherwise fulfill an
obligation imposed by law or by the court. A release pursuant to this
division shall be only for the duration of time that is needed to fulfill the
purpose of the release and for travel that reasonably is necessary to fulfill
the purposes of release.



      (3)   The court may order that a reasonable portion of the
income earned by the offender upon a release pursuant to division (E)(2) of
this section be applied to any financial sanction imposed under division (G)
of this section.



      (4)   No court shall sentence any person to a prison term for
a misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor or to a jail term for a minor misdemeanor.



      (5)   If a court sentences a person who has been convicted of
or pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor to a community residential sanction as
described in division (E)(1) of this section, at the time of reception and at
other times the person in charge of the operation of the halfway house,
community alternative sentencing center, district community alternative
sentencing center, or other place at which the offender will serve the
residential sanction determines to be appropriate, the person in charge of
the operation of the halfway house, community alternative sentencing center,
district community alternative sentencing center, or other place may cause
the convicted offender to be examined and tested for tuberculosis, HIV
infection, hepatitis, including, but not limited to, hepatitis A, B, and C,
and other contagious diseases. The person in charge of the operation of the
halfway house, community alternative sentencing center, district community
alternative sentencing center, or other place at which the offender will
serve the residential sanction may cause a convicted offender in the halfway
house, community alternative sentencing center, district community
alternative sentencing center, or other place who refuses to be tested or
treated for tuberculosis, HIV infection, hepatitis, including, but not
limited to, hepatitis A, B, and C, or another contagious disease to be tested
and treated involuntarily.



      (6)   The municipality may enter into a contract with a
halfway house for use of the halfway house to house misdemeanor offenders
under a sanction imposed under division (E)(1)(a) of this section.



(R.C. § 2929.26)



   (F)   Nonresidential sanction where jail term is not mandatory.



      (1)   Except when a mandatory jail term is required by law,
the court imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a minor
misdemeanor, may impose upon the offender any nonresidential sanction or
combination of nonresidential sanctions authorized under this division. 
Nonresidential sanctions include, but are not limited to, the following:



         (a)   A term of day reporting;



         (b)   A term of house arrest with electronic monitoring
or continuous alcohol monitoring or both electronic monitoring and continuous
alcohol monitoring, a term of electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol
monitoring without house arrest, or a term of house arrest without electronic
monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring;



         (c)   A term of community service of up to 500 hours for
misdemeanor of the first degree or 200 hours for a misdemeanor of the second,
third, or fourth degree;



         (d)   A term in a drug treatment program with a level of
security for the offender as determined necessary by the court;



         (e)   A term of intensive probation supervision;



         (f)   A term of basic probation supervision;



         (g)   A term of monitored time;



         (h)   A term of drug and alcohol use monitoring,
including random drug testing;



         (i)   A curfew term;



         (j)   A requirement that the offender obtain employment;



         (k)   A requirement that the offender obtain education
or training;



         (l)   Provided the court obtains the prior approval of
the victim, a requirement that the offender participate in victim-offender
mediation;



         (m)   If authorized by law, suspension of the offender's
privilege to operate a motor vehicle, immobilization or forfeiture of the
offender's motor vehicle, a requirement that the offender obtain a valid
motor vehicle operator's license, or any other related sanction;



         (n)   A requirement that the offender obtain counseling
if the offense is a violation of R.C. § 2919.25 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance or a violation of R.C. § 2903.13 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance involving a person who was a
family or household member at the time of the violation, if the offender
committed the offense in the vicinity of one or more children who are not
victims of the offense, and if the offender or the victim of the offense is a
parent, guardian, custodian, or person in loco parentis of one or more of
those children. This division does not limit the court in requiring that the
offender obtain counseling for any offense or in any circumstance not
specified in this division.



      (2)   If the court imposes a term of community service
pursuant to division (F)(1)(c) of this section, the offender may request that
the court modify the sentence to authorize the offender to make a reasonable
contribution, as determined by the court, to the general fund of the county,
municipality, or other local entity that provides funding to the court. The
court may grant the request if the offender demonstrates a change in
circumstances from the date the court imposes the sentence or that the
modification would otherwise be in the interests of justice. If the court
grants the request, the offender shall make a reasonable contribution to the
court, and the clerk of the court shall deposit that contribution into the
general fund of the county, municipality, or other local entity that provides
funding to the court. If more than one entity provides funding to the court,
the clerk shall deposit a percentage of the reasonable contribution equal to
the percentage of funding the entity provides to the court in that entity's
general fund.



      (3)   In addition to the sanctions authorized under division
(F)(1) of this section, the court imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor,
other than a minor misdemeanor, upon an offender who is not required to serve
a mandatory jail term may impose any other sanction that is intended to
discourage the offender or other persons from committing a similar offense if
the sanction is reasonably related to the overriding purposes and principles
of misdemeanor sentencing.



      (4)   The court imposing a sentence for a minor misdemeanor
may impose a term of community service in lieu of all or part of a fine. The
term of community service imposed for a minor misdemeanor shall not exceed 30
hours.  After imposing a term of community service, the court may modify the
sentence to authorize a reasonable contribution, as determined by the court,
to the appropriate general fund as provided in division (F)(2) of this
section.



(R.C. § 2929.27)



   (G)   Financial sanctions.



      (1)   In addition to imposing court costs pursuant to R.C. §
2947.23, the court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor,
including a minor misdemeanor, may sentence the offender to any financial
sanction or combination of financial sanctions authorized under this division
(G). If the court in its discretion imposes one or more financial sanctions,
the financial sanctions that may be imposed pursuant to this section include,
but are not limited to, the following:



         (a)   Restitution.



            1.   Unless the misdemeanor offense is a minor
misdemeanor or could be disposed of by the Traffic Violations Bureau serving
the court under Traffic Rule 13, restitution by the offender to the victim of
the offender's crime or any survivor of the victim, in an amount based upon
the victim's economic loss. The court may not impose restitution as a
sanction pursuant to this division if the offense is a minor misdemeanor or
could be disposed of by the Traffic Violations Bureau serving the court under
Traffic Rule 13. If the court requires restitution, the court shall order
that the restitution be made to the victim in open court or to the adult
probation department that serves the jurisdiction or the clerk of the court
on behalf of the victim.



            2.   If the court imposes restitution, the court
shall determine the amount of restitution to be paid by the offender. If the
court imposes restitution, the court may base the amount of restitution it
orders on an amount recommended by the victim, the offender, a presentence
investigation report, estimates or receipts indicating the cost of repairing
or replacing property, and other information, provided that the amount the
court orders as restitution shall not exceed the amount of economic loss
suffered by the victim as a direct and proximate result of the commission of
the offense. If the court decides to impose restitution, the court shall hold
an evidentiary. If the court holds an evidentiary hearing, at the hearing the
victim or survivor has the burden to prove by a preponderance of the evidence
the amount of restitution sought from the offender.



            3.   All restitution payments shall be credited
against any recovery of economic loss in a civil action brought by the victim
or any survivor of the victim against the offender.  No person may introduce
evidence of an award of restitution under this section in a civil action for
purposes of imposing liability against an insurer under R.C. § 3937.18.



            4.   If the court imposes restitution, the court
may order that the offender pay a surcharge, of not more than 5% of the
amount of the restitution otherwise ordered, to the entity responsible for
collecting and processing restitution payments.



            5.   The victim or survivor of the victim may
request that the prosecutor in the case file a motion, or the offender may
file a motion, for modification of the payment terms of any restitution
ordered. If the court grants the motion, it may modify the payment terms as
it determines appropriate.



         (b)   Fines. A fine of the type described in divisions
(G)(1)(b)1. and 2. of this section payable to the appropriate entity as
required by law:



            1.   A fine in the following amount:



               a.   For a misdemeanor of the first degree,
not more than $1,000;



               b.   For a misdemeanor of the second degree,
not more than $750;



               c.   For a misdemeanor of the third degree,
not more than $500;



               d.   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree,
not more than $250;



               e.   For a minor misdemeanor, not more than
$150.



            2.   A state fine or cost as defined in R.C. §
2949.111.



         (c)   Reimbursement.



            1.   Reimbursement by the offender of any or all
of the costs of sanctions incurred by the government, including, but not
limited to, the following:



               a.   All or part of the costs of
implementing any community control sanction, including a supervision fee
under R.C. § 2951.021;



               b.   All or part of the costs of confinement
in a jail or other residential facility, including, but not limited to, a per
diem fee for room and board, the costs of medical and dental treatment, and
the costs of repairing property damaged by the offender while confined;



               c.   All or part of the cost of purchasing
and using an immobilizing or disabling device, including a certified ignition
interlock device, or a remote alcohol monitoring device that a court orders
an offender to use under R.C. § 4510.13.



            2.   The amount of reimbursement under division
(G)(1)(c)1. of this section shall not exceed the total amount of
reimbursement the offender is able to pay and shall not exceed the actual
cost of the sanctions. The court may collect any amount of reimbursement the
offender is required to pay under that division. If the court does not order
reimbursement under that division, confinement costs may be assessed pursuant
to a repayment policy adopted under R.C. § 2929.37. In addition, the
offender may be required to pay the fees specified in R.C. § 2929.38 in
accordance with that section.



      (2)   (a)   If the court determines a hearing is necessary,
the court may hold a hearing to determine whether the offender is able to pay
the financial sanction imposed pursuant to this division (G) or court costs
or is likely in the future to be able to pay the sanction or costs.



         (b)   If the court determines that the offender is
indigent and unable to pay the financial sanction or court costs, the court
shall consider imposing and may impose a term of community service under
division (F)(1) of this section in lieu of imposing a financial sanction or
court costs. If the court does not determine that the offender is indigent,
the court may impose a term of community service under division (F)(1) of
this section in lieu of or in addition to imposing a financial sanction under
this division (G) and in addition to imposing court costs. The court may
order community service for a minor misdemeanor pursuant to division (F)(4)
of this section in lieu of or in addition to imposing a financial sanction
under this section and in addition to imposing court costs. If a person fails
to pay a financial sanction or court costs, the court may order community
service in lieu of the financial sanction or court costs.



      (3)   (a)   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed
upon the offender pursuant to division (G)(1)(c) of this section to pay the
costs incurred by a county pursuant to any sanction imposed under division
(E), (F), or (G) of this section or in operating a facility used to confine
offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (E) of this section
to the county treasurer. The county treasurer shall deposit the
reimbursements in the county's general fund. The county shall use the amounts
deposited in the fund to pay the costs incurred by the county pursuant to any
sanction imposed under division (E), (F), or (G) of this section or in
operating a facility used to confine offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed
under division (E) of this section.



         (b)   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed upon
the offender pursuant to division (G)(1)(c) of this section to pay the costs
incurred by a municipal corporation pursuant to any sanction imposed under
division (E), (F), or (G) of this section or in operating a facility used to
confine offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (E) of this
section to the treasurer of the municipal corporation. The treasurer shall
deposit the reimbursements in the municipal corporation's general fund. The
municipal corporation shall use the amounts deposited in the fund to pay the
costs incurred by the municipal corporation pursuant to any sanction imposed
under division (E), (F), or (G) of this section or in operating a facility
used to confine offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (E)
of this section.



         (c)   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed
pursuant to division (G)(1)(c) of this section for the costs incurred by a
private provider pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (E), (F), or
(G) of this section to the provider.



      (4)   In addition to any other fine that is or may be imposed
under this division (G), the court imposing sentence upon an offender for
misdemeanor domestic violence or menacing by stalking may impose a fine of
not less than $70 nor more than $500, which shall be transmitted to the
Treasurer of Ohio to be credited to the address confidentiality program fund
created by R.C. § 111.48.



      (5)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division
(G)(5), a financial sanction imposed under division (G)(1) of this section is
a judgment in favor of the state or the political subdivision that operates
the court that imposed the financial sanction, and the offender subject to
the financial sanction is the judgment debtor. A financial sanction of
reimbursement imposed pursuant to division (G)(1)(c)1.a. of this section upon
an offender is a judgment in favor of the entity administering the community
control sanction, and the offender subject to the financial sanction is the
judgment debtor. A financial sanction of reimbursement imposed pursuant to
division (G)(1)(c)1.b. of this section upon an offender confined in a jail or
other residential facility is a judgment in favor of the entity operating the
jail or other residential facility, and the offender subject to the financial
sanction is the judgment debtor. A financial sanction of restitution imposed
pursuant to division (G)(1)(a) of this section is an order in favor of the
victim of the offender’s criminal act that can be collected through a
certificate of judgment as described in division (G)(5)(b)1. of this section,
through execution as described in division (G)(5)(b)2. of this section or
through an order as described in division (G)(5)(b)3. of this section and the
offender shall be considered for purposes of the collection as a judgment
debtor.



         (b)   Once a financial sanction is imposed as a judgment
or order under this division, the victim, private provider, state, or
political subdivision may do any of the following:



            1.   Obtain from the clerk of the court in which
the judgment was entered a certificate of judgment that shall be in the same
manner and form as a certificate of judgment issued in a civil action;



            2.   Obtain execution of the judgment or order
through any available procedure,



including any of the procedures identified in R.C. § 2929.18(D)(1) and
(D)(2) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



            3.   Obtain an order for the assignment of wages
of the judgment debtor under R.C. § 1321.33 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.



      (6)   The civil remedies authorized under division (G)(5) of
this section for the collection of the financial sanction supplement, but do
not preclude, enforcement of the criminal sentence.



      (7)   Each court imposing a financial sanction upon an
offender under this division (G) may designate the clerk of the court or
another person to collect the financial sanction. The clerk, or another
person authorized by law or the court to collect the financial sanction may
do the following:



         (a)   Enter into contracts with one or more public
agencies or private vendors for the collection of amounts due under the
sanction. Before entering into a contract for the collection of amounts due
from an offender pursuant to any financial sanction imposed pursuant to this
division (G), a court shall comply with R.C. §§ 307.86 to 307.92.



         (b)   Permit payment of all or any portion of the
sanction in installments, by financial transaction device if the court is a
county court or a municipal court operated by a county, or by any other
reasonable method, in any time, and on any terms that the court considers
just, except that the maximum time permitted for payment shall not exceed
five years. If the court is a county court or a municipal court operated by a
county, the acceptance of payments by any financial transaction device shall
be governed by the policy adopted by the board of county commissioners of the
county pursuant to R.C. § 301.28. If the court is a municipal court not
operated by a county, the clerk may pay any fee associated with processing an
electronic transfer out of public money or may charge the fee to the offender.



         (c)   To defray administrative costs, charge a
reasonable fee to an offender who elects a payment plan rather than a lump
sum payment of any financial sanction.



      (8)   No financial sanction imposed under this division (G)
shall preclude a victim from bringing a civil action against the offender.



(R.C. § 2929.28)



   (H)   Organizational penalties.



      (1)   Regardless of the other penalties provided in this
section, an organization convicted of an offense pursuant to § 130.09 shall
be fined by the court as follows:



         (a)   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more
than $5,000;



         (b)   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more
than $4,000;



         (c)   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more
than $3,000;



         (d)   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more
than $2,000;



         (e)   For a minor misdemeanor, not more than $1,000;



         (f)   For a misdemeanor not specifically classified, not
more than $2,000;



         (g)   For a minor misdemeanor not specifically
classified, not more than $1,000.



      (2)   When an organization is convicted of an offense not
specifically classified, and the section defining the offense or penalty
plainly indicates a purpose to impose the penalty provided for violation upon
organizations, then such penalty shall be imposed in lieu of the penalty
provided in this section.



      (3)   When an organization is convicted of an offense not
specifically classified, and the penalty provided includes a higher fine than
that provided in this section, then the penalty imposed shall be pursuant to
the penalty provided for violation of the section defining the offense.



      (4)   This section does not prevent the imposition of
available civil sanctions against an organization convicted of an offense
pursuant to § 130.09, either in addition to or in lieu of a fine imposed
pursuant to this section.



(R.C. § 2929.31)  (Rev. 2004)



Cross-reference:



   Sentencing for sexually oriented offenses; sexual predators;
registration, see § 133.99



Statutory reference:



   Citation issuance and limitations on arrest for minor misdemeanors, see
R.C. § 2935.26



   Crime victim's reparations fund, see R.C. § 2929.32



   Habitual sex offender and sexual predator registration, see R.C.
Chapter 2950



   Reimbursement for costs of confinement, see R.C. §§ 2929.36 et seq.



   Reports to health care licensing boards of criminal offenses, see R.C.
§ 2929.42



CHAPTER 131: OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY



Section



   131.01   Definitions



   131.02   Arson



   131.03   Criminal damaging or endangering; vehicular vandalism



   131.04   Criminal mischief



   131.05   Determining property value or amount of physical harm



   131.06   Criminal trespass



   131.061   Aggravated trespass



   131.07   Tampering with coin machines



   131.08   Theft



   131.09   Unauthorized use of a vehicle



   131.10   Unauthorized use of property or access to computer systems



   131.11   Passing bad checks



   131.12   Misuse of credit cards



   131.13   Making or using slugs



   131.14   Prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud



   131.15   Tampering with records



   131.16   Securing writings by deception



   131.17   Defrauding creditors



   131.18   Receiving stolen property



   131.19   Value of stolen property



   131.20   Degree of offense when certain property involved



   131.21   Injuring vines, bushes, trees, or crops



   131.22   Detention and arrest of shoplifters and those committing
motion picture piracy; protection of institutional property



   131.23   Damaging or endangering aircraft, airport operations



   131.24   Injury to property by hunters



   131.25   Motion picture piracy



   131.26   Diminishing or interfering with forfeitable property



Public Property



   131.30   Definitions



   131.31   Public meetings; permission



   131.32   Concerts



   131.33   Flags



   131.34   Parades



   131.35   Races



   131.36   Damage



   131.37   Refuse



   131.38   Fireworks



   131.39   Gambling



   131.40   Park closing hours



   131.41   Foot paths and bridle paths



   131.42   Birds and animals



   131.43   Public recreation area rules



   131.44   Operating model aircraft



 



   131.99   Penalty



§ 131.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACTIVE DUTY SERVICE MEMBER. Any member of the armed forces of the
United States performing active duty under Title 10 of the United States Code.



   ANHYDROUS AMMONIA. A compound formed by the combination of two gaseous
elements, nitrogen and hydrogen, in the manner described below. Anhydrous
ammonia is one part nitrogen to three parts hydrogen (NH3). Anhydrous ammonia
by weight is fourteen parts nitrogen to three parts hydrogen, which is
approximately 82% nitrogen to 18% hydrogen.



   ASSISTANCE DOG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.



   CABLE TELEVISION SERVICE.  Any services provided by or through the
facilities of any cable television system or other similar closed circuit
coaxial cable communications system, or any microwave or similar transmission
service used in connection with any cable television system or other similar
closed circuit coaxial cable communications system.



   COIN MACHINE.  Any mechanical or electronic device designed to do both
of the following:



      (1)   Receive a coin or bill, or token made for that purpose;



      (2)   In return for the insertion or deposit of a coin, bill,
or token, automatically dispense property, provide a service, or grant a
license.



   COMPUTER.  An electronic device that performs logical, arithmetic, and
memory functions by the manipulation of electronic or magnetic impulses. 
COMPUTER includes, but is not limited to, all input, output, processing,
storage, computer program, or communication facilities that are connected, or
related, in a computer system or network to an electronic device of that
nature.



   COMPUTER CONTAMINANT. Means a computer program that is designed to
modify, damage, destroy, disable, deny or degrade access to, allow
unauthorized access to, functionally impair, record, or transmit information
within a computer, computer system, or computer network without the express
or implied consent of the owner or other person authorized to give consent
and that is of a type or kind described in divisions (1) through (4) of this
definition or of a type or kind similar to a type or kind described in
divisions (1) through (4) of this definition:



      (1)   A group of computer programs commonly known as "viruses"
and "worms" that are self-replicating or self-propagating and that are
designed to contaminate other computer programs, compromise computer
security, consume computer resources, modify, destroy, record, or transmit
data, or disrupt the normal operation of the computer, computer system, or
computer network;



      (2)   A group of computer programs commonly known as "Trojans"
or "Trojan horses" that are not self-replicating or self-propagating and that
are designed to compromise computer security, consume computer resources,
modify, destroy, record, or transmit data, or disrupt the normal operation of
the computer, computer system, or computer network;



      (3)   A group of computer programs commonly known as "zombies"
that are designed to use a computer without the knowledge and consent of the
owner, or other person authorized to give consent, and that are designed to
send large quantities of data to a targeted computer network for the purpose
of degrading the targeted computer's or network's performance, or denying
access through the network to the targeted computer or network, resulting in
what is commonly known as "denial of service" or "distributed denial of
service" attacks;



      (4)   A group of computer programs commonly known as "trap
doors", "back doors", or "root kits" that are designed to bypass standard
authentication software and that are designed to allow access or use of a
computer without the knowledge or consent of the owner, or other person
authorized to give consent.



   COMPUTER HACKING.



      (1)   COMPUTER HACKING means any of the following:



         (a)   Gaining access or attempting to gain access to all
or part of a computer, computer system, or a computer network without express
or implied authorization with the intent to defraud or with intent to commit
a crime;



         (b)   Misusing computer or network services including
but not limited to mail transfer programs, file transfer programs, proxy
servers, and web servers by performing functions not authorized by the owner
of the computer, computer system, or computer network or other person
authorized to give consent. As used in this division, "misuse of computer and
network services" includes but is not limited to the unauthorized use of any
of the following:



            1.   Mail transfer programs to send mail to
persons other than the authorized users of that computer or computer network;



            2.   File transfer program services or proxy
servers to access other computers, computer systems, or computer networks;



            3.   Web servers to redirect users to other web
pages or web servers.



         (c)   1.   Subject to division (1)(c)2. of this
definition, using a group of computer programs commonly known as "port
scanners" or "probes" to intentionally access any computer, computer system,
or computer network without the permission of the owner of the computer,
computer system, or computer network or other person authorized to give
consent. The group of computer programs referred to in this division includes
but is not limited to those computer programs that use a computer network to
access a computer, computer system, or another computer network to determine
any of the following: the presence or types of computers or computer systems
on a network; the computer network's facilities and capabilities; the
availability of computer or network services; the presence or versions of
computer software including but not limited to operating systems, computer
services, or computer contaminants; the presence of a known computer software
deficiency that can be used to gain unauthorized access to a computer,
computer system, or computer network; or any other information about a
computer, computer system, or computer network not necessary for the normal
and lawful operation of the computer initiating the access.



            2.   The group of computer programs referred to in
division (1)(c)1. of this definition does not include standard computer
software used for the normal operation, administration, management, and test
of a computer, computer system, or computer network including but not limited
to domain name services, mail transfer services, and other operating system
services, computer programs commonly called "ping", "tcpdump", and
"traceroute" and other network monitoring and management computer software,
and computer programs commonly knows as "nslookup" and "whois" and other
systems administration computer software.



         (d)   The intentional use of a computer, computer
system, or a computer network in a manner that exceeds any right or
permission granted by the owner of the computer, computer system, or computer
network or other person authorized to give consent.



      (2)   COMPUTER HACKING does not include the introduction of a
computer contaminant, as defined in this section, into a computer, computer
system, computer program, or computer network.



   COMPUTER NETWORK.  A set of related and remotely-connected computers
and communication facilities that includes more than one computer system that
has the capability to transmit among the connected computers and
communication facilities through the use of computer facilities.



   COMPUTER PROGRAM.  An ordered set of data representing coded
instructions or statements that, when executed by a computer, causes the
computer to process data.



   COMPUTER SERVICES.  Includes, but is not limited to, the use of a
computer system, computer network, computer program, data that is prepared
for computer use, or data that is contained within a computer system or
computer network.



   COMPUTER SOFTWARE.  Computer programs, procedures, and other
documentation associated with the operation of a computer system.



   COMPUTER SYSTEM.  A computer and related devices, whether connected or
unconnected, including, but not limited to, data input, output, and storage
devices, data communications links, and computer programs and data that make
the system capable of performing specified special purpose data processing
tasks.



   COUNTERFEIT TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE.  A telecommunications device
that, alone or with another telecommunications device, has been altered,
constructed, manufactured, or programmed to acquire, intercept, receive, or
otherwise facilitate the use of a telecommunications service or information
service without the authority or consent of the provider of the
telecommunications service or information service. The phrase includes but is
not limited to a clone telephone, clone microchip, tumbler telephone, or
tumbler microchip; a wireless scanning device capable of acquiring,
intercepting, receiving, or otherwise facilitating the use of
telecommunications service or information service without immediate
detection; or a device, equipment, hardware, or software designed for, or
capable of, altering or changing the electronic serial number in a wireless
telephone.



   CREATE A SUBSTANTIAL RISK OF SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM TO ANY PERSON.
Includes the creation of a substantial risk of serious physical harm to any
emergency personnel.



   CREDIT CARD.  Includes, but is not limited to, a card, code, device,
or other means of access to a customer's account for the purpose of obtaining
money, property, labor, or services on credit, or for initiating an
electronic fund transfer at a point-of-sale terminal, an automated teller
machine, or a cash dispensing machine. It also includes a county procurement
card issued under R.C. § 301.29.



   DANGEROUS DRUG. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.



   DATA.  A representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts, or
instructions that are being or have been prepared in a formalized manner and
that are intended for use in a computer, computer system, or computer network.



   DECEPTION.  To knowingly deceive another or cause another to be
deceived by any false or misleading representation, by withholding
information, by preventing another from acquiring information, or by any
other conduct, act, or omission that creates, confirms, or perpetuates a
false impression in another, including a false impression as to law, value,
state of mind, or other objective or subjective fact.



   DEFRAUD.  To knowingly obtain, by deception, some benefit for oneself
or another, or to knowingly cause, by deception, some detriment to another.



   DEPRIVE.  To do any of the following:



      (1)   To withhold property of another permanently, or for a
period that appropriates a substantial portion of its value or use, or with
purpose to restore it only upon payment of a reward or other consideration;



      (2)   To dispose of property so as to make it unlikely that
the owner will recover it;



      (3)   To accept, use, or appropriate money, property, or
services, with purpose not to give proper consideration in return for the
money, property, or services, and without reasonable justification or excuse
for not giving proper consideration.



   DISABLED ADULT.  A person who is 18 years of age or older and has some
impairment of body or mind that makes the person unable to work at any
substantially remunerative employment that the person otherwise would be able
to perform and that will, with reasonable probability, continue for a period
of at least 12 months without any present indication of recovery from the
impairment, or who is 18 years of age or older and has been certified as
permanently and totally disabled by an agency of this state or the United
States that has the function of so classifying persons.



   DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2925.01.



   ELDERLY PERSON.  A person who is 65 years of age or older.



   ELECTRONIC FUND TRANSFER.  Has the same meaning as in 92 Stat. 3728,
15 USC 1693a, as amended.



   EMERGENCY PERSONNEL. Means any of the following persons:



      (1)   A peace officer, as defined in R.C. § 2935.01;



      (2)   A member of a fire department or other firefighting
agency of a municipal corporation, township, township fire district, joint
fire district, other political subdivision, or combination of political
subdivisions;



      (3)   A member of a private fire company, as defined in R.C.
§ 9.60, or a volunteer firefighter;



      (4)    A member of a joint ambulance district or joint
emergency medical services district;



      (5)   An emergency medical technician-basic, emergency medical
technician-intermediate, emergency medical technician-paramedic, ambulance
operator, or other member of an emergency medical service that is owned or
operated by a political subdivision or a private entity;



      (6)   The State Fire Marshal, the Chief Deputy State Fire
Marshal, or an assistant state fire marshal;



      (7)   A fire prevention officer of a political subdivision or
an arson, fire, or similar investigator of a political subdivision.



   FEDERALLY-LICENSED FIREARMS DEALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5502.63.



   FIREARM and DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.  Have the same meaning as in R.C. §
2923.11.



   FORGE.  To fabricate or create, in whole or in part and by any means,
any spurious writing, or to make, execute, alter, complete, reproduce, or
otherwise purport to authenticate any writing, when the writing in fact is
not authenticated by that conduct.



   GAIN ACCESS.  To approach, instruct, communicate with, store data in,
retrieve data from, or otherwise make use of any resources of a computer,
computer system, or computer network or any cable service or cable system
both as defined in R.C. § 2913.04.



   INFORMATION SERVICE.



      (1)   Subject to division (2) of this definition, the offering
of a capability for generating, acquiring,  storing, transforming,
processing, retrieving, utilizing, or making available information via
telecommunications, including but not limited to electronic publishing.



      (2)   INFORMATION SERVICE does not include any use of a
capability of a type described in division (1) of this definition for the
management, control, or operation of a telecommunications system or the
management of a telecommunications service.



   INTERNET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 341.42.



   MOTOR VEHICLE.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.



   OCCUPIED STRUCTURE. Means any house, building, outbuilding, watercraft,
aircraft, railroad car, truck, trailer, tent, or other structure, vehicle, or
shelter, or any portion thereof, to which any of the following applies:



      (1)   It is maintained as a permanent or temporary dwelling,
even though it is temporarily unoccupied and whether nor not any person is
actually present;



      (2)   At the time, it is occupied as the permanent or
temporary habitation of any person, whether or not any person is actually
present;



      (3)   At the time, it is specially adapted for the overnight
accommodation of any person, whether or not any person is actually present;



      (4)   At the time, any person is present or likely to be
present in it.



   OWNER.  Unless the context requires a different meaning, any person,
other than the actor, who is the owner of, who has possession or control of,
or who has any license or interest in property or services, even though the
ownership, possession, control, license, or interest is unlawful.



   POLICE DOG OR HORSE. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 2921.321.



   POLITICAL SUBDIVISION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2744.01.



   RENTED PROPERTY.  Personal property in which the right of possession
and use of the property is for a short and possibly indeterminate term in
return for consideration; the rentee generally controls the duration of
possession of the property within any applicable minimum or maximum term; and
the amount of consideration is generally determined by the duration of
possession of the property.



   SERVICES. Includes labor, personal services, professional services,
rental services, public utility services including wireless service as
defined in R.C. § 128.01(F)(1), common carrier services, and food, drink,
transportation, entertainment, and cable television services and, for
purposes of R.C. § 2913.04 or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, includes cable services as defined in that section.



   SLUG.  An object that, by virtue of its size, shape, composition, or
other quality, is capable of being inserted or deposited in a coin machine as
an improper substitute for a genuine coin, bill, or token made for that
purpose.



   STATE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2744.01.



   TELECOMMUNICATION.  The origination, emission, dissemination,
transmission, or reception of data, images, signals, sounds, or other
intelligence or equivalence or intelligence of any nature over any
communications system by any method, including but not limited to a fiber
optic, electronic, magnetic, optical, digital or analog method.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE.  Any instrument, equipment, machine, or
other device that facilitates telecommunication, including but not limited to
a computer, computer network, computer chip, computer circuit, scanner,
telephone, cellular telephone, pager, personal communications device,
transponder, receiver, radio, modem, or device that enables the use of a
modem.



   TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE.  The providing, allowing, facilitating, or
generating of any form of telecommunication through the use of a
telecommunications device over a telecommunications system.



   THEFT OFFENSE.  Any of the following:



      (1)   A violation of R.C. §§ 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11,
2911.12, 2911.13, 2911.31, 2911.32, 2913.02, 2913.03, 2913.04, 2913.041,
2913.11, 2913.21, 2913.31, 2913.32, 2913.33, 2913.34, 2913.40, 2913.42,
2913.43, 2913.44, 2913.45, 2913.47, 2913.48, former R.C. §§ 2913.47 or
2913.48, or R.C. §§ 2913.51, 2915.05, or 2921.41;



      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance
or law of this or any other state or of the United States substantially
equivalent to any section listed in division (1) of this definition, or a
violation of R.C. § 2913.41, 2913.81 or 2915.06 as it existed prior to July
1, 1996;



      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal
ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United States involving
robbery, burglary, breaking and entering, theft, embezzlement, wrongful
conversion, forgery, counterfeiting, deceit, or fraud;



      (4)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity
in committing any offense under division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.



   UTTER.  To issue, publish, transfer, use, put or send into
circulation, deliver, or display.



   WRITING.  Any computer software, document, letter, memorandum, note,
paper, plate, data, film, or other thing having in or upon it any written,
type-written, or printed matter, and any token, stamp, seal, credit card,
badge, trademark, label, or other symbol of value, right, privilege, license,
or identification.



(R.C. §§ 2909.01, 2913.01) ('69 Code, § 132.01)  (Ord. C-417, passed
1-12-76)



§ 131.02  ARSON.



   (A)   No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall knowingly do
any of the following:



      (1)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to
any property of another without the other person’s consent;



      (2)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to
any property of the offender or another, with purpose to defraud;



      (3)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to
the statehouse or a courthouse, school building, or other building or
structure that is owned or controlled by the state, any political
subdivision, or any department, agency, or instrumentality of the state or a
political subdivision, and that is used for public purposes;



      (4)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm,
through the offer or the acceptance of an agreement for hire or other
consideration, to any property of another without the other person’s
consent or to any property of the offender or another with purpose to defraud;



      (5)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to
any park, preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over land, forest,
timberland, greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is owned or
controlled by another person, the state, or a political subdivision without
the consent of the other person, the state, or the political subdivision;



      (6)   With purpose to defraud, cause, or create a substantial
risk of, physical harm to any park, preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land,
cut-over land, forest, timberland, greenlands, woods, or similar real
property that is owned or controlled by the offender, another person, the
state, or a political subdivision.



   (B)   No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall knowingly do
any of the following:



      (1)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to
any structure of another that is not an occupied structure;



      (2)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm,
through the offer or the acceptance of an agreement for hire or other
consideration, to any structure of another that is not an occupied structure;



      (3)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to
any structure that is not an occupied structure and that is in or on any
park, preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over land, forest,
timberland, greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is owned or
controlled by another person, the state, or a political subdivision.



   (C)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under
division (B)(1) or (B)(2) of this section that the defendant acted with the
consent of the other person.



      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division
(B)(3) of this section that the defendant acted with the consent of the other
person, the state, or the political subdivision.



   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of arson.



      (2)   A violation of division (A)(1) or (B)(1) of this section
is one of the following:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(2)(b)
of this section, a misdemeanor of the first degree;



         (b)   If the value of the property or the amount of the
physical harm involved is $1,000 or more, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



      (3)   A violation of division (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), (A)(5),
(A)(6), (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2909.03)  ('69 Code, § 132.03)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



§ 131.03  CRIMINAL DAMAGING OR ENDANGERING; VEHICULAR VANDALISM.



   (A)   Criminal damaging or endangering.



      (1)   No person shall cause or create a substantial risk of
physical harm to any property of another without the other person's consent:



         (a)   Knowingly, by any means; or



         (b)   Recklessly, by means of fire, explosion, flood,
poison gas, poison, radioactive material, caustic or corrosive material, or
other inherently dangerous agency or substance.



      (2)   Whoever violates this division (A) is guilty of criminal
damaging or endangering, a misdemeanor of the second degree. If violation of
this division (A) creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal
damaging or endangering is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the property
involved in a violation of this division (A) is an aircraft, an aircraft
engine, propeller, appliance, spare part, or any other equipment or implement
used or intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if the
violation creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging or
endangering is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. If the
property involved in a violation of this division (A) is n aircraft, an
aircraft engine, propeller, appliance, spare part, or any other equipment or
implement used or intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if
the violation creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person or if
the property involved in a violation of this division (A) is an occupied
aircraft, criminal damaging or endangering is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2909.06)



   (B)   Vehicular vandalism.



      (1)   As used in this division (B):



         ALLEY, STREET, and VEHICLE. Have the same meanings as in
R.C. § 4511.01.



         HIGHWAY. Means any highway as defined in R.C. § 4511.01 or
any lane, road, street, alley, bridge, or overpass.



         VESSEL and WATERS IN THIS STATE. Have the same meanings as
in R.C. § 1546.01.



      (2)   No person shall knowingly, and by any means, drop or
throw any object at, onto, or in the path of any of the following:



         (a)   Any vehicle on a highway;



         (b)   Any boat or vessel on any of the waters in this
state.



      (3)   Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of
vehicular vandalism. Except as otherwise provided in this division (B)(3),
vehicular vandalism is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation of
this division (B) creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person
or the violation of this division (B) causes serious physical harm to
property, vehicular vandalism is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law. If the violation of this division (B) causes physical harm to any
person or serious physical harm to any person, vehicular vandalism is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. §§ 2909.06, 2909.09)  ('69 Code, § 132.04)  (Ord. C-417, passed
1-12-76)



Statutory reference:



   Disrupting public services, felony offense, see R.C. § 2909.04



   Railroad grade crossing device vandalism, see R.C. § 2909.101



   Railroad vandalism, see R.C. § 2909.10



   Vandalism, felony offense, see R.C. § 2909.05



§ 131.04  CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.



   (A)   No person shall:



      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface,
damage, destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with the either of the
following:



         (a)   The property of another;



         (b)   One’s own residential real property with the
purpose to decrease the value of or enjoyment of the residential real
property, if both of the following apply:



            1.   The residential real property is subject to a
mortgage.



            2.   The person has been served with a summons and
complaint in a pending residential mortgage loan foreclosure action relating
to that real property. As used in this division, “pending” includes the
time between judgment entry and confirmation of sale.



      (2)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of
property of another, employ a tear gas device, stink bomb, smoke generator,
or other device releasing a substance that is harmful or offensive to persons
exposed, or that tends to cause public alarm;



      (3)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface,
damage, destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with a bench mark,
triangulation station, boundary marker, or other survey station, monument, or
marker;



      (4)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface,
damage, destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with any safety device, the
property of another, or the property of the offender when required or placed
for the safety of others, so as to destroy or diminish its effectiveness or
availability for its intended purpose.



      (5)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of
the property of another, set a fire on the land of another or place personal
property that has been set on fire on the land of another, which fire or
personal property is outside and apart from any building, other structure, or
personal property that is on that land;



      (6)   Without privilege to do so, and with intent to impair
the functioning of any computer, computer system, computer network, computer
software, or computer program, knowingly do any of the following:



         (a)   In any manner or by any means, including but not
limited to, computer hacking, alter, damage, destroy, or modify a computer,
computer system, computer network, computer software, or computer program or
data contained in a computer, computer system, computer network, computer
software, or computer program;



         (b)   Introduce a computer contaminant into a computer,
computer system, computer network, computer software, or computer program.



   (B)   As used in this section, SAFETY DEVICE means any fire
extinguisher, fire hose, or fire axe, or any fire escape, emergency exit, or
emergency escape equipment, or any life line, life-saving ring, life
preserver, or life boat or raft, or any alarm, light, flare, signal, sign, or
notice intended to warn of danger or emergency, or intended for other safety
purposes, or any guard railing or safety barricade, or any traffic sign or
signal, or any railroad grade crossing sign, signal, or gate, or any first
aid or survival equipment, or any other device, apparatus, or equipment
intended for protecting or preserving the safety of persons or property.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal mischief,
and shall be punished as provided in division (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this
section.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, criminal
mischief committed in violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4),
or (A)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third degree. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, if the violation of division (A)(1),
(A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section creates a risk of physical
harm to any person, criminal mischief committed in violation of division
(A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.  If the property involved in the violation of division
(A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section is an aircraft, an
aircraft engine, propeller, appliance, spare part, fuel, lubricant, hydraulic
fluid, any other equipment, implement, or material used or intended to be
used in the operation of an aircraft, or any cargo carried or intended to be
carried in an aircraft and if the violation creates any risk of physical harm
to any person, or if the aircraft in question is an occupied aircraft,
criminal mischief committed in violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3),
(A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, criminal
mischief committed in violation of division (A)(6) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the value of the computer, computer
system, computer network, computer software, computer program, or data
involved in the violation of division (A)(6) of this section or the loss to
the victim resulting from the violation is $1,000 or more, or if the
computer, computer system, computer network, computer software, computer
program, or data involved in the violation of division (A)(6) is used or
intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and the violation creates
any risk of physical harm to any person, or if the aircraft in question is an
occupied aircraft, criminal mischief committed in violation of division
(A)(6) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.



(R.C. § 2909.07)  ('69 Code, § 132.05)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



§ 131.05  DETERMINING PROPERTY VALUE OR AMOUNT OF PHYSICAL HARM.



   (A)   The following criteria shall be used in determining the value
of property or amount of physical harm involved in a violation of § 131.02:



      (1)   If the property is an heirloom, memento, collector's
item, antique, museum piece, manuscript, document, record, or other thing
that is either irreplaceable or is replaceable only on the expenditure of
substantial time, effort, or money, the value of the property or the amount
of physical harm involved is the amount that would compensate the owner for
its loss.



      (2)   If the property is not covered under division (A)(1) of
this section, and the physical harm is such that the property can be restored
substantially to its former condition, the amount of physical harm involved
is the reasonable cost of restoring the property.



      (3)   If the property is not covered under division (A)(1) of
this section, and the physical harm is such that the property cannot be
restored substantially to its former condition, the value of the property, in
the case of personal property, is the cost of replacing the property with new
property of like kind and quality, and in the case of real property or real
property fixtures, is the difference in the fair market value of the property
immediately before and immediately after the offense.



   (B)   As used in this section, FAIR MARKET VALUE has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 2913.61.



   (C)   Prima facie evidence of the value of property, as provided in
R.C. § 2913.61(D), may be used to establish the value of property pursuant
to this section.



(R.C. § 2909.11(B) - (D))



§ 131.06  CRIMINAL TRESPASS.



   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall do any of the
following:



      (1)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of
another;



      (2)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of
another, the use of which is lawfully restricted to certain persons,
purposes, modes, or hours, when the offender knows the offender is in
violation of any such restriction or is reckless in that regard;



      (3)   Recklessly enter or remain on the land or premises of
another, as to which notice against unauthorized access or presence is given
by actual communication to the offender, or in a manner prescribed by law, or
by posting in a manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of
potential intruders, or by fencing or other enclosure manifestly designed to
restrict access;



      (4)   Being on the land or premises of another, negligently
fail or refuse to leave upon being notified by signage posted in a
conspicuous place or otherwise being notified to do so by the owner or
occupant, or the agent or servant of either.



   (B)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the land
or premises involved was owned, controlled, or in custody of a public agency.



   (C)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the
offender was authorized to enter or remain on the land or premises involved,
when the authorization was secured by deception.



   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is
guilty of criminal trespass, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



      (2)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 2929.28, if the person, in
committing the violation of this section, used a snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle, the court shall impose a fine of two
times the usual amount imposed for the violation.



      (3)   If an offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section, R.C. § 2911.21 or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and the offender, in
committing each violation, used a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or
all-purpose vehicle, the court, in addition to or independent of all other
penalties imposed for the violation, may impound the certificate of
registration of that snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle or the certificate
of registration and license plate of that all-purpose vehicle for not less
than 60 days. In such a case, R.C. § 4519.47 applies.



   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, if the
offender, in committing the violation of this section, used an all-purpose
vehicle, the Clerk of the Court shall pay the fine imposed pursuant to this
section to the State Recreational Vehicle Fund created by R.C. § 4519.11.



   (F)   As used in this section:



      ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLE, OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE, and SNOWMOBILE have
the same meanings as in R.C. § 4519.01.



      LAND or PREMISES. Includes any land, building, structure, or
place belonging to, controlled by, or in custody of another, and any separate
enclosure or room, or portion thereof.



(R.C. § 2911.21)  ('69 Code, § 132.06)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



   (G)   Criminal trespass on a place of public amusement.



      (1)   As used in this division (G), PLACE OF PUBLIC AMUSEMENT
means a stadium, theater, or other facility, whether licensed or not, at
which a live performance, sporting event, or other activity takes place for
entertainment of the public and to which access is made available to the
public, regardless of whether admission is charged.



      (2)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly
enter or remain on any restricted portion of a place of public amusement and,
as a result of that conduct, interrupt or cause the delay of the live
performance, sporting event, or other activity taking place at the place of
public amusement after a printed written notice has been given as provided in
division (G)(4)(a) of this section that the general public is restricted from
access to that restricted portion of the place of public amusement. A
restricted portion of a place of public amusement may include, but is not
limited to, a playing field, an athletic surface, or a stage located at the
place of public amusement.



      (3)   An owner or lessee of a place of public amusement, an
agent of the owner or lessee, or a performer or participant at a place of
public amusement may use reasonable force to restrain and remove a person
from a restricted portion of the place of public amusement if the person
enters or remains on the restricted portion of the place of public amusement
and, as a result of that conduct, interrupts or causes the delay of the live
performance, sporting event, or other activity taking place at the place of
public amusement. This division does not provide immunity from criminal
liability for any use of force beyond reasonable force by an owner or lessee
of a place of public amusement, an agent of either the owner or lessee, or a
performer or participant at a place of public amusement.



      (4)   (a)   Notice has been given that the general public
is restricted from access to a portion of a place of public amusement if a
printed written notice of the restricted access has been conspicuously posted
or exhibited at the entrance to that portion of the place of public
amusement. If a printed written notice is posted or exhibited as described in
this division regarding a portion of a place of public amusement, in addition
to that posting or exhibition, notice that the general public is restricted
from access to that portion of the place of public amusement also may be
given, but is not required to be given, by either of the following means:



            1.   By notifying the person personally, either
orally or in writing, that access to that portion of the place of public
amusement is restricted;



            2.   By broadcasting over the public address
system of the place of public amusement an oral warning that access to that
portion of the place of public amusement is restricted.



         (b)   If notice that the general public is restricted
from access to a portion of a place of public amusement is provided by the
posting or exhibition of a printed written notice as described in division
(G)(4)(a) of this section, the municipality, in a criminal prosecution for a
violation of division (G)(2) of this section, is not required to prove that
the defendant received actual notice that the general public is restricted
from access to a portion of a place of public amusement.



      (5)   (a)   Whoever violates division (G)(2) of this
section is guilty of criminal trespass on a place of public amusement, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.



         (b)   In addition to any jail term, fine, or other
sentence, penalty, or sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to
division (G)(5)(a) of this section, a court may require an offender who
violates this section to perform not less than 30 and not more than 120 hours
of supervised community service work.



(R.C. § 2911.23) 



§ 131.061  AGGRAVATED TRESPASS.



   (A)   No person shall enter or remain on the land or premises of
another with purpose to commit on that land or those premises a misdemeanor,
the elements of which involve causing physical harm to another person or
causing another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm
to him or her.



   (B)   Whoever violates this division is guilty of aggravated
trespass, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2911.211)



§ 131.07  TAMPERING WITH COIN MACHINES.



   (A)   No person, with purpose to commit theft or to defraud, shall
knowingly enter, force an entrance into, tamper with, or insert any part of
an instrument into any coin machine.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with coin
machines, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of this section or of any theft offense as
defined in R.C. § 2913.01, tampering with coin machines is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2911.32)  ('69 Code, § 132.18)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



§ 131.08  THEFT.



   (A)   No person, with purpose to deprive the owner of property or
services, shall knowingly obtain or exert control over either the property or
services in any of the following ways:



      (1)   Without the consent of the owner or person authorized to
give consent;



      (2)   Beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of
the owner or person authorized to give consent;



      (3)   By deception;



      (4)   By threat;



      (5)   By intimidation.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of theft.  Except as
otherwise provided in this division, a violation of this section is petty
theft, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If any of the following criteria
are met, then a violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law:



      (1)   If the value of the property or services is $1,000 or
more;



      (2)   If the property stolen is any of the property listed in
R.C. § 2913.71;



      (3)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person,
disabled adult, active duty service member, or spouse of an active duty
service member;



      (4)   If the property stolen is a firearm or dangerous
ordnance;



      (5)   If the property stolen is a motor vehicle;



      (6)   If the property stolen is any dangerous drug, or if the
offender previously has been convicted of a felony drug abuse offense;



      (7)   If the property stolen is a police dog or horse or an
assistance dog and the offender knows or should know that the property stolen
is a police dog or horse or an assistance dog;



      (8)   If the property stolen is anhydrous ammonia; or



      (9)    If the property stolen is a special purchase article as
defined in R.C. § 4737.04 or is a bulk merchandise container as defined in
R.C. § 4737.012.



   (C)   In addition to the penalties described in division (B) of this
section, if the offender committed the violation by causing a motor vehicle
to leave the premises of an establishment at which gasoline is offered for
retail sale without the offender making full payment for gasoline that was
dispensed into the fuel tank of the motor vehicle or into another container,
the court may do one of the following:



      (1)   Unless division (C)(2) of this section applies, suspend
for not more than six months the offenders driver’s license, probationary
driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, or nonresident operating privilege;



      (2)   If the offender’s driver’s license, probationary
driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, or nonresident operating privilege has previously been suspended
pursuant to division (C)(1) of this section, or any other substantially
equivalent state or local law, impose a class seven suspension of the
offender’s license, permit, or privilege from the range specified in R.C.
§ 4510.02(A)(7), provided that the suspension shall be at least six months;



      (3)   The court, in lieu of suspending the offender’s
driver’s or commercial driver’s license, probationary driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, or nonresident operating privilege pursuant to
division (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this section, instead may require the offender
to perform community service for a number of hours determined by the court.



   (D)   In addition to the penalties described in division (B) of this
section, if the offender committed the violation by stealing rented property
or rental services, the court may order that the offender make restitution
pursuant to R.C. § 2929.18 or R.C. § 2929.28. Restitution may include, but
is not limited to, the cost of repairing or replacing the stolen property, or
the cost of repairing the stolen property and any loss of revenue resulting
from deprivation of the property due to theft of rental services that is less
than or equal to the actual value of the property at the time it was rented.
Evidence of intent to commit theft of rented property or rental services
shall be determined pursuant to the provisions of R.C. § 2913.72.



   (E)   The sentencing court that suspends an offender's license,
permit, or nonresident operating privilege under division (C) of this section
may grant the offender limited driving privileges during the period of the
suspension in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4510.



(R.C. § 2913.02)  ('69 Code, § 132.07)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



Statutory reference:



   Felony theft provisions, see R.C. § 2913.02(B)



§ 131.09  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF A VEHICLE.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor
vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat, or other motor-propelled vehicle without the
consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent.



   (B)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor
vehicle, motorboat, or other motor-propelled vehicle without the consent of
the owner or person authorized to give consent, and either remove it from
this state, or keep possession of it for more than 48 hours.



   (C)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this
section:



      (1)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor, though
mistaken, reasonably believed that he or she was authorized to use or operate
the property.



      (2)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor reasonably
believed that the owner or person empowered to give consent would authorize
the actor to use or operate the property.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unauthorized use of
a vehicle.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (D)(1), a
violation of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.  If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled adult
and if the victim incurs a loss as a result of the violation, a violation of
division (A) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.



      (2)   A violation of division (B) of this section is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2913.03)  ('69 Code, § 132.08)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



Statutory reference:



   Theft offense involving a motor vehicle, offender to pay towing and
storage fees, see R.C. § 2913.82



§ 131.10  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PROPERTY OR ACCESS TO COMPUTER SYSTEMS.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly use or operate the property of
another without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent.



   (B)   No person, in any manner and by any means, including but not
limited to computer hacking, shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain
access to, or cause access to be gained to any computer, computer system,
computer network, cable service, cable system, telecommunications device,
telecommunications service, or information service without the consent of, or
beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of, the owner of the
computer, computer system, computer network, cable service, cable system,
telecommunications device, telecommunications service, or information service
or other person authorized to give consent.



   (C)   Except as permitted under R.C. § 5503.101, no person shall
knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access to, cause access to be
granted to, or disseminate information gained from access to the law
enforcement automated database system created pursuant to R.C. § 5503.10
without the consent of, or beyond the scope of the express or implied consent
of, the chair of the Law Enforcement Automated Data System Steering Committee.



   (D)   No person shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain
access to, cause access to be granted to, or disseminate information gained
from access to the Ohio law enforcement gateway established and operated
pursuant to R.C. § 109.57(C)(1) without the consent of, or beyond the scope
of the express or implied consent of, the Superintendent of the Bureau of
Criminal Identification and Investigation.



   (E)   The affirmative defenses contained in R.C. § 2913.03(C) are
affirmative defenses to a charge under this section.



   (F)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of property. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
unauthorized use of property is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



      (1)   If unauthorized use of property is committed for the
purpose of devising or executing a scheme to defraud or to obtain property or
services, unauthorized use of property is whichever of the following is
applicable:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided below, unauthorized
use of property is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



         (b)   If the value of the property or services or the
loss to the victim is $1,000 or more, it is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



      (2)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or
disabled adult, unauthorized use of property is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.



   (G)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of computer, cable, or telecommunication property, a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



   (H)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of the law enforcement automated database system, a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



   (I)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of the Ohio law enforcement gateway, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.



   (J)   As used in this section:



      CABLE OPERATOR means any person or group of persons that does
either of the following:



         (a)   Provides cable service over a cable system and
directly through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that
cable system;



         (b)   Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through
any arrangement, the management and operation of a cable system.



      CABLE SERVICE means any of the following:



         (a)   The one-way transmission to subscribers of video
programming or of information that a cable operator makes available to all
subscribers generally;



         (b)   Subscriber interaction, if any, that is required
for the selection or use of video programming or of information that a cable
operator makes available to all subscribers generally, both as described in
division (a) of this definition;



         (c)   Any cable television service.



      CABLE SYSTEM means any facility, consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control
equipment that is designed to provide cable service that includes video
programming and that is provided to multiple subscribers within a community.
CABLE SYSTEM does not include any of the following:



         (a)   Any facility that serves only to retransmit the
television signals of one or more television broadcast stations;



         (b)   Any facility that serves subscribers without using
any public right-of-way;



         (c)   Any facility of a common carrier that, under 47
U.S.C. § 522(7)(c), is excluded from the term "cable system" as defined in
47 U.S.C. § 522(7);



         (d)   Any open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C.
§ 573;



         (e)   Any facility of any electric utility used solely
for operating its electric utility system.



(R.C. § 2913.04)  ('69 Code, § 132.09)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



   (K)   Possession of municipal property.



      (1)   No person shall, without being authorized, have in his
or her control or possession any equipment, tools, implements or other
property belonging to the municipality.



(R.C. § 5589.12)



      (2)   Whoever violates this division (K) is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 5589.99(B))



Statutory reference:



   Telecommunications: fraud and unlawful use of a device, felony
offenses, see R.C. §§ 2913.05 and 2913.06



§ 131.11  PASSING BAD CHECKS.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      CHECK. Includes any form of debit from a demand deposit account,
including but not limited to any of the following:



         (a)   A check, bill of exchange, draft, order of
withdrawal, or similar negotiable or non-negotiable instrument;



         (b)   An electronic check, electronic transaction, debit
card transaction, check card transaction, substitute check, web check, or any
form of automated clearing house transaction.



      ISSUE A CHECK. Causing any form of debit from a demand deposit
account.



   (B)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall issue or transfer or
cause to be issued or transferred a check or other negotiable instrument,
knowing that it will be dishonored or knowing that a person has ordered or
will order stop payment on the check or other negotiable instrument.



   (C)   For purposes of this section, a person who issues or transfers
a check or other negotiable instrument is presumed to know that it will be
dishonored if either of the following occurs:



      (1)   The drawer has no account with the drawee at the time of
issue or the stated date, whichever is later.



      (2)   The check or other negotiable instrument was properly
refused payment for insufficient funds upon presentment within 30 days after
issue or the stated date, whichever is later, and the liability of the
drawer, indorser, or any party who may be liable thereon is not discharged by
payment or satisfaction within ten days after receiving notice of dishonor.



   (D)   For purposes of this section, a person who issues or transfers
a check, bill of exchange, or other draft is presumed to have the purpose to
defraud if the drawer fails to comply with R.C. § 1349.16 by doing any of
the following when opening a checking account intended for personal, family,
or household purposes at a financial institution:



      (1)   Falsely stating that he or she has not been issued a
valid driver's or commercial driver's license or identification card issued
under R.C. § 4507.50;



      (2)   Furnishing the license or card, or another
identification document that contains false information;



      (3)   Making a false statement with respect to the drawer's
current address or any additional relevant information reasonably required by
the financial institution.



   (E)   In determining the value of the payment for purposes of
division (F) of this section, the court may aggregate all checks and other
negotiable instruments that the offender issued or transferred or caused to
be issued or transferred in violation of division (B) of this section within
a period of 180 consecutive days.



   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of passing bad checks.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, passing bad checks is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the check or checks or other negotiable
instrument or instruments are issued or transferred to a single vendor or
single other person for the payment of $1,000 or more, or if the check or
checks or other negotiable instrument or instruments are issued or
transferred to multiple vendors or persons for the payment of $1,500 or more,
passing bad checks is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2913.11)('69 Code, § 132.10)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



§ 131.12  MISUSE OF CREDIT CARDS.



   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Practice deception for the purpose of procuring the
issuance of a credit card, when a credit card is issued in actual reliance
thereon;



      (2)   Knowingly buy or sell a credit card from or to a person
other than the issuer;



      (3)   As an officer, employee, or appointee of a political
subdivision or as a public servant as defined under R.C. § 2921.01,
knowingly misuse a credit card account held by a political subdivision.



   (B)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall do any of the
following:



      (1)   Obtain control over a credit card as security for a debt;



      (2)   Obtain property or services by the use of a credit card,
in one or more transactions, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe
that the card has expired or been revoked, or was obtained, is retained, or
is being used in violation of law;



      (3)   Furnish property or services upon presentation of a
credit card, knowing that the card is being used in violation of law;



      (4)   Represent or cause to be represented to the issuer of a
credit card that property or services have been furnished, knowing that the
representation is false.



   (C)   No person, with purpose to violate this section, shall
receive, possess, control, or dispose of a credit card.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misuse of credit
cards.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) of this
section, a violation of division (A), (B)(1), or (C) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division or
division (D)(3) of this section, a violation of division (B)(2), (3), or (4)
of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the cumulative
retail value of the property and services involved in one or more violations
of division (B)(2), (3), or (4) of this section which violations involve one
or more credit card accounts and occur within a period of 90 consecutive days
commencing on the date of the first violation, is $1,000 or more, misuse of
credit cards is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (3)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or
disabled adult, and if the offense involves a violation of division (B)(1) or
(B)(2) of this section, misuse of credit cards is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2913.21)  ('69 Code, § 132.11)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



§ 131.13  MAKING OR USING SLUGS.



   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Insert or deposit a slug in a coin machine, with purpose
to defraud;



      (2)   Make, possess, or dispose of a slug, with purpose of
enabling another to defraud by inserting or depositing it in a coin machine.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or using
slugs, a misdemeanor of the second degree.



(R.C. § 2913.33)  ('69 Code, § 132.12)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



§ 131.14  PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF PURPOSE TO DEFRAUD.



   In a prosecution of a person for a theft offense that alleges that the
person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she was facilitating a
fraud, hired or rented an aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat,
sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy, or other property or equipment, kept
or operated any of the same that has been hired or rented, or engaged
accommodations at a hotel, motel, inn, campground, or other hostelry, it is
prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud if the person did any of the
following:



   (A)   Used deception to induce the rental agency to furnish the
person with the aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat, sailboat,
camper, trailer, horse, buggy, or other property or equipment, or used
deception to induce the hostelry to furnish the person with accommodations;



   (B)   Hired or rented any aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle,
motorboat, sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy, or other property or
equipment, or engaged accommodations, knowing that he or she is without
sufficient means to pay the hire or rental;



   (C)   Absconded without paying the hire or rental;



   (D)   Knowingly failed to pay the hire or rental as required by the
contract of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the failure;



   (E)   Knowingly failed to return hired or rented property as
required by the contract of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the
failure.



(R.C. § 2913.41)  ('69 Code, § 132.13)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



§ 131.15  TAMPERING WITH RECORDS.



   (A)   No person, knowing that he or she has no privilege to do so,
and with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she is facilitating a
fraud, shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Falsify, destroy, remove, conceal, alter, deface, or
mutilate any writing, computer software, data, or record;



      (2)   Utter any writing or record, knowing it to have been
tampered with as provided in division (A)(1) of this section.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with
records.



      (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(3) of this section,
if the offense does not involve data or computer software, tampering with
records is whichever of the following is applicable:



         (a)   If division (B)(1)(b) of this section does not
apply, it is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



         (b)   If the writing or record is a will unrevoked at
the time of the offense, it is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.



      (2)   Except as provided in division (B)(3) of this section,
if the offense involves a violation of division (A) of this section involving
data or computer software, tampering with records is whichever of the
following is applicable:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2)(b)
of this section, it is a misdemeanor of the first degree;



         (b)   If the value of the data or computer software
involved in the offense or the loss to the victim is $1,000 or more or if the
offense is committed for the purpose of devising or executing a scheme to
defraud or to obtain property or services and the value of the property or
services or the loss to the victim is $7,500 or more, it is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (3)   If the writing, data, computer software, or record is
kept by or belongs to a local, state, or federal governmental entity, it is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2913.42)  ('69 Code, § 132.14)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



§ 131.16  SECURING WRITINGS BY DECEPTION.



   (A)   No person, by deception, shall cause another to execute any
writing that disposes of or encumbers property, or by which a pecuniary
obligation is incurred.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of securing writings
by deception.  Except as otherwise provided in this division, securing
writings by deception is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the value of
the property or the obligation involved is $1,000 or more, securing writings
by deception is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate to state law. If
the victim of the offense is an elderly person, disabled adult, active duty
service member, or spouse of an active duty service member, securing writings
by deception is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2913.43)  ('69 Code, § 132.15)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



§ 131.17  DEFRAUDING CREDITORS.



   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud one or more of his or her
creditors, shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Remove, conceal, destroy, encumber, convey, or otherwise
deal with any of his or her property;



      (2)   Misrepresent or refuse to disclose to a fiduciary
appointed to administer or manage his or her affairs or estate, the
existence, amount, or location of any of his or her property, or any other
information regarding the property which he or she is legally required to
furnish to the fiduciary.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of defrauding
creditors.  Except as otherwise provided in this division, defrauding
creditors is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the value of the
property involved is $1,000 or more, defrauding creditors is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C.  § 2913.45)  ('69 Code, § 132.16)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



Statutory reference:



   Insurance fraud and worker's compensation fraud, see R.C. §§ 2913.47
and 2913.48



§ 131.18  RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY.



   (A)   No person shall receive, retain, or dispose of property of
another knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the property has
been obtained through commission of a theft offense.



   (B)   It is not a defense to a charge of receiving stolen property
in violation of this section that the property was obtained by means other
than through the commission of a theft offense if the property was explicitly
represented to the accused person as being obtained through the commission of
a theft offense.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of receiving stolen
property.  Except as otherwise provided in this division, receiving stolen
property is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If any of the following
criteria are met, then a violation of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law:



      (1)   The value of the property involved is $500 or more;



      (2)   The property involved is any of the property listed in
R.C. § 2913.71;



      (3)   The property involved is a firearm or dangerous
ordnance, as defined in R.C. § 2923.11;



      (4)   The property involved is a motor vehicle as defined in
R.C. § 4501.01;



      (5)   The property involved is any dangerous drug, as defined
in R.C. § 4729.01; or



      (6)   The property involved in violation of this section is a
special purchase article as defined in R.C. § 4737.04 or a bulk merchandise
container as defined in R.C. § 4737.012.



(R.C. § 2913.51)  ('69 Code, § 132.17)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



§ 131.19  VALUE OF STOLEN PROPERTY.



   (A)   If more than one item of property or services is involved in a
theft offense or in a violation of R.C. § 1716.14(A) involving a victim who
is an elderly person or disabled adult, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the value of the property or services involved for the
purpose of determining the value is the aggregate value of all property or
services involved in the offense.



   (B)   (1)   When a series of offenses under R.C. § 2913.02, or a
series of violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to
violate, or complicity in violations of R.C. § 1716.14(A), R.C. § 2913.02,
2913.03, or 2913.04, R.C. § 2913.21 (B)(1) or (B)(2), or R.C. § 2913.31 or
2913.43 involving a victim who is an elderly person or disabled adult, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, is
committed by the offender in the offender's same employment, capacity, or
relationship to another, all of those offenses shall be tried as a single
offense.  When a series of offenses under R.C. § 2913.02, or a series of
violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or
complicity in violations of R.C. § 2913.02 or 2913.43 involving a victim who
is an active duty service member or spouse of an active duty service member,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses,
is committed by the offender in the offender’s same employment, capacity,
or relationship to another, all of those offenses shall be tried as a single
offense. The value of the property or services involved in the series of
offenses for the purpose of determining the value is the aggregate value of
all property and services involved in all offenses in the series.



      (2)   If an offender commits a series of offenses under R.C.
§ 2913.02 that involves a common course of conduct to defraud multiple
victims, all of the offenses may be tried as a single offense.  If an
offender is being tried for the commission of a series of violations of,
attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in
violations of R.C. § 1716.14(A), R.C. § 2913.02, 2913.03, or 2913.04, R.C.
§ 2913.21 (B)(1) or (B)(2), or R.C. § 2913.31 or 2913.43, whether committed
against one victim or more than one victim, involving a victim who is an
elderly person or disabled adult, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance to any of these offenses,  pursuant to a scheme or course of
conduct, all of those offenses may be tried as a single offense.  If an
offender is being tried for the commission of a series of violations of,
attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in
violations of R.C. § 2913.02 or 2913.43, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, whether committed against one
victim or more than one victim, involving a victim who is an active duty
service member or spouse of an active duty service member pursuant to a
scheme or course of conduct, all of those offenses may be tried as a single
offense.  If the offenses are tried as a single offense, the value of the
property or services involved for the purpose of determining the value is the
aggregate value of all property and services involved in all of the offenses
in the course of conduct.



      (3)   When a series of two or more offenses under R.C. §
2913.40, 2913.48, or 2921.41 is committed by the offender in the offender’s
same employment, capacity, or relationship to another, all of those offenses
may be tried as a single offense.  If the offenses are tried as a single
offense, the value of the property or services involved for the purpose of
determining the value as required by R.C. § 2913.61(A) is the aggregate
value of all property and services involved in all of the offenses in the
series of two or more offenses.



      (4)   In prosecuting a single offense under division
(B)(1),(B)(2) or (B)(3) of this section, it is not necessary to separately
allege and prove each offense in the series.  Rather, it is sufficient to
allege and prove that the offender, within a given span of time, committed
one or more theft offenses or violations of R.C. § 2913.40, 2913.48, or
2921.41 in the offender's same employment, capacity, or relationship to
another as described in division (B)(1) or (B)(3) of this section, or
committed one or more theft offenses that involve a common course of conduct
to defraud multiple victims or a scheme or course of conduct as described in
division (B)(2) of this section. While it is not necessary to separately
allege and prove each offense in the series in order to prosecute a single
offense under division (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) of this section, it remains
necessary in prosecuting them as a single offense to prove the aggregate
value of the property or services in order to meet the requisite statutory
offense level sought by the prosecution.



   (C)   The following criteria shall be used in determining the value
of property or services involved in a theft offense:



      (1)   The value of an heirloom, memento, collector's item,
antique, museum piece, manuscript, document, record, or other thing that has
intrinsic worth to its owner and that either is irreplaceable or is
replaceable only on the expenditure of substantial time, effort, or money, is
the amount which would compensate the owner for its loss.



      (2)   The value of personal effects and household goods, and
of materials, supplies, equipment, and fixtures used in the profession,
business, trade, occupation, or avocation of its owner, which property is not
covered under division (C)(1) of this section, and which retains substantial
utility for its purpose regardless of its age or condition, is the cost of
replacing such property with new property of like kind and quality.



      (3)   The value of any real or personal property that is not
covered under division (C)(1) or (2) of this section, and the value of
services, is the fair market value of the property or services.  As used in
this section, FAIR MARKET VALUE is the money consideration which a buyer
would give and a seller would accept for property or services, assuming that
the buyer is willing to buy and the seller is willing to sell, that both are
fully informed as to all facts material to the transaction, and that neither
is under any compulsion to act.



   (D)   Without limitation on the evidence which may be used to
establish the value of property or services involved in a theft offense:



      (1)   When the property involved is personal property held for
sale at wholesale or retail, the price at which the property was held for
sale is prima facie evidence of its value.



      (2)   When the property involved is a security or commodity
traded on an exchange, the closing price or, if there is no closing price,
the asked price, given in the latest marked quotation prior to the offense,
is prima facie evidence of the value of the security or commodity.



      (3)   When the property involved is livestock, poultry, or raw
agricultural products for which a local market price is available, the latest
local market price prior to the offense is prima facie evidence of the value
of the livestock, poultry, or products.



      (4)   When the property involved is a negotiable instrument,
the face value is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.



      (5)   When the property involved is a warehouse receipt, bill
of lading, pawn ticket, claim check, or other instrument entitling the holder
or bearer to receive property, the face value or, if there is no face value,
the value of the property covered by the instrument less any payment
necessary to receive the property, is prima facie evidence of the value of
the instrument.



      (6)   When the property involved is a ticket of admission,
ticket for transportation, coupon, token, or other instrument entitling the
holder or bearer to receive property or services, the face value or, if there
is no face value, the value of the property or services which may be received
by the instrument is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.



      (7)   When the services involved are gas, electricity, water,
telephone, transportation, shipping, or other services for which the rate is
established by law, the duly established rate is prima facie evidence of the
value of the services.



      (8)   When the services involved are services for which the
rate is not established by law, and the offender has been notified prior to
the offense of the rate for the services, either in writing, or orally, or by
posting in a manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of
potential offenders, the rate contained in the notice is prima facie evidence
of the value of the services.



(R.C. § 2913.61(B) - (E))  ('69 Code, § 132.19)  (Ord. C-417, passed
1-12-76)



§ 131.20  DEGREE OF OFFENSE WHEN CERTAIN PROPERTY INVOLVED.



   Regardless of the value of the property involved, and regardless of
whether the offender previously has been convicted of a theft offense, a
violation of § 131.08 or § 131.18 is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if the property involved is any of the following:



   (A)   A credit card;



   (B)   A printed form for a check or other negotiable instrument,
that on its face identifies the drawer or maker for whose use it is designed
or identifies the account on which it is to be drawn, and that has not been
executed by the drawer or maker or on which the amount is blank;



   (C)   A motor vehicle identification license plate as prescribed by
R.C. § 4503.22, a temporary license placard or windshield sticker as
prescribed by R.C. § 4503.182, or any comparable license plate, placard, or
sticker as prescribed by the applicable law of another state or the United
States;



   (D)   A blank form for a certificate of title or a manufacturer's or
importer's certificate to a motor vehicle, as prescribed by R.C. § 4505.07;



   (E)   A blank form for any license listed in R.C. § 4507.01.



(R.C. § 2913.71)  ('69 Code, § 132.20)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



§ 131.21  INJURING VINES, BUSHES, TREES, OR CROPS.



   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall recklessly cut
down, destroy, girdle, or otherwise injure a vine, bush, shrub, sapling,
tree, or crop standing or growing on the land of another or upon public land.



   (B)   In addition to the penalty provided in division (C) of this
section, whoever violates this section is liable in treble damages for the
injury caused.



(R.C. § 901.51)



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 901.99)  ('69 Code, § 132.21)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



Cross-reference:



   Abuse or mutilation of public trees, see § 100.07



§ 131.22  DETENTION AND ARREST OF SHOPLIFTERS AND THOSE COMMITTING MOTION
PICTURE PIRACY; PROTECTION OF INSTITUTIONAL PROPERTY.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply.



      ARCHIVAL INSTITUTION.  Any public or private building,
structure, or shelter in which are stored historical documents, devices,
records, manuscripts, or items of public interest, which historical materials
are stored to preserve the materials or the information in the materials, to
disseminate the information contained in the materials, or to make the
materials available for public inspection or for inspection by certain
persons who have a particular interest in, use for, or knowledge concerning
the materials.



      AUDIOVISUAL RECORDING FUNCTION and FACILITY. Have the same
meaning as in R.C. § 2913.07.



      MUSEUM. Any public or private nonprofit institution that is
permanently organized for primarily educational or aesthetic purposes, owns
or borrows objects or items of public interest, and cares for and exhibits to
the public the objects or items.



      PRETRIAL DIVERSION PROGRAM. Means a rehabilitative, educational
program designed to reduce recidivism and promote personal responsibility
that is at least four hours in length and that has been approved by any court
in this state.



   (B)   A merchant, or an employee or agent of a merchant, who has
probable cause to believe that things offered for sale by a mercantile
establishment have been unlawfully taken by a person, may, for the purposes
set forth in division (D) below, detain the person in a reasonable manner for
a reasonable length of time within the mercantile establishment or its
immediate vicinity.



   (C)   Any officer, employee, or agent of a library, museum, or
archival institution may, for the purposes set forth in division (D) below or
for the purpose of conducting a reasonable investigation of a belief that the
person has acted in a manner described in divisions (C)(1) and (2) below,
detain a person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of time
within, or in the immediate vicinity of, the library, museum, or archival
institution, if the officer, employee, or agent has probable cause to believe
that the person has:



      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly moved, defaced,
damaged, destroyed, or otherwise improperly tampered with property owned by
or in the custody of the library, museum, or archival institution; or



      (2)   With purpose to deprive the library, museum, or archival
institution of property owned by it or in its custody, knowingly obtained or
exerted control over the property without the consent of the owner or person
authorized to give consent, beyond the scope of the express or implied
consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent, by deception, or
by threat.



   (D)   An officer, agent, or employee of a library, museum, or
archival institution pursuant to division (C) above or a merchant or an
employee or agent of a merchant pursuant to division (B) above may detain
another person for any of the following purposes:



      (1)   To recover the property that is the subject of the
unlawful taking, criminal mischief, or theft;



      (2)   To cause an arrest to be made by a peace officer;



      (3)   To obtain a warrant of arrest;



      (4)   To offer the person, if the person is suspected of the
unlawful taking, criminal mischief, or theft and notwithstanding any other
provision of this Code or the Ohio Revised Code, an opportunity to complete a
pretrial diversion program and to inform the person of the other legal
remedies available to the library, museum, archival institution, or merchant.



   (E)   The owner or lessee of a facility in which a motion picture is
being shown, or the owner's or lessee's employee or agent, who has probable
cause to believe that a person is or has been operating an audiovisual
recording function of a device in violation of R.C. § 2917.07 may, for the
purpose of causing an arrest to be made by a peace officer or of obtaining an
arrest warrant, detain the person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable
length of time within the facility or its immediate vicinity.



   (F)   The officer, agent, or employee of the library, museum, or
archival institution, the merchant or an employee or agent of a merchant, or
the owner, lessee, employee, or agent of the facility acting under divisions
(B), (C) or (E) above shall not search the person detained, search or seize
any property belonging to the person detained without the person's consent,
or use undue restraint upon the person detained.



   (G)   Any peace officer may arrest without a warrant any person that
the officer has probable cause to believe has committed any act described in
divisions (C)(1) or (2) above, that the officer has probable cause to believe
has committed an unlawful taking in a mercantile establishment, or that the
officer has reasonable cause to believe has committed an act prohibited by
R.C. § 2913.07. An arrest under this division shall be made within a
reasonable time after the commission of the act or unlawful taking.



(R.C. § 2935.041)



Statutory reference:



   Arrest without a warrant generally, see R.C. § 2935.03



§ 131.23  DAMAGING OR ENDANGERING AIRCRAFT, AIRPORT OPERATIONS.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      AIR GUN.  A hand pistol or rifle that propels its projectile by
means of releasing compressed air, carbon dioxide, or other gas.



      AIRPORT OPERATIONAL SURFACE.  Any surface of land or water that
is developed, posted, or marked so as to give an observer reasonable notice
that the surface is designed and developed for the purpose of storing,
parking, taxiing, or operating aircraft, or any surface of land or water that
is actually being used for any of those purposes.



      FIREARM.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2923.11.



      SPRING-OPERATED GUN.  A hand pistol or rifle that propels a
projectile not less than four or more than five millimeters in diameter by
means of a spring.



   (B)   No person shall do either of the following:



      (1)   Knowingly throw an object at, or drop an object upon,
any moving aircraft.



      (2)   Knowingly shoot with a bow and arrow, or knowingly
discharge a firearm, air gun, or spring-operated gun, at or toward any
aircraft.



   (C)   No person shall knowingly or recklessly shoot with a bow and
arrow, or shall knowingly or recklessly discharge a firearm, air gun, or
spring-operated gun, upon or over any airport operational surface.  This
division does not apply to the following:



      (1)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other
state or of the United States, or a law enforcement officer, authorized to
discharge firearms and acting within the scope of his or her duties.



      (2)   A person who, with the consent of the owner or operator
of the airport operational surface or the authorized agent of either, is
lawfully engaged in any hunting or sporting activity or is otherwise lawfully
discharging a firearm.



   (D)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
endangering aircraft, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the violation
creates any risk of physical harm to any person, or if the aircraft that is
the subject of the violation is occupied, endangering aircraft is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



   (E)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of
endangering airport operations, a misdemeanor of the second degree.  If the
violation creates a risk of physical harm to any person or substantial risk
of serious harm to any person, endangering airport operations is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  In addition to any other penalty
or sanction imposed for the violation, the hunting license or permit of a
person who violates division (C) of this section while hunting shall be
suspended or revoked pursuant to R.C. § 1533.68.



(R.C. § 2909.08(A) - (E))  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 131.24  INJURY TO PROPERTY BY HUNTERS.



   (A)   No person in the act of hunting, pursuing, taking, or killing
a wild animal shall act in a negligent, careless, or reckless manner so as to
injure property.



(R.C. § 1533.171(A))



   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 1533.99(C))



Statutory reference:



   Revocation of license for violation, see R.C. § 1533.171(B) – (E)



§ 131.25  MOTION PICTURE PIRACY.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      AUDIOVISUAL RECORDING FUNCTION means the capability of a device
to record or transmit a motion picture or any part of a motion picture by
means of any technology existing on, or developed after, March 9, 2004.



      FACILITY means a movie theater.



   (B)   No person, without the written consent of the owner or lessee
of the facility and of the licensor of the motion picture, shall knowingly
operate an audiovisual recording function of a device in a facility in which
the motion picture is being shown.



   (C)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
motion picture piracy, a misdemeanor of the first degree on the first offense
and a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent
offense.



   (D)   This section does not prohibit or restrict a lawfully
authorized investigative, law enforcement, protective, or intelligence
gathering employee or agent of the government of this state or a political
subdivision of this state, or of the federal government, when acting in an
official capacity, from operating an audiovisual recording function of a
device in any facility in which a motion picture is being shown.



   (E)   Division (B) of this section does not limit or affect the
application of any other prohibition in this code or the Ohio Revised Code.
Any act that is a violation of both division (B) of this section and another
provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this
section, under the other provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code, or
under both this section and the other provision of this code or the Ohio
Revised Code.



(R.C. § 2913.07)



§ 131.26  DIMINISHING OR INTERFERING WITH FORFEITABLE PROPERTY.



   (A)   No person shall destroy, damage, remove, or transfer property
that is subject to forfeiture or otherwise take any action in regard to
property that is subject to forfeiture with purpose to do any of the
following:



      (1)   Prevent or impair the state's or political subdivision's
lawful authority to take the property into its custody or control under R.C.
Chapter 2981 or to continue holding the property under its lawful custody or
control;



      (2)   Impair or defeat the court's continuing jurisdiction
over the person and property;



      (3)   Devalue property that the person knows, or has
reasonable cause to believe, is subject to forfeiture proceedings under R.C.
Chapter 2981.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference with
or diminishing forfeitable property. Except as otherwise provided in this
division (B), interference with or diminishing forfeitable property is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the property is $1,000 or
more, interference with or diminishing forfeitable property is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2981.07)



PUBLIC PROPERTY



§ 131.30  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL.  All law enforcement officers and supervisory
personnel of the village.



   VILLAGE PROPERTY.  Any and all property owned or maintained by the
village, specifically but not exclusively, all park areas and recreational
areas.



('69 Code, § 138.01)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



§ 131.31  PUBLIC MEETINGS; PERMISSION.



   No person or persons, except with the written permission of the
village, shall hold or attend any public meeting, discussion, debate, picnic,
or gathering of any kind on or within village property, except that family
parties or small groups of picnickers will not be required to obtain such
written permission.



('69 Code, § 138.02) (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.32  CONCERTS.



   No person or persons, except with the written consent of the village,
shall play upon or operate any musical instrument or hold any musical concert
on or within village property.



('69 Code, § 138.03)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.33  FLAGS.



   No person or persons, except with the written consent of the village,
shall display any banner, flag, target, sign, or device for advertising or
other purposes on or within village property.



('69 Code, § 138.04)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.34  PARADES.



   No person or persons, except with the written consent of the village,
shall engage in any parade, drill, or procession of any kind on or within
village property.



('69 Code, § 138.05) (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.35  RACES.



   No person or persons shall engage in, or in any way be party to, any
race or races of any kind, whether between animals, bicycles, motorcycles,
automobiles, or vehicles of any kind or otherwise on or within village
property.



('69 Code, § 138.06) (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.36  DAMAGE.



   No person or persons shall take, carry away, disturb, molest, destroy,
mar, deface, mutilate, mark, or damage anything on or within village property.



('69 Code, § 138.07) (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.37  REFUSE.



   No person shall drop or throw paper, lunch boxes, refuse, or litter on
or within any village property, but shall place the same in receptacles
provided for such purposes.



('69 Code, § 138.08) (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.38  FIREWORKS.



   No person, except with written consent of the village shall bring or
display any fireworks within village property.



('69 Code, § 138.09) (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.39  GAMBLING.



   No person shall gamble or play at any game of chance for stakes within
village property.



('69 Code, § 138.10) (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.40  PARK CLOSING HOURS.



   (A)   Parks located within the village shall be closed to the public
between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m., except where otherwise posted on signs, and
except, when different hours are established by resolution of the village, or
by permit issued to a group by the village for a specific event, and except
for vehicular traffic on through roadways directly connecting to village
streets.  All persons shall leave the parks at or before closing time.



   (B)   Any section or part of any village property may be declared
closed to the public at any time and for any interval of time, either
temporarily or at regular and stated intervals, and either entirely or for
certain uses, as the village or its agents shall find necessary.



('69 Code, § 138.11) (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.41  FOOT PATHS AND BRIDLE PATHS.



   No person shall use or ride any bicycle, motorcycle, or horse on any of
the foot paths within village property.  No person shall ride a horse within
village property except on bridle paths or roads provided for that purpose.



('69 Code, § 138.12) (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.42  BIRDS AND ANIMALS.



   No person or persons shall molest, disturb, injure, or in any way have
contact with or throw anything at or to animals or birds located within or on
village property; and no person or persons shall feed any animals or birds
located within or on village property, except with written permission of the
village.



('69 Code, § 138.13) (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.43  PUBLIC RECREATION AREA RULES.



   No person shall cause or permit in a public recreational area of this
village a violation of the following rules:



   (A)   No dogs or other animals kept as pets shall be permitted on
the track established for walking and jogging.



   (B)   No bikes, mopeds, or other vehicles are permitted on the
walking/jogging track except for authorized maintenance purposes.



(Ord. C-600, passed 5-12-86)  Penalty, see § 131.99



§ 131.44  OPERATING MODEL AIRCRAFT.



   No person, without privilege to do so, shall operate model aircraft on
or over village property. The term MODEL AIRCRAFT means any unmanned object
that is powered (such as with a battery, stored energy, an engine, or
propellants), capable of sustained flight, and operated from a remote source.
Examples of model aircraft include radio controlled planes or helicopters,
model planes, drones, or hobby or recreational aircraft.



(Ord. 2016-10, passed 5-9-16)



§ 131.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Except as otherwise provided herein, whoever violates any
provision of this chapter shall be fined not more than $100 for each such
offense.



   (B)   Whoever violates any rule established under § 131.43 shall be
guilty of a minor misdemeanor on the first offense.  Any person who
continues to violate any rule after being directed to cease the violation or
who has been previously convicted of violating any rule under § 131.43
within one year of being cited for a second violation, shall, upon
conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(Ord. 2016-10, passed 5-9-16)



CHAPTER 132: OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE



Section



   132.01   Riot



   132.02   Failure to disperse



   132.03   Justifiable use of force to suppress riot



   132.04   Disorderly conduct



   132.05   Disturbing a lawful meeting



   132.06   Misconduct at an emergency



   132.07   Telephone harassment



   132.08   Inducing panic



   132.09   Making false alarms



§ 132.01  RIOT.



   (A)   No person shall participate with four or more others in a
course of disorderly conduct in violation of R.C. § 2917.11 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance:



      (1)   With purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of a
misdemeanor, other than disorderly conduct;



      (2)   With purpose to intimidate a public official or employee
into taking or refraining from official action, or with purpose to hinder,
impede, or obstruct a function of government;



      (3)   With purpose to hinder, impede, or obstruct the orderly
process of administration or instruction at an educational institution, or to
interfere with or disrupt lawful activities carried on at the institution.



   (B)   No person shall participate with four or more others with
purpose to do an act with unlawful force or violence, even though the act
might otherwise be lawful.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of riot, a misdemeanor
of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2917.03)  ('69 Code, § 133.01)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



   (D)   For the purposes of prosecuting violations of this section,
the prosecution is not required to allege or prove that the offender
expressly agreed with four or more others to commit any act that constitutes
a violation this section prior to or while committing those acts.



(R.C. § 2917.031)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Aggravated riot, felony provisions, see R.C. § 2917.02



§ 132.02  FAILURE TO DISPERSE.



   (A)   Where five or more persons are participating in a course of
disorderly conduct in violation of R.C. § 2917.11 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and there are other persons in the vicinity
whose presence creates the likelihood of physical harm to persons or property
or of serious public inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm, a law enforcement
officer or other public official may order the participants and the other
persons to disperse.  No person shall knowingly fail to obey the order.



   (B)   Nothing in this section requires persons to disperse who are
peaceably assembled for a lawful purpose.



   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to
disperse.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3) of this
section, failure to disperse is a minor misdemeanor.



      (3)   Failure to disperse is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree if the failure to obey the order described in division (A) of this
section creates the likelihood of physical harm to persons or is committed at
the scene of a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind.



(R.C. § 2917.04)  ('69 Code, § 133.02)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 132.03  JUSTIFIABLE USE OF FORCE TO SUPPRESS RIOT.



   A law enforcement officer or firefighter engaged in suppressing a riot
or in protecting persons or property during a riot:



   (A)   Is justified in using force, other than deadly force, when and
to the extent he or she has probable cause to believe such force is necessary
to disperse or apprehend rioters;



   (B)   Is justified in using force, including deadly force, when and
to the extent he or she has probable cause to believe such force is necessary
to disperse or apprehend rioters whose conduct is creating a substantial risk
of serious physical harm to persons.



(R.C. § 2917.05)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 132.04  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.



   (A)   No person shall recklessly cause inconvenience, annoyance, or
alarm to another, by doing any of the following:



      (1)   Engaging in fighting, in threatening harm to persons or
property, or in violent or turbulent behavior;



      (2)   Making unreasonable noise or an offensively coarse
utterance, gesture, or display, or communicating unwarranted and grossly
abusive language to any person;



      (3)   Insulting, taunting, or challenging another, under
circumstances in which that conduct is likely to provoke a violent response;



      (4)   Hindering or preventing the movement of persons on a
public street, road, highway, or right-of-way, or to, from, within, or upon
public or private property, so as to interfere with the rights of others, and
by any act that serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender;



      (5)   Creating a condition that is physically offensive to
persons or that presents a risk of physical harm to persons or property, by
any act that serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender.



   (B)   No person while voluntarily intoxicated shall do either of the
following:



      (1)   In a public place or in the presence of two or more
persons, engage in conduct likely to be offensive or to cause inconvenience,
annoyance, or alarm to persons of ordinary sensibilities, which conduct the
offender, if he or she were not intoxicated, should know is likely to have
such effect on others;



      (2)   Engage in conduct or create a condition that presents a
risk of physical harm to himself, herself or another, or to the property of
another.



   (C)   Violation of any statute or ordinance of which an element is
operating a motor vehicle, locomotive, watercraft, aircraft, or other vehicle
while under the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse is not a violation
of division (B) of this section.



   (D)   If a person appears to an ordinary observer to be intoxicated,
it is probable cause to believe that the person is voluntarily intoxicated
for purposes of division (B) of this section.



   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disorderly conduct.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (E)(2) of this
section, disorderly conduct is a minor misdemeanor.



      (2)   Disorderly conduct is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree
if any of the following applies:



         (a)   The offender persists in disorderly conduct after
reasonable warning or request to desist.



         (b)   The offense is committed in the vicinity of a
school or in a school safety zone.



         (c)   The offense is committed in the presence of any
law enforcement officer, firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency
medical services person, or other authorized person who is engaged in the
person's duties at the scene of a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or
emergency of any kind.



         (d)   The offense is committed in the presence of any
emergency facility person who is engaged in the person's duties in an
emergency facility.



   (F)   As used in this section:



   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SCHOOL.  Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2925.01.



   EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON.  Is the singular of "emergency facility
personnel" as defined in R.C. § 2909.04.



   EMERGENCY FACILITY.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.04.



   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON.  Is the singular of "emergency
medical services personnel" as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.



(R.C. § 2917.11)  ('69 Code, § 133.03)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 132.05  DISTURBING A LAWFUL MEETING.



   (A)   No person, with purpose to prevent or disrupt a lawful
meeting, procession, or gathering, shall do either of the following:



      (1)   Do any act which obstructs or interferes with the due
conduct of the meeting, procession, or gathering.



      (2)   Make any utterance, gesture, or display which outrages
the sensibilities of the group.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disturbing a lawful
meeting, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 2917.12)  ('69 Code, § 133.04)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 132.06  MISCONDUCT AT AN EMERGENCY.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:



      (1)   Hamper the lawful operations of any law enforcement
officer, firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services
person, or other authorized person engaged in the person's duties at the
scene of a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind;



      (2)   Hamper the lawful activities of any emergency facility
person who is engaged in the person's duties in an emergency facility;



      (3)   Fail to obey the lawful order of any law enforcement
officer engaged in the law enforcement officer's duties at the scene of or in
connection with a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind.



   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit access or
deny information to any news media representative in the lawful exercise of
the news media representative's duties.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misconduct at an
emergency. Except as otherwise provided in this division, misconduct at an
emergency is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If violation of this section
creates a risk of physical harm to persons or property, misconduct at an
emergency is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



   (D)   As used in this section:



   EMERGENCY FACILITY.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.04.



   EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON.  Is the singular of "emergency facility
personnel" as defined in R.C. § 2909.04.



   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON.  Is the singular of "emergency
medical services personnel" as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.



(R.C. § 2917.13)  ('69 Code, § 133.05)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 132.07  TELEPHONE HARASSMENT.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a
telecommunication, or knowingly permit a telecommunication to be made from a
telecommunications device under the person's control, to another, if the
caller does any of the following:



      (1)   Makes the telecommunication with purpose to harass,
intimidate, or abuse any person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made, whether or not actual communication takes place
between the caller and a recipient;



      (2)   Describes, suggests, requests, or proposes that the
caller, the recipient of the telecommunication, or any other person engage in
sexual activity, and the recipient or another person at the premises to which
the telecommunication is made has requested, in a previous telecommunication
or in the immediate telecommunication, that the caller not make a
telecommunication to the recipient or to the premises to which the
telecommunication is made;



      (3)   During the telecommunication, violates R.C. § 2903.21
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;



      (4)   Knowingly states to the recipient of the
telecommunication that the caller intends to cause damage to or destroy
public or private property, and the recipient, any member of the recipient's
family, or any other person who resides at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made owns, leases, resides, or works in, will at the
time of the destruction or damaging be near or in, has the responsibility of
protecting, or insures the property that will be destroyed or damaged;



      (5)   Knowingly makes the telecommuni-cation to the recipient
of the telecommunication, to another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made, or to those premises, and the recipient or another
person at those premises previously has told the caller not to make a
telecommunication to those premises or to any persons at those premises;



      (6)   Knowingly makes any comment, request, suggestion, or
proposal to the recipient of the telecommunication that is threatening,
intimidating, menacing, coercive, or obscene with the intent to abuse,
threaten, or harass the recipient;



      (7)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly interrupts
the telecommunication service of any person;



      (8)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly transmits
to any person, regardless of whether the telecommunication is heard in its
entirety, any file, document, or other communication that prevents that
person from using the person’s telephone service or electronic
communication device;



      (9)   Knowingly makes any false statement concerning the
death, injury, illness, disfigurement, reputation, indecent conduct, or
criminal conduct of the recipient of the telecommunication or family or
household member of the recipient with purpose to abuse, threaten,
intimidate, or harass the recipient;



      (10)   Knowingly incites another person through a
telecommunication or other means to harass or participate in the harassment
of a person;



      (11)   Knowingly alarms the recipient by making a
telecommunication without a lawful purpose at an hour or hours known to be
inconvenient to the recipient and in an offensive or repetitive manner.



   (B)   (1)   No person shall make or cause to be made a
telecommunication or permit a telecommunication to be made from a
telecommunications device under the person's control, with purpose to abuse,
threaten, or harass another person.



      (2)   No person shall knowingly post a text or audio statement
or an image on an internet web site or web page for the purpose of abusing,
threatening, or harassing another person.



   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of
telecommunications harassment.



      (2)   A violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(5),
(A)(6), (A)(7), (A)(8), (A)(9), (A)(10), or (A)(11) or (B) of this section is
a misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense and a felony on each
subsequent offense, which shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(3), a
violation of division (A)(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree on a first offense and a felony on each subsequent offense, to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.  If a violation of division (A)(4)
of this section results in economic harm of $1,000 or more,
telecommunications harassment is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.



   (D)   No cause of action may be asserted in any court of this
municipality against any provider of a telecommunications service,
interactive computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information
service, or against any officer, employee, or agent of a telecommunications
service, interactive computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or
information service, for any injury, death, or loss to person or property
that allegedly arises out of the provider's, officer's, employee's, or
agent's provision of information, facilities, or assistance in accordance
with the terms of a court order that is issued in relation to the
investigation or prosecution of an alleged violation of this section.  A
provider of a telecommunications service, interactive computer service as
defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, or an officer, employee,
or agent of a telecommunications service, interactive computer service as
defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, is immune from any civil
or criminal liability for injury, death, or loss to person or property that
allegedly arises out of the provider's, officer's, employees, or agent's
provision of information, facilities, or assistance in accordance with the
terms of a court order that is issued in relation to the investigation or
prosecution of an alleged violation of this section.



   (E)   (1)   This section does not apply to a person solely
because the person provided access or connection to or from an electronic
method of remotely transferring information not under that person’s
control, including having provided capabilities that are incidental to
providing access or connection to or from the electronic method of remotely
transferring the information, and that do not include the creation of the
content of the material that is the subject of the access or connection. In
addition, any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic
method of remotely transferring information not under that person’s control
shall not be liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block
the receipt or transmission through its service of any information that the
person believes is, or will be sent, in violation of this section.



      (2)   Division (E)(1) of this section does not create an
affirmative duty for any person providing access or connection to or from an
electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that
person’s control to block the receipt or transmission through its service
of any information that it believes is, or will be sent, in violation of this
section except as otherwise provided by law.



      (3)   Division (E)(1) of this section does not apply to a
person who conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or
knowing distribution of material in violation of this section or who
knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.



      (4)   A provider or user of an interactive computer service,
as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, shall neither be treated as the publisher or
speaker of any information provided by another information content provider,
as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, nor held civilly or criminally liable for the
creation or development of information provided by another information
content provider, as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230. Nothing in this division
shall be construed to protect a person from liability to the extent that the
person developed or created any content in violation of this section.



   (F)   Divisions (A)(5) to (A)(11) and (B)(2) of this section do not
apply to a person who, while employed or contracted by a newspaper, magazine,
press association, news agency, news wire service, cable channel or cable
operator, or radio or television station, is gathering, processing,
transmitting, compiling, editing, or disseminating information for the
general public within the scope of the person’s employment in that capacity
or the person’s contractual authority in that capacity.



   (G)   As used in divisions (A) through (D) of this section:



      CABLE OPERATOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.21.



      CALLER.  Means the person described in division (A) of this
section who makes or causes to be made a telecommunication or who permits a
telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under that
person's control.



      ECONOMIC HARM.  Means all direct, incidental and consequential
pecuniary harm suffered by a victim as a result of the criminal conduct. 
The term includes but is not limited to all of the following:



         (a)   All wages, salaries or other compensation lost as
a result of the criminal conduct;



         (b)   The cost of all wages, salaries or other
compensation paid to employees for time those employees are prevented from
working as a result of the criminal conduct;



         (c)   The overhead costs incurred from the time that a
business is shut down as a result of the criminal conduct;



         (d)   The loss of value to tangible or intangible
property that was damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.



      FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Means any of the following:



         (a)   Any of the following who is residing or has
resided with the recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act
prohibited in division (A)(9) of this section is committed:



            1.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a
former spouse of the recipient;



            2.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the
recipient, or another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the
recipient;



            3.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person
living as a spouse, or former spouse of the recipient, or another person
related by consanguinity or affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse,
or former spouse of the recipient.



         (b)   The natural parent of any child of whom the
recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in
division (A)(9) of this section is committed is the other natural parent or
is the putative other natural parent.



      PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE. Means a person who is living or has
lived with the recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act
prohibited in division (A)(9) of this section is committed in a common law
marital relationship, who otherwise is cohabiting with the recipient, or who
otherwise has cohabited with the recipient within five years prior to the
date of the alleged commission of the act in question.



      SEXUAL ACTIVITY.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.01.



      TELECOMMUNICATION and TELE-COMMUNICATIONS DEVICE.  Have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.



   (H)   Nothing in this section prohibits a person from making a
telecommunication to a debtor that is in compliance with the Fair Debt
Collection Practices Act, 15 USC 1692, as amended, or the Telephone Consumer
Protection Act, 47 USC 227, as amended.



(R.C. § 2917.21)  ('69 Code, § 133.06)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 132.08  INDUCING PANIC.



   (A)   No person shall cause the evacuation of any public place, or
otherwise cause serious public inconvenience or alarm, by doing any of the
following:



      (1)   Initiating or circulating a report or warning of an
alleged or impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing
that the report or warning is false.



      (2)   Threatening to commit any offense of violence.



      (3)   Committing any offense, with reckless disregard of the
likelihood that its commission will cause serious public inconvenience or
alarm.



   (B)   Division (A)(1) of this section does not apply to any person
conducting an authorized fire or emergency drill.



   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inducing
panic.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3),
inducing panic is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (3)   If violation of this section results in physical harm to
any person, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.  If a violation of this section results in economic harm of
$1,000 or more, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.  If the public place involved in a violation of division (A)(1)
is a school or an institution of higher education, inducing panic is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  If a violation of this
section pertains to a purported, threatened or actual use of a weapon of mass
destruction, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.



   (D)   (1)   It is not a defense to a charge under this section
that pertains to a purported or threatened use of a weapon of mass
destruction that the offender did not possess or have the ability to use a
weapon of mass destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of
mass destruction was not a weapon of mass destruction.



      (2)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any
other section of the Ohio Revised Code or this Code of Ordinances may be
prosecuted under this section, the other section, or both sections.



   (E)   As used in this section:



      BIOLOGICAL AGENT has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2917.33.



      ECONOMIC HARM means any of the following:



         (a)   All direct, incidental and consequential pecuniary
harm suffered by a victim as a result of the criminal conduct.  “Economic
harm” as described in this division includes but is not limited to all of
the following:



            1.   All wages, salaries or other compensation
lost as a result of the criminal conduct;



            2.   The cost of all wages, salaries or other
compensation paid to employees for time those employees are prevented from
working as a result of the criminal conduct;



            3.   The overhead costs incurred from the time
that a business is shut down as a result of the criminal conduct;



            4.   The loss of value to tangible or intangible
property that was damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.



         (b)   All costs incurred by the state or any political
subdivision as a result of, or in making any response to, the criminal
conduct that constituted the violation of this section or R.C. § 2917.32, or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, including but not limited
to all costs so incurred by any law enforcement officers, firefighters,
rescue personnel, or emergency medical services personnel of the state or the
political subdivision.



      EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSONNEL has the same meaning as in
R.C.



§ 2133.21.



      INSTITUTION OF HIGHER EDUCATION means any of the following:



         (a)   A state university or college as defined in R.C.
§ 3345.12(A)(1), community college, state community college, university
branch, or technical college;



         (b)   A private, nonprofit college, university or other
post-secondary institution located in this state that possesses a certificate
of authorization issued by the Ohio Board of Regents pursuant to R.C. Chapter
1713;



         (c)   A post-secondary institution with a certificate of
registration issued by the State Board of Career Colleges and Schools
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3332.



      SCHOOL means any school operated by a board of education or any
school for which the State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards
under R.C. § 3301.07, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular
activities, or training provided by the school is being conducted at the time
a violation of this section is committed.



      WEAPON OF MASS DESTRUCTION means any of the following:



         (a)   Any weapon that is designed or intended to cause
death or serious physical harm through the release, dissemination, or impact
of toxic or poisonous chemicals, or other precursors;



         (b)   Any weapon involving a disease organism or
biological agent;



         (c)   Any weapon that is designed to release radiation
or radioactivity at a level dangerous to human life;



         (d)   Any of the following, except to the extent that
the item or device in question is expressly excepted from the definition of
"destructive device" pursuant to 18 U.S.C. 921(a)(4) and regulations issued
under that section:



            1.   Any explosive, incendiary, or poison gas
bomb, grenade, rocket having a propellant charge of more than four ounces,
missile having an explosive or incendiary charge of more than one-quarter
ounce, mine, or similar device;



            2.   Any combination of parts either designed or
intended for use in converting any item or device into any item or device
described in division (d)1. of this definition and from which an item or
device described in that division may be readily assembled.



(R.C. § 2917.31)  ('69 Code, § 133.07)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 132.09  MAKING FALSE ALARMS.



   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Initiate or circulate a report or warning of an alleged
or impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing that the
report or warning is false and likely to cause public inconvenience or alarm.



      (2)   Knowingly cause a false alarm of fire or other emergency
to be transmitted to or within any organization, public or private, for
dealing with emergencies involving a risk of physical harm to persons or
property.



      (3)   Report to any law enforcement agency an alleged offense
or other incident within its concern, knowing that the offense did not occur.



   (B)   This section does not apply to any person conducting an
authorized fire or emergency drill.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making false
alarms.  Except as otherwise provided in this division, making false alarms
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If a violation of this section
results in economic harm of $1,000 or more, making false alarms is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  If a violation of this
section pertains to a purported, threatened, or actual use of a weapon of
mass destruction, making false alarms is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



   (D)   (1)   It is not a defense to a charge under this section
that pertains to a purported or threatened use of a weapon of mass
destruction that the offender did not possess or have the ability to use a
weapon of mass destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of
mass destruction was not a weapon of mass destruction.



      (2)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any
other section of the Ohio Revised Code or this Code of Ordinances may be
prosecuted under this section, the other section, or both sections.



   (E)   As used in this section, ECONOMIC HARM and WEAPON OF MASS
DESTRUCTION have the same meaning as in R.C. § 2917.31.



(R.C. § 2917.32)  ('69 Code, § 133.08)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



Cross-reference:



   Burglar alarm systems; fees for false alarms, see § 91.12



CHAPTER 133: OFFENSES AGAINST MORALS



Section



   133.01   Definitions



   133.02   Unlawful sexual conduct with a minor



   133.03   Sexual imposition



   133.04   Public indecency



   133.05   Voyeurism



   133.06   Polygraph examinations for victims: restrictions on use



   133.07   Procuring



   133.08   Soliciting; loitering to engage in



   133.09   Prostitution



   133.10   Disseminating matter harmful to juveniles



   133.11   Display of matter harmful to juveniles



   133.12   Deception to obtain matter harmful to juveniles



   133.13   Presumption of knowledge



   133.14   Unlawful operation of viewing booths depicting sexual
conduct



   133.15   Juveniles on the premises of adult entertainment
establishments prohibited



   133.16   Sexually oriented businesses; illegal operation and activity



   133.17   Unlawful advertising of massage



 



   133.99   Sentencing for sexually oriented offenses; sexual
predators; registration



§ 133.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.



   HARMFUL TO JUVENILES. That quality of any material or performance
describing or representing nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or
sado-masochistic abuse in any form to which all of the following apply:



      (1)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole,
appeals to the prurient interest of juveniles in sex.



      (2)   The material or performance is patently offensive to
prevailing standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what
is suitable for juveniles.



      (3)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole,
lacks serious literary, artistic, political, and scientific value for
juveniles.



   JUVENILE. Any unmarried person under 18 years of age.



   MATERIAL. Any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, poster, print,
picture, figure, image, description, motion picture film, video cassette,
laser disc, phonograph record, cassette tape, compact disc, or other tangible
thing capable of arousing interest through sight, sound, or touch and
includes an image or text appearing on a computer monitor, television screen,
liquid crystal display, or similar display device or an image or text
recorded on a computer hard disk, computer floppy disk, compact disk,
magnetic tape, or similar data storage device.



   MENTAL HEALTH CLIENT OR PATIENT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2305.51.



   MENTAL HEALTH PROFESSIONAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2305.115.



   MINOR.  A person under the age of 18.



   NUDITY.  The showing, representation, or depiction of human male or
female genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a full, opaque
covering, or of a female breast with less than a full, opaque covering of any
portion thereof below the top of the nipple, or of covered male genitals in a
discernibly turgid state.



   OBSCENE.  When considered as a whole, and judged with reference to
ordinary adults or, if it is designed for sexual deviates or other specially
susceptible group, judged with reference to that group, any material or
performance is OBSCENE if any of the following apply:



      (1)   Its dominant appeal is to prurient interest.



      (2)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or
depicting sexual activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, or nudity in a
way that tends to represent human beings as mere objects of sexual appetite.



      (3)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or
depicting bestiality or extreme or bizarre violence, cruelty, or brutality.



      (4)   Its dominant tendency is to appeal to scatological
interest by displaying or depicting human bodily functions of elimination in
a way that inspires disgust or revulsion in persons with ordinary
sensibilities, without serving any genuine scientific, educational,
sociological, moral, or artistic purpose.



      (5)   It contains a series of displays or descriptions of
sexual activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, nudity, bestiality, extreme
or bizarre violence, cruelty, or brutality, or human bodily functions of
elimination, the cumulative effect of which is a dominant tendency to appeal
to prurient or scatological interest, when the appeal to such an interest is
primarily for its own sake or for commercial exploitation, rather than
primarily for a genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral, or
artistic purpose.



   PERFORMANCE.  Any motion picture, preview, trailer, play, show, skit,
dance, or other exhibition performed before an audience.



   PROSTITUTE.  A male or female who promiscuously engages in sexual
activity for hire, regardless of whether the hire is paid to the prostitute
or to another.



   SADO-MASOCHISTIC ABUSE. Flagellation or torture by or upon a person or
the condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained.



   SEXUAL ACTIVITY.  Sexual conduct or sexual contact, or both.



   SEXUAL CONDUCT.  Vaginal intercourse between a male and female; anal
intercourse, fellatio, and cunnilingus between persons regardless of sex;
and, without privilege to do so, the insertion, however slight, of any part
of the body or any instrument, apparatus, or other object into the vaginal or
anal opening of another.  Penetration, however slight, is sufficient to
complete vaginal or anal intercourse.



   SEXUAL CONTACT.  Any touching of an erogenous zone of another,
including without limitation the thigh, genitals, buttock, pubic region, or,
if the person is a female, a breast, for the purpose of sexually arousing or
gratifying either person.



   SEXUAL EXCITEMENT.  The condition of human male or female genitals
when in a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.



   SPOUSE.  A person married to an offender at the time of an alleged
offense, except that such person shall not be considered the spouse when any
of the following apply:



      (1)   When the parties have entered into a written separation
agreement pursuant to R.C. § 3103.06.



      (2)   When an action is pending between the parties for
annulment, divorce, dissolution of marriage, or legal separation.



      (3)   In the case of an action for legal separation, after the
effective date of the judgment for legal separation.



(R.C. § 2907.01)  ('69 Code, § 136.01)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



§ 133.02  UNLAWFUL SEXUAL CONDUCT WITH A MINOR.



   (A)   No person who is 18 years of age or older shall engage in
sexual conduct with another who is not the spouse of the offender, when the
offender knows the other person is 13 years of age or older but less than 16
years of age, or the offender is reckless in that regard.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful sexual
conduct with a minor.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2),
unlawful sexual conduct with a minor is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(3) of this
section, if the offender is less than four years older than the other person,
unlawful sexual conduct with a minor is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (3)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a violation of R.C. § 2907.02, 2907.03 or 2907.04, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a violation of former R.C.
§ 2907.12, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, unlawful
sexual conduct with a minor is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.



(R.C. § 2907.04)  ('69 Code, § 136.02)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 133.03  SEXUAL IMPOSITION.



   (A)   No person shall have sexual contact with another, not the
spouse of the offender; cause another, not the spouse of the offender, to
have sexual contact with the offender; or cause two or more other persons to
have sexual contact when any of the following applies:



      (1)   The offender knows that the sexual contact is offensive
to the other person, or one of the other persons, or is reckless in that
regard.



      (2)   The offender knows that the other person's, or one of
the other person's ability to appraise the nature of or control the
offender's or touching person's conduct is substantially impaired.



      (3)   The offender knows that the other person, or one of the
other persons, submits because of being unaware of the sexual contact.



      (4)   The other person, or one of the other persons, is 13
years of age or older but less than 16 years of age, whether or not the
offender knows the age of the person, and the offender is at least 18 years
of age and four or more years older than the other person.



      (5)   The offender is a mental health professional, the other
person or one of the other persons is a mental health client or patient of
the offender, and the offender induces the other person who is the client or
patient to submit by falsely representing to the other person who is the
client or patient that the sexual contact is necessary for mental health
treatment purposes.



   (B)   No person shall be convicted of a violation of this section
solely upon the victim's testimony unsupported by other evidence.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of sexual imposition,
a misdemeanor of the third degree.  If the offender has been convicted
previously of a violation of this section, R.C. § 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.04,
2907.05, 2907.06, former R.C. § 2907.12, or a substantially equivalent state
law or municipal ordinance, a violation of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.



(R.C. § 2907.06)  ('69 Code, § 136.03)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 133.04  PUBLIC INDECENCY.



   (A)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following, under
circumstances in which the person's conduct is likely to be viewed by and
affront others who are in the person's physical proximity and who are not
members of the person's household:



      (1)   Expose the persons's private parts.



      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct or masturbation.



      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would
appear to be sexual conduct or masturbation.



   (B)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following, under
circumstances in which the person's conduct is likely to be viewed by and
affront another person who is a minor, who is not the spouse of the offender,
and who resides in the person's household:



      (1)   Engage in masturbation.



      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct.



      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would
appear to be sexual conduct or masturbation.



      (4)   Expose the person's private parts with the purpose of
personal sexual arousal or gratification or to lure the minor into sexual
activity.



   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public
indecency and shall be punished as provided in divisions (C)(2), (C)(3),
(C)(4), and (C)(5) of this section.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(2), a
violation of division (A)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
one violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(1) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the third degree or, if any person who was likely to view and
be affronted by the offender's conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the
second degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two violations of this section or a substantially equivalent state
law or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(1) of this section is
a misdemeanor of the second degree or, if any person who was likely to view
and be affronted by the offender's conduct was a minor, a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to three or more violations of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(1)
of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if any person who
was likely to view and be affronted by the offender's conduct was a minor, a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(3), a
violation of division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the third degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state
law or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the second degree or, if any person who was
likely to view and be affronted by the offender's conduct was a minor, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of
division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree or, if any person who was likely to view and be affronted by the
offender's conduct was a minor, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.



      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(4), a
violation of division (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the second degree. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of
division (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a violation of division (B)(1),
(B)(2), or (B)(3) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(5), a
violation of division (B)(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to
any violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a violation of division (B)(4) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2907.09)



   (D)   A mother is entitled to breast-feed her baby in any location
of a place of public accommodation, as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, wherein
the mother otherwise is permitted.



(R.C. § 3781.55)



Statutory reference:



   Bail considerations for persons charged, see R.C. § 2907.41



§ 133.05  VOYEURISM.



   (A)   No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying
himself or herself, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade
the privacy of another, to spy or eavesdrop upon another.



   (B)   No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying
himself or herself, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade
the privacy of another to videotape, film, photograph, or otherwise record
the other person in a state of nudity.



   (C)   No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying
himself or herself, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade
the privacy of another to videotape, film, photograph, otherwise record, or
spy or eavesdrop upon the other person in a state of nudity if the other
person is a minor.



   (D)   No person shall secretly or surreptitiously vidoetape, film,
photograph, or otherwise record another person under or through the clothing
being worn by that person for the purpose of viewing the body of, or the
undergarments worn by, that other person.



   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of voyeurism.



      (1)   A violation of division (A) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the third degree.



      (2)   A violation of division (B) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the second degree.



      (3)   A violation of division (D) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (4)   A violation of division (C) of this section is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2907.08)  ('69 Code, § 136.05)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



§ 133.06  POLYGRAPH EXAMINATIONS FOR VICTIMS: RESTRICTIONS ON USE.



   (A)   (1)   A peace officer, prosecutor, or other public official
shall not ask or require a victim of an alleged sex offense to submit to a
polygraph examination as a condition for proceeding with the investigation of
the alleged sex offense.



      (2)   The refusal of the victim of an alleged sex offense to
submit to a polygraph examination shall not prevent the investigation of the
alleged sex offense, the filing of criminal charges with respect to the
alleged sex offense, or the prosecution of the alleged perpetrator of the
alleged sex offense.



   (B)   As used in this section:



      PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.51.



      POLYGRAPH EXAMINATION. Means any mechanical or electrical
instrument or device of any type used or allegedly used to examine, test, or
question an individual for the purpose of determining the individual's
truthfulness.



      PROSECUTION. Means the prosecution of criminal charges in a
criminal prosecution or the prosecution of a delinquent child complaint in a
delinquency proceeding.



      PROSECUTOR. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.



      PUBLIC OFFICIAL. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 117.01.



      SEX OFFENSE. Means a violation of any provision of §§ 133.02 to
133.05 or R.C. §§ 2907.02 to 2907.09.



(R.C. § 2907.10)



§ 133.07  PROCURING.



   (A)   No person, knowingly and for gain, shall do either of the
following:



      (1)   Entice or solicit another to patronize a prostitute or
brothel;



      (2)   Procure a prostitute for another to patronize, or take
or direct another at the other’s request to any place for the purpose of
patronizing a prostitute.



   (B)   No person, having authority or responsibility over the use of
premises, shall knowingly permit the premises to be used for the purpose of
engaging in sexual activity for hire.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of procuring. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, procuring is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the prostitute who is procured, patronized, or otherwise
involved in a violation of division (A)(2) of this section is under 18 years
of age at the time of the violation, regardless of whether the offender who
violates division (A)(2) of this section knows the prostitute’s age, or if
a prostitute who engages in sexual activity for hire in premises used in
violation of division (B) of this section is under 18 years of age at the
time of the violation, regardless of whether the offender who violates
division (B) of this section knows the prostitute’s age, procuring is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2907.23)  ('69 Code, § 136.07)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



§ 133.08  SOLICITING; LOITERING TO ENGAGE IN.



   (A)   (1)   No person shall solicit another who is 18 years of
age or older to engage with the other person in sexual activity for hire.



      (2)   No person shall solicit another to engage with such
other person in sexual activity for hire if the other person is 16 or 17
years of age and the offender knows that the other person is 16 or 17 years
of age or is reckless in that regard.



      (3)   No person shall solicit another to engage with such
other person in sexual activity for hire if either of the following applies:



         (a)   The other person is less than 16 years of age,
whether or not the offender knows the age of the other person.



         (b)   The other person is a person with a developmental
disability and the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe the
other person is a person with a developmental disability.



   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is
guilty of soliciting. A violation of division (A)(1) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the third degree. A violation of division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of
this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of division (A) of this section or an attempt to commit a violation
of division (A) of this section and if the person, in committing or
attempting to commit the violation, was in, was on, or used a motor vehicle,
the court, in addition to or independent of all other penalties imposed for
the violation, may impose upon the offender a class six suspension of the
person’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6). In lieu of imposing upon
the offender the class six suspension, the court instead may require the
offender to perform community service for a number of hours determined by the
court. In lieu of imposing upon the offender the class six suspension, the
court instead may require the offender to perform community service for a
number of hours determined by the court.



   (C)   As used in division (A) of this section:



      PERSON WITH A DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITY. Has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 2905.32.



      SEXUAL ACTIVITY FOR HIRE. Means an implicit or explicit agreement
to provide sexual activity in exchange for anything of value paid to the
person engaging in such sexual activity, to any person trafficking that
person, or to any person associated with either such person.



(R.C. § 2907.24(A), (C)(1), (D), (E))  ('69 Code, § 136.08)  (Ord. C-417,
passed 1-12-76)



   (D)   No person, with purpose to solicit another to engage in sexual
activity for hire and while in or near a public place, shall do any of the
following:



      (1)   Beckon to, stop or attempt to stop another;



      (2)   Engage or attempt to engage another in conversation;



      (3)   Stop or attempt to stop the operator of a vehicle or
approach a stationary vehicle;



      (4)   If the offender is the operator of or a passenger in a
vehicle, stop, attempt to stop, beckon to, attempt to beckon to, or entice
another to approach or enter the vehicle of which the offender is the
operator or in which the offender is the passenger;



      (5)   Interfere with the free passage of another.



   (E)   As used in division (D) of this section:



      PUBLIC PLACE means any of the following:



         (a)   A street, road, highway, thoroughfare, bikeway,
walkway, sidewalk, bridge, alley, alleyway, plaza, park, driveway, parking
lot or transportation facility.



         (b)   A doorway or entrance way to a building that
fronts on a place described in division (a) of this definition.



         (c)   A place not described in division (a) or (b) of
this definition that is open to the public.



      VEHICLE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.



   (F)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of
loitering to engage in solicitation, a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 2907.241)



§ 133.09  PROSTITUTION.



   (A)   No person shall engage in sexual activity for hire.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of prostitution, a
misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 2907.25)  ('69 Code, § 136.09)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



§ 133.10  DISSEMINATING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.



   (A)   No person, with knowledge of its character or content, shall
recklessly do any of following:



      (1)   Directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide,
exhibit, rent, or present to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law
enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement
officers posing as juveniles any material or performance that is obscene or
harmful to juveniles;



      (2)   Directly offer or agree to sell, deliver, furnish,
disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present to a juvenile, a group of
juveniles, a law enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law
enforcement officers posing as juveniles any material or performance that is
obscene or harmful to juveniles;



      (3)   While in the physical proximity of the juvenile or law
enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, allow any juvenile or law
enforcement officer posing as a juvenile to review or peruse any material or
view any live performance that is harmful to juveniles.



   (B)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this
section that involves material or a performance that is harmful to juveniles
but not obscene:



      (1)   The defendant is the parent, guardian, or spouse of the
juvenile involved.



      (2)   The juvenile involved, at the time of the conduct in
question, was accompanied by his or her parent or guardian who, with
knowledge of its character, consented to the material or performance being
furnished or presented to the juvenile.



      (3)   The juvenile exhibited to the defendant or his or her
agent or employee a draft card, driver's license, birth record, marriage
license, or other official or apparently official document purporting to show
that the juvenile was 18 years of age or over or married, and the person to
whom the document was exhibited did not otherwise have reasonable cause to
believe that the juvenile was under the age of 18 and unmarried.



   (C)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this
section, involving material or a performance that is obscene or harmful to
juveniles, that the material or performance was furnished or presented for a
bona fide medical, scientific, educational, governmental, judicial, or other
proper purpose, by a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist,
teacher, librarian, clergy, prosecutor, judge, or other proper person.



      (2)   Except as provided in division (B)(3) of this section,
mistake of age is not a defense to a charge under this section.



   (D)   (1)   A person directly sells, delivers, furnishes,
disseminates, provides, exhibits, rents, or presents or directly offers or
agrees to sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or
present material or a performance to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law
enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement
officers posing as juveniles in violation of this section by means of an
electronic method of remotely transmitting information if the person knows or
has reason to believe that the person receiving the information is a juvenile
or the group of persons receiving the information are juveniles.



      (2)   A person remotely transmitting information by means of a
method of mass distribution does not directly sell, deliver, furnish,
disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present or directly offer or agree to
sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present the
material or performance in question to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a
law enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement
officers posing as juveniles in violation of this section if either of the
following applies:



         (a)   The person has inadequate information to know or
have reason to believe that a particular recipient of the information or
offer is a juvenile.



         (b)   The method of mass distribution does not provide
the person the ability to prevent a particular recipient from receiving the
information.



(R.C. § 2907.31)  ('69 Code, § 136.10)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



Cross-reference:



   Presumptions, notice and defense, see § 133.13



§ 133.11  DISPLAY OF MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.



   (A)   No person who has custody, control, or supervision of a
commercial establishment, with knowledge of the character or content of the
material involved, shall display at the establishment any material that is
harmful to juveniles and that is open to view by juveniles as part of the
invited general public.



   (B)   It is not a violation of division (A) of this section if the
material in question is displayed by placing it behind "blinder racks" or
similar devices that cover at least the lower two-thirds of the material, if
the material in question is wrapped or placed behind the counter, or if the
material in question otherwise is covered or located so that the portion that
is harmful to juveniles is not open to the view of juveniles.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of displaying matter
harmful to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  Each day during
which the offender is in violation of this section constitutes a separate
offense.



(R.C. § 2907.311)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Cross-reference:



   Presumptions, notice and defense, see § 133.13



§ 133.12  DECEPTION TO OBTAIN MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.



   (A)   No person, for the purpose of enabling a juvenile to obtain
any material or gain admission to any performance which is harmful to
juveniles, shall do either of the following:



      (1)   Falsely represent that he or she is the parent,
guardian, or spouse of the juvenile.



      (2)   Furnish the juvenile with any identification or document
purporting to show that the juvenile is 18 years of age or over or married.



   (B)   No juvenile, for the purpose of obtaining any material or
gaining admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles, shall do
either of the following:



      (1)   Falsely represent that he or she is 18 years of age or
over or married.



      (2)   Exhibit any identification or document purporting to
show that he or she is 18 years of age or over or married.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of deception to obtain
matter harmful to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the second degree.  A juvenile
who violates division (B) of this section shall be adjudged an unruly child,
with the disposition of the case as may be appropriate under R.C. Chapter
2151.



(R.C. § 2907.33)  ('69 Code, § 136.12)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



Cross-reference:



   Presumptions, notice and defense, see § 133.13



§ 133.13  PRESUMPTION OF KNOWLEDGE.



   (A)   An owner or manager, or agent or employee of an owner or
manager, of a bookstore, newsstand, theater, or other commercial
establishment engaged in selling material or exhibiting performances, who, in
the course of business does any of the acts prohibited by this section is
presumed to have knowledge of the character of the material or performance
involved if the owner, manager, or agent or employee of the owner or manager
has actual notice of the nature of such material or performance, whether or
not the owner, manager, or agent or employee of the owner or manager has
precise knowledge of its contents.



   (B)   Without limitation on the manner in which such notice may be
given, actual notice of the character of material or a performance may be
given in writing by the chief legal officer of the municipality.  Such
notice, regardless of the manner in which it is given, shall identify the
sender, identify the material or performance involved, state whether it is
obscene or harmful to juveniles, and bear the date of such notice.



   (C)   This § 133.13 does not apply to a motion picture operator or
projectionist acting within the scope of employment as an employee of the
owner or manager of the theater or other place for the showing of motion
pictures to the general public, and having no managerial responsibility or
financial interest in the operator's or projectionist's place of employment,
other than wages.



   (D)   (1)   The provisions of §§ 133.10, 133.11 and 133.12(A)
do not apply to a person solely because the person provided access or
connection to or from an electronic method of remotely transferring
information not under that person's control, including having provided
capabilities that are incidental to providing access or connection to or from
the electronic method of remotely transferring the information, and that do
not include the creation of the content of the material that is the subject
of the access or connection.



      (2)   Division (D)(1) of this section does not apply to a
person who conspires with an entity actively involved in the creation or
knowing distribution of material in violation of § 133.10, 133.11, or 133.12
or who knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.



      (3)   Division (D)(1) of this section does not apply to a
person who provides access or connection to an electronic method of remotely
transferring information that is engaged in the violation of § 133.10,
133.11, or 133.12 and that contain content that person has selected and
introduced into the electronic method of remotely transferring information or
content over which that person exercises editorial control.



   (E)   An employer is not guilty of a violation of § 133.10, 133.11,
or 133.12 based on the actions of an employee or agent of the employer unless
the employee's or agent's conduct is within the scope of the employee's or
agent's employment or agency, and the employer does either of the following:



      (1)   With knowledge of the employee's or agent's conduct, the
employer authorizes or ratifies the conduct.



      (2)   The employer recklessly disregards the employee's or
agent's conduct.



   (F)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under § 133.10 or
133.11 as the section applies to an image transmitted through the internet or
other electronic method of remotely transmitting information that the person
charged with violating the section has taken, in good faith, reasonable,
effective, and appropriate actions under the circumstances to restrict or
prevent access by juveniles to material that is harmful to juveniles,
including any method that is feasible under available technology.



(R.C. § 2907.35)  ('69 Code, § 136.13)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 133.14  UNLAWFUL OPERATION OF VIEWING BOOTHS DEPICTING SEXUAL CONDUCT.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      COMMERCIAL ESTABLISHMENT means an entity that is open to the
public and to which either of the following applies:



         (a)   It has a substantial or significant portion of its
stock in trade of the sale, rental, or viewing of visual materials or
performances depicting sexual conduct.



         (b)   It has as a principal business purpose the sale,
rental, or viewing of visual materials or performances depicting sexual
conduct.



      VISUAL MATERIALS OR PERFORMANCES means films, videos, CD-ROM
discs, streaming video, or other motion pictures.



   (B)   No person who has custody, control, or supervision of a
commercial establishment, with knowledge of the character of the visual
material or performance involved, shall knowingly permit the use of, or offer
the use of, viewing booths, stalls, or partitioned portions of a room located
in the commercial establishment for the purpose of viewing visual materials
or performances depicting sexual conduct unless both of the following apply:



      (1)   The inside of each booth, stall, or partitioned room is
visible from, and at least one side of each booth, stall, or partitioned room
is open to, a continuous and contiguous main aisle or hallway that is open to
the public areas of the commercial establishment and is not obscured by any
curtain, door, or other covering or enclosure.



      (2)   No booth, stall, or partitioned room is designed,
constructed, pandered, or allowed to be used for the purpose of encouraging
or facilitating nudity or sexual activity on the part of or between patrons
or members of the public, and no booth, stall, or partitioned room has any
aperture, hole, or opening for the purpose of encouraging or facilitating
nudity or sexual activity.



   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section
that either of the following applies to the involved visual materials or
performances:



      (1)   The visual materials or performances depicting sexual
conduct are disseminated or presented for a bona fide medical, scientific,
educational, religious, governmental, judicial, or other proper purpose and
by or to a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher, person
pursuing bona fide studies or research, librarian, member of the clergy,
prosecutor, judge, or other person having a proper interest in the visual
materials or performances.



      (2)   The visual materials or performances depicting sexual
conduct, taken as a whole, would be found by a reasonable person to have
serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value or are presented
or disseminated in good faith for a serious literary, artistic, political, or
scientific purpose and are not pandered for their prurient appeal.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting unlawful
operation of viewing booths depicting sexual conduct, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.



(R.C. § 2907.38)  (Rev. 2007)



§ 133.15  JUVENILES ON THE PREMISES OF ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
PROHIBITED.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      ADULT ARCADE means any place to which the public is permitted or
invited in which coin- operated, slug-operated, or electronically,
electrically, or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines,
projectors, or other image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show
images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and in which the
images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon
matter exhibiting or describing specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.



      ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT NOVELTY STORE, or ADULT VIDEO STORE.



         (a)   Means a commercial establishment that, for any
form of consideration, has as a significant or substantial portion of its
stock-in-trade in, derives a significant or substantial portion of its
revenues from, devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior
business or advertising to, or maintains a substantial section of its sales
or display space for the sale or rental of any of the following:



            1.   Books, magazines, periodicals, or other
printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes,
compact discs, slides, or other visual representations, that are
characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas;



            2.   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that
are designed for use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital
organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of self or others.



         (b)   Includes a commercial establishment as defined in
R.C. § 2907.38. An establishment may have other principal business purposes
that do not involve the offering for sale, rental, or viewing of materials
exhibiting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas and still be categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or
adult video store. The existence of other principal business purposes does
not exempt an establishment from being categorized as an adult bookstore,
adult novelty store, or adult video store so long as one of its principal
business purposes is offering for sale or rental, for some form of
consideration, such materials that exhibit or describe specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.



      ADULT CABARET means a nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant,
bottle club, or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic
beverages are served, that regularly features any of the following:



         (a)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or
seminudity;



         (b)   Live performances that are characterized by the
exposure of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities;



         (c)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides,
or other photographic reproductions that are distinguished or characterized
by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.



      ADULT ENTERTAINMENT means the sale, rental, or exhibition, for
any form of consideration, of books, films, video cassettes, magazines,
periodicals, or live performances that are characterized by an emphasis on
the exposure or display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual
activity.



      ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENT means an adult arcade, adult
bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult
motion picture theater, adult theater, nude or seminude model studio, or
sexual encounter establishment. An establishment in which a medical
practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person
licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized therapy,
including, but not limited to, massage therapy, as regulated pursuant to R.C.
§ 4731.15, is not an "adult entertainment establishment".



      ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER means a commercial establishment
where films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar
photographic reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas are regularly shown for any form of consideration.



      ADULT THEATER means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or
similar commercial establishment that, for any form of consideration,
regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity or
live performances that are characterized by their emphasis upon the exposure
of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.



      DISTINGUISHED OR CHARACTERIZED BY THEIR EMPHASIS UPON means the
dominant or principal character and theme of the object described by this
phrase. For instance, when the phrase refers to films "that are distinguished
or characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas", the films so
described are those whose dominant or principal character and theme are the
exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.



      NUDE OR SEMINUDE MODEL STUDIO means any place where a person, who
regularly appears in a state of nudity or seminudity, is provided for money
or any other form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. A modeling
class or studio is not a nude or seminude model studio and is not subject to
this chapter if it is operated in any of the following ways:



         (a)   By a college or university supported entirely or
partly by taxation;



         (b)   By a private college or university that maintains
and operates educational programs, the credits for which are transferable to
a college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;



         (c)   In a structure that has no sign visible from the
exterior of the structure and no other advertising indicating that a person
appearing in a state of nudity or seminudity is available for viewing, if in
order to participate in a class in the structure, a student must enroll at
least three days in advance of the class and if not more than one nude or
seminude model is on the premises at any one time.



      NUDITY, NUDE, or STATE OF NUDITY means the showing of the human
male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft, or cleavage
with less than a fully opaque covering; or the showing of the female breasts
with less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple.



      REGULARLY FEATURES or REGULARLY SHOWN means a consistent or
substantial course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited
constitute a substantial portion of the films or performances offered as a
part of the ongoing business of the adult entertainment establishment.



      SEMINUDE or STATE OF SEMINUDITY means a state of dress in which
opaque clothing covers not more than the genitals, pubic region, and nipple
of the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting
straps or devices.



      SEXUAL ENCOUNTER ESTABLISHMENT.



         (a)   Means a business or commercial establishment that,
as one of its principal business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration a place where either of the following occur:



            1.   Two or more persons may congregate,
associate, or consort for the purpose of engaging in specified sexual
activities.



            2.   Two or more persons appear nude or seminude
for the purpose of displaying their nude or seminude bodies for their receipt
of consideration or compensation in any type or form.



         (b)   An establishment where a medical practitioner,
psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the
state engages in medically approved and recognized therapy, including, but
not limited to, massage therapy, as regulated pursuant to R.C. § 4731.15, is
not a "sexual encounter establishment".



      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS means the cleft of the buttocks, anus,
male or female genitals, or the female breast.



      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY means any of the following:



         (a)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, or actual or
simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy;



         (b)   Excretory functions as a part of or in connection
with any of the activities described in division (a) of this definition.



   (B)   No person knowingly shall allow an individual, including, but
not limited to, a patron, customer, or employee, who is under 18 years of age
on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment.



   (C)   No individual who is under 18 years of age knowingly shall
show or give false information concerning the individual's name or age, or
other false identification, for the purpose of gaining entrance to an adult
entertainment establishment.



   (D)   A person shall not be found guilty of a violation of division
(B) of this section if the person raises as an affirmative defense and if the
jury or, in a nonjury trial, the court finds the person has established by a
preponderance of the evidence, all of the following:



      (1)   The individual gaining entrance to the adult
entertainment establishment exhibited to an operator, employee, agent, or
independent contractor of the adult entertainment establishment a driver's or
commercial driver's license or an identification card issued under R.C. §§
4507.50 and 4507.52 showing that the individual was then at least 18 years of
age.



      (2)   The operator, employee, agent, or independent contractor
made a bona fide effort to ascertain the true age of the individual gaining
entrance to the adult entertainment establishment by checking the
identification presented, at the time of entrance, to ascertain that the
description on the identification compared with the appearance of the
individual and that the identification had not been altered in any way.



      (3)   The operator, employee, agent, or independent contractor
had reason to believe that the individual gaining entrance to the adult
entertainment establishment was at least 18 years of age.



   (E)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense
described in division (D) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles or the Deputy Registrar who issued a driver's or commercial driver's
license or an identification card under R.C. §§ 4507.50 and 4507.52 shall
be permitted to submit certified copies of the records, in the Registrar's or
Deputy Registrar's possession, of the issuance of the license or
identification card in question, in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of
the Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the action.



   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is
guilty of permitting a juvenile on the premises of an adult entertainment
establishment, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day a person violates
this division constitutes a separate offense.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty
of use by a juvenile of false information to enter an adult entertainment
establishment, a delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree if committed by an adult.



(R.C. § 2907.39) 



§ 133.16  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES; ILLEGAL OPERATION AND ACTIVITY.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      ADULT BOOKSTORE or ADULT VIDEO STORE. A commercial establishment
that has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock in trade or
inventory in, derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues
from, devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business
or advertising to, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display
space for the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of books,
magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides, or other visual
representations, that are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.



      ADULT CABARET. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2907.39.



      ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER. A commercial establishment where
films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic
reproductions that are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown
to more than five individuals for any form of consideration.



      CHARACTERIZED BY. Describing the essential character or quality
of an item.



      EMPLOYEE. Any individual who performs any service on the premises
of a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time, or contract basis,
regardless of whether the individual is denominated an employee, independent
contractor, agent, or otherwise, but does not include an individual
exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for
the delivery of goods to the premises.



      NUDITY, NUDE, or STATE OF NUDITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2907.39.



      OPERATOR. Any individual on the premises of a sexually oriented
business who causes the business to function or who puts or keeps in
operation the business or who is authorized to manage the business or
exercise overall operational control of the business premises.



      PATRON. Any individual on the premises of a sexually oriented
business except for any of the following:



         (a)   An operator or an employee of the sexually
oriented business;



         (b)   An individual who is on the premises exclusively
for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the
premises;



         (c)   A public employee or a volunteer firefighter
emergency medical services worker acting within the scope of the public
employee's or volunteer's duties as a public employee or volunteer.



      PREMISES. The real property on which the sexually oriented
business is located and all appurtenances to the real property, including,
but not limited, to the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private
walkways, and parking lots or parking garages adjacent to the real property
under the ownership, control, or supervision of the owner or operator of the
sexually oriented business.



      REGULARLY. Consistently or repeatedly.



      SEMINUDE or STATE OF SEMINUDITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2907.39.



      SEXUAL DEVICE. Any three-dimensional object designed and marketed
for stimulation of the male or female human genitals or anus or female
breasts or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others, including,
but not limited to, dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, and physical
representations of the human genital organs, but not including devices
primarily intended for protection against sexually transmitted diseases or
for preventing pregnancy.



      SEXUAL DEVICE SHOP. A commercial establishment that regularly
features sexual devices, but not including any pharmacy, drug store, medical
clinic, or establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical or
healthcare products or services, and not including any commercial
establishment that does not restrict access to its premises by reason of age.



      SEXUAL ENCOUNTER CENTER. A business or commercial enterprise
that, as one of its principal business purposes, purports to offer for any
form of consideration physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling
between individuals of the opposite sex when one or more of the individuals
is nude or seminude.



      SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS. An adult bookstore, adult video
store, adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, sexual device shop, or
sexual encounter center, but does not include a business solely by reason of
its showing, selling, or renting materials that may depict sex.



      SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS. Includes human genitals, pubic
region, and buttocks and the human female breast below a point immediately
above the top of the areola.



      SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITY. Sexual intercourse, oral copulation,
masturbation, or sodomy, or excretory functions as a part of or in connection
with any of these activities.



   (B)   No sexually oriented business shall be or remain open for
business between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on any day, except that a
sexually oriented business that holds a liquor permit pursuant to R.C.
Chapter 4303 may remain open until the hour specified in that permit if it
does not conduct, offer, or allow sexually oriented entertainment activity in
which the performers appear nude.



   (C)   (1)   No patron who is not a member of the employee's
immediate family shall knowingly touch any employee while that employee is
nude or seminude or touch the clothing of any employee while that employee is
nude or seminude.



      (2)   No employee who regularly appears nude or seminude on
the premises of a sexually oriented business, while on the premises of that
sexually oriented business and while nude or seminude, shall knowingly touch
a patron who is not a member of the employee's immediate family or another
employee who is not a member of the employee's immediate family or the
clothing of a patron who is not a member of the employee's immediate family
or another employee who is not a member of the employee's immediate family or
allow a patron who is not a member of the employee's immediate family or
another employee who is not a member of the employee's immediate family to
touch the employee or the clothing of the employee.



   (D)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
illegally operating a sexually oriented business, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.



   (E)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of
illegal sexually oriented activity in a sexually oriented business. If the
offender touches a specified anatomical area of the patron or employee, or
the clothing covering a specified anatomical area, a violation of division
(C) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
does not touch a specified anatomical area of the patron or employee, or the
clothing covering a specified anatomical area, a violation of division (C) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 2907.40)



Statutory reference:



   State indemnification for certain municipal liability stemming from
local adult business regulations, see R.C. § 715.55



§ 133.17 UNLAWFUL ADVERTISING OF MASSAGE.



   (A)   No person, by means of a statement, solicitation, or offer in
a print or electronic publication, sign, placard, storefront display, or
other medium, shall advertise massage, relaxation massage, any other massage
technique or method, or any related service, with the suggestion or promise
of sexual activity.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful
advertising of massage, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



   (C)   Nothing in this section prevents the municipality from
enacting any regulation of the advertising of massage further than and in
addition to the provisions of divisions (A) and (B) of this section.



   (D)   As used in this section, SEXUAL ACTIVITY has the same meaning
as in R.C. § 2907.01.



(R.C. § 2927.17)



§ 133.99  SENTENCING FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED OFFENSES; SEXUAL PREDATORS;
REGISTRATION.



   (A)   If an offender is being sentenced for a sexually oriented
offense or child-victim oriented offense that is a misdemeanor committed on
or after January 1, 1997, and the offender is a tier III sex
offender/child-victim offender relative to the offense or the offense is any
offense listed in R.C. § 2901.07(D)(1) to (D)(3), the judge shall include in
the offender's sentence a statement that the offender is a tier III sex
offender/child-victim offender, shall comply with the requirements of R.C. §
2950.03, and shall require the offender to submit to a DNA specimen
collection procedure pursuant to R.C. § 2901.07.



   (B)   If an offender is being sentenced for a sexually oriented
offense or a child-victim oriented offense that is a misdemeanor committed on
or after January 1, 1997, the judge shall include in the sentence a summary
of the offender's duties imposed under R.C. §§ 2950.04, 2950.041, 2950.05,
and 2950.06, and the duration of the duties. The judge shall inform the
offender, at the time of sentencing, of those duties and of their duration.
If required under R.C. § 2950.03(A)(2), the judge shall perform the duties
specified in that section or, if required under R.C. § 2950.03(A)(6), the
judge shall perform the duties specified in that division.



(R.C. § 2929.23)



Cross-reference:



   Sentencing generally, see Chapter 130



CHAPTER 134: GAMBLING



Section



   134.01   Definitions



   134.02   Prohibitions against gambling; exception



   134.03   Operating a gambling house



   134.04   Public gaming



   134.05   Cheating



   134.06   Regulations concerning operation of licensed bingo game



   134.07   Records to be kept



   134.08   Requirements for bingo game operators



   134.09   Bingo games for amusement only



   134.10   Prohibitions where instant bingo game is conducted



   134.11   Raffle drawings



   134.12   Instant bingo other than at bingo sessions



   134.13   Restrictions on owner or lessor of location at instant bingo



   134.14   Skill-based amusement machines; prohibited conduct



Statutory reference:



   Conducting an illegal bingo game, felony, see R.C. § 2915.07



   Licensing bingo games by Attorney General, see R.C. § 2915.08



   Licensing distributors of bingo supplies by Attorney General, see R.C.
§ 2915.081



   Licensing manufacturers of bingo supplies by Attorney General, see R.C.
§ 2915.082



§ 134.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   BET. The hazarding of anything of value upon the result of an event,
undertaking, or contingency, but does not include a bona fide business risk.



   BINGO. Means either of the following:



      (1)   A game with all of the following characteristics:



         (a)   The participants use bingo cards or sheets,
including paper formats and electronic representation or image formats, that
are divided into 25 spaces arranged in 5 horizontal and 5 vertical rows of
spaces, with each space, except the central space, being designated by a
combination of a letter and a number and with the central space being
designated as a free space;



         (b)   The participants cover the spaces on the bingo
cards or sheets that correspond to combinations of letters and numbers that
are announced by a bingo game operator;



         (c)   A bingo game operator announces combinations of
letters and numbers that appear on objects that a bingo game operator selects
by chance, either manually or mechanically, from a receptacle that contains
75 objects at the beginning of each game, each object marked by a different
combination of a letter and a number that corresponds to one of the 75
possible combinations of a letter and a number that can appear on the bingo
cards or sheets;



         (d)   The winner of the bingo game includes any
participant who properly announces during the interval between the
announcements of letters and numbers, as described in division (1)(c) of this
definition, that a predetermined and preannounced pattern of spaces has been
covered on a bingo card or sheet being used by the participant.



      (2)   Instant bingo, punch boards, and raffles.



   BINGO GAME OPERATOR. Any person, except security personnel, who
performs work or labor at the site of bingo including but not limited to
collecting money from participants, handing out bingo cards or sheets or
objects to cover spaces on bingo cards or sheets, selecting from a receptacle
the objects that contain the combination of letters and numbers that appear
on bingo cards or sheets, calling out the combinations of letters and
numbers, distributing prizes, selling or redeeming instant bingo tickets or
cards, supervising the operation of a punch board, selling raffle tickets,
selecting raffle tickets from a receptacle and announcing the winning numbers
in a raffle, and preparing, selling, and serving food or beverages.



   BINGO SESSION. A period that includes both of the following:



      (1)   Not to exceed five continuous hours for the conduct of
one or more games described in division (1) of the definition of "bingo" in
this section, instant bingo, and seal cards;



      (2)   A period for the conduct of instant bingo and seal cards
for not more than two hours before and not more than two hours after the
period described in division (1) of this definition.



   BINGO SUPPLIES. Bingo cards or sheets; instant bingo tickets or cards;
electronic bingo aids; raffle tickets; punch boards; seal cards; instant
bingo ticket dispensers; and devices for selecting or displaying the
combination of bingo letters and numbers or raffle tickets. Items that are
BINGO SUPPLIES are not gambling devices if sold or otherwise provided, and
used, in accordance with this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915. For purposes of
this chapter, BINGO SUPPLIES are not to be considered equipment used to
conduct a bingo game.



   BOOKMAKING. The business of receiving or paying off bets.



   CHAMBER OF COMMERCE. Any organization of individuals, professionals,
and businesses that has the purpose to advance the commercial, financial,
industrial, and civic interests of the community and that is, and has
received from the Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that
currently is in effect stating that the organization is, exempt from federal
income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(6).



   CHARITABLE BINGO GAME. Any bingo game described in divisions (1) or (2)
of the definition of "bingo" in this section that is conducted by a
charitable organization that has obtained a license pursuant to R.C. §
2915.08 and the proceeds of which are used for a charitable purpose.



   CHARITABLE INSTANT BINGO ORGANIZATION. An organization that is exempt
from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3)
and is a charitable organization as defined in this section. A CHARITABLE
INSTANT BINGO ORGANIZATION does not include a charitable organization that is
exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC
501(c)(3) and that is created by a veteran's organization, a fraternal
organization, or a sporting organization in regards to bingo conducted or
assisted by a veteran's organization, a fraternal organization, or a sporting
organization pursuant to R.C. § 2915.13, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.



   CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter,
“charitable organization” means either of the following:



         (a)   An organization that is and has received from the
Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that is currently in effect,
stating that the organization is exempt from federal income taxation under
IRC § 501(a) and described in IRC § 501(c)(3);



         (b)   A volunteer rescue service organization, volunteer
firefighter’s organization, veteran’s organization, fraternal
organization, or sporting organization that is exempt from federal income
taxation under IRC §§ 501(c)(4), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10) or
501(c)(19).



      (2)   To qualify as a charitable organization, an organization
shall have been in continuous existence as such in this state for a period of
two years immediately preceding either the making of an application for a
bingo license under R.C. § 2915.08 or the conducting of any game of chance
as provided in R.C. § 2915.02(D), or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.



   CHARITABLE PURPOSE. Means that the net profit of bingo, other than
instant bingo, is used by, or is given, donated, or otherwise transferred to,
any of the following:



      (1)   Any organization that is described in IRC 509(a)(1),
509(a)(2), or 509(a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an organization
that is tax exempt under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3);



      (2)   A veteran's organization that is a post, chapter, or
organization of veterans, or an auxiliary unit or society of, or a trust or
foundation for, any such post, chapter, or organization organized in the
United States or any of its possessions, at least 75% of the members of which
are veterans and substantially all of the other members of which are
individuals who are spouses, widows, or widowers of veterans, or such
individuals, provided that no part of the net earnings of such post, chapter,
or organization inures to the benefit of any private shareholder or
individual, and further provided that the net profit is used by the post,
chapter, or organization for the charitable purposes set forth in R.C. §
5739.02(B)(12), is used for awarding scholarships to or for attendance at an
institution mentioned in that division of the Revised Code, is donated to a
governmental agency, or is used for nonprofit youth activities, the purchase
of United States or Ohio flags that are donated to schools, youth groups, or
other bona fide nonprofit organizations, promotion of patriotism, or disaster
relief;



      (3)   A fraternal organization that has been in continuous
existence in this state for 15 years and that uses the net profit exclusively
for religious, charitable, scientific, literary, or educational purposes, or
for the prevention of cruelty to children or animals, if contributions for
such use would qualify as a deductible charitable contribution under IRC 170;



      (4)   A volunteer firefighter's organization that uses the net
profit for the purposes set forth in the definition of "volunteer
firefighter's organization" in this section.



   COMMUNITY ACTION AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 122.66.



   CONDUCT. To back, promote, organize, manage, carry on, sponsor, or
prepare for the operation of bingo or a game of chance, a scheme of chance,
or a sweepstakes.



   DEAL OF INSTANT BINGO TICKETS. A single game of instant bingo tickets
all with the same serial number.



   DISTRIBUTOR. Any person who purchases or obtains bingo supplies and who
does either of the following:



      (1)   Sells, offers for sale, or otherwise provides or offers
to provide the bingo supplies to another person for use in this state;



      (2)   Modifies, converts, adds to, or removes parts from the
bingo supplies to further their promotion or sale for use in this state.



   ELECTRONIC BINGO AID.



      (1)   ELECTRONIC BINGO AID means an electronic device used by
a participant to monitor bingo cards or sheets purchased at the time and
place of a bingo session and that does all of the following:



         (a)   It provides a means for a participant to input
numbers and letters announced by a bingo caller.



         (b)   It compares the numbers and letters entered by the
participant to the bingo faces previously stored in the memory of the device.



         (c)   It identifies a winning bingo pattern.



      (2)   ELECTRONIC BINGO AID does not include any device into
which a coin, currency, token, or an equivalent is inserted to activate play.



   EXPENSES. The reasonable amount of gross profit actually expended for
all of the following:



      (1)   The purchase or lease of bingo supplies;



      (2)   The annual license fee required under R.C. § 2915.08;



      (3)   Bank fees and service charges for a bingo session or
game account described in R.C. § 2915.10;



      (4)   Audits and accounting services;



      (5)   Safes;



      (6)   Cash registers;



      (7)   Hiring security personnel;



      (8)   Advertising bingo;



      (9)   Renting premises in which to conduct a bingo session;



      (10)   Tables and chairs;



      (11)   Expenses for maintaining and operating a charitable
organization's facilities, including, but not limited to, a post home, club
house, lounge, tavern, or canteen and any grounds attached to the post home,
club house, lounge, tavern, or canteen;



      (12)   Payment of real property taxes and assessments that are
levied on a premises on which bingo is conducted;



      (13)   Any other product or service directly related to the
conduct of bingo that is authorized in rules adopted by the Attorney General
under R.C. § 2915.08(B)(1).



   FRATERNAL ORGANIZATION. Any society, order, state headquarters, or
association within this state, except a college or high school fraternity,
that is not organized for profit, that is a branch, lodge, or chapter of a
national or state organization, that exists exclusively for the common
business or sodality of its members.



   GAMBLING DEVICE. Means any of the following:



      (1)   A book, totalizer, or other equipment used for recording
bets;



      (2)   A ticket, token, or other device representing a chance,
share, or interest in a scheme of chance or evidencing a bet;



      (3)   A deck of cards, dice, gaming table, roulette wheel,
slot machine, or other apparatus designed for use in connection with a game
of chance;



      (4)   Any equipment, device, apparatus, or paraphernalia
specially designed for gambling purposes;



      (5)   Bingo supplies sold or otherwise provided, or used, in
violation of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.



   GAMBLING OFFENSE. Means any of the following:



      (1)   A violation of R.C. §§ 2915.02, 2915.03, 2915.04,
2915.05, 2915.06, 2915.07, 2915.08, 2915.081, 2915.082, 2915.09, 2915.091,
2915.092, 2915.10, or 2915.11;



      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance
or law of this or any other state or of the United States substantially
equivalent to any section listed in division (1) of this definition or a
violation of R.C. § 2915.06 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996;



      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal
ordinance or law of this or any other state or of the United States, of which
gambling is an element;



      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing, any offense under division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.



   GAME FLARE. The board or placard that accompanies each deal of instant
bingo tickets and that has printed on or affixed to it the following
information for the game:



      (1)   The name of the game;



      (2)   The manufacturer's name or distinctive logo;



      (3)   The form number;



      (4)   The ticket count;



      (5)   The prize structure, including the number of winning
instant bingo tickets by denomination and the respective winning symbol or
number combinations for the winning instant bingo tickets;



      (6)   The cost per play;



      (7)   The serial number of the game.



   GAME OF CHANCE. Poker, craps, roulette, or other game in which a player
gives anything of value in the hope of gain, the outcome of which is
determined largely by chance, but does not include bingo.



   GAME OF CHANCE CONDUCTED FOR PROFIT. Any game of chance designed to
produce income for the person who conducts or operates the game of chance,
but does not include bingo.



   GROSS ANNUAL REVENUES. The annual gross receipts derived from the
conduct of bingo described in division (1) of the definition of "bingo" in
this section plus the annual net profit derived from the conduct of bingo
described in division (2) of the definition of "bingo" in this section.



   GROSS PROFIT. Means gross receipts minus the amount actually expended
for the payment of prize awards.



   GROSS RECEIPTS. All money or assets, including admission fees, that a
person receives from bingo without the deduction of any amounts for prizes
paid out or for the expenses of conducting bingo. GROSS RECEIPTS does not
include any money directly taken in from the sale of food or beverages by a
charitable organization conducting bingo, or by a bona fide auxiliary unit or
society of a charitable organization conducting bingo, provided all of the
following apply:



      (1)   The auxiliary unit or society has been in existence as a
bona fide auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization for at
least two years prior to conducting bingo.



      (2)   The person who purchases the food or beverage receives
nothing of value except the food or beverage and items customarily received
with the purchase of that food or beverage.



      (3)   The food and beverages are sold at customary and
reasonable prices.



   HISTORIC RAILROAD.  All or a portion of the tracks and right-of-way of
a railroad that was owned and operated by a for profit common carrier in this
state at any time prior to January 1, 1950.



   INSTANT BINGO. A form of bingo that shall use folded or banded tickets
or paper cards with perforated break-open tabs, a face of which is covered or
otherwise hidden from view to conceal a number, letter, or symbol, or set of
numbers, letters, or symbols, some of which have been designated in advance
as prize winners, and may also include games in which some winners are
determined by the random selection of one or more bingo numbers by the use of
a seal card or bingo blower. In all “instant bingo” the prize amount and
structure shall be predetermined. The term does not include any device that
is activated by the insertion of a coin, currency, token, or an equivalent,
and that contains as one of its components a video display monitor that is
capable of displaying numbers, letters, symbols, or characters in winning or
losing combinations.



   INSTANT BINGO TICKET DISPENSER. A mechanical device that dispenses an
instant bingo ticket or card as the sole item of value dispensed and that has
the following characteristics:



      (1)   It is activated upon the insertion of United States
currency.



      (2)   It performs no gaming functions.



      (3)   It does not contain a video display monitor or generate
noise.



      (4)   It is not capable of displaying any numbers, letters,
symbols, or characters in winning or losing combinations.



      (5)   It does not simulate or display rolling or spinning
reels.



      (6)   It is incapable of determining whether a dispensed bingo
ticket or card is a winning or non-winning ticket or card and requires a
winning ticket or card to be paid by a bingo game operator.



      (7)   It may provide accounting and security features to aid
in accounting for the instant bingo tickets or cards it dispenses.



      (8)   It is not part of an electronic network and is not
interactive.



   IRC or INTERNAL REVENUE CODE. The Internal Revenue Code of 1986, 100
Stat. 2085, 26 U.S.C. §§ 1 et seq., as now or hereafter amended.



   MANUFACTURER. Any person who assembles completed bingo supplies from
raw materials, other items, or subparts or who modifies, converts, adds to,
or removes parts from bingo supplies to further their promotion or sale.



   MERCHANDISE PRIZE. Any item of value, but shall not include any of the
following:



      (1)   Cash, gift cards, or any equivalent thereof;



      (2)   Plays on games of chance, state lottery tickets, bingo,
or instant bingo;



      (3)   Firearms, tobacco, or alcoholic beverages; or



      (4)   A redeemable voucher that is redeemable for any of the
items listed in division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.



   NET PROFIT. Means gross profit minus expenses.



   NET PROFIT FROM THE PROCEEDS OF THE SALE OF INSTANT BINGO. Means gross
profit minus the ordinary, necessary, and reasonable expense expended for the
purchase of instant bingo supplies.



   PARTICIPANT. Any person who plays bingo.



   PERSON. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1.59 and includes any firm
or any other legal entity, however organized.



   POOL NOT CONDUCTED FOR PROFIT. A scheme in which a participant gives a
valuable consideration for a chance to win a prize and the total amount of
consideration wagered is distributed to a participant or participants.



   PUNCH BOARD. A board containing a number of holes or receptacles of
uniform size in which are placed, mechanically and randomly, serially
numbered slips of paper that may be punched or drawn from the hole or
receptacle when used in conjunction with instant bingo. A player may punch or
draw the numbered slips of paper from the holes or receptacles and obtain the
prize established for the game if the number drawn corresponds to a winning
number or, if the punch board includes the use of a seal card, a potential
winning number.



   RAFFLE. A form of bingo in which the one or more prizes are won by one
or more persons who have purchased a raffle ticket. The one or more winners
of the raffle are determined by drawing a ticket stub or other detachable
section from a receptacle containing ticket stubs or detachable sections
corresponding to all tickets sold for the raffle.  The term does not include
the drawing of a ticket stub or other detachable section of a ticket
purchased to attend a professional sporting event if both of the following
apply:



      (1)   The ticket stub or other detachable section is used to
select the winner of a free prize given away at the professional sporting
event; and



      (2)   The cost of the ticket is the same as the cost of a
ticket to the professional sporting event on days when no free prize is given
away.



   REDEEMABLE VOUCHER. Any ticket, token, coupon, receipt, or other
noncash representation of value.



   RELIGIOUS ORGANIZATION. Any church, body of communicants, or group that
is not organized or operated for profit and that gathers in common membership
for regular worship and religious observances.



   REVOKE. To void permanently all rights and privileges of the holder of
a license issued under R.C. §§ 2915.08, 2915.081, or 2915.082 or a
charitable gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.



   SCHEME OF CHANCE.



      (1)   A slot machine unless authorized under R.C. Chapter
3772, lottery unless authorized under R.C. Chapter 3770, numbers game, pool
conducted for profit, or other scheme in which a participant gives a valuable
consideration for a chance to win a prize, but does not include bingo, a
skill- based amusement machine, or a pool not conducted for profit. “Scheme
of chance” includes the use of an electronic device to reveal the results
of a game entry if valuable consideration is paid, directly or indirectly,
for a chance to win a prize. Valuable consideration is deemed to be paid for
a chance to win a prize in the following instances:



         (a)   Less than 50% of the goods or services sold by a
scheme of chance operator in exchange for game entries are used or redeemed
by participants at any one location;



         (b)   Less than 50% of participants who purchase goods
or services at any one location do not accept, use, or redeem the goods or
services sold or purportedly sold;



         (c)   More than 50% of prizes at any one location are
revealed to participants through an electronic device simulating a game of
chance or a “casino game” as defined in R.C. § 3772.01;



         (d)   The good or service sold by a scheme of chance
operator in exchange for a game entry cannot be used or redeemed in the
manner advertised;



         (e)   A participant pays more than fair market value for
goods or services offered by a scheme of chance operator in order to receive
one or more game entries;



         (f)   A participant may use the electronic device to
purchase additional game entries;



         (g)   A participant may purchase additional game entries
by using points or credits won as prizes while using the electronic device;



         (h)   A scheme of chance operator pays out in prize
money more than 20% of the gross revenue received at one location; or



         (i)   A participant makes a purchase or exchange in
order to obtain any good or service that may be used to facilitate play on
the electronic device.



      (2)   As used in this division, “electronic device” means
a mechanical, video, digital, or electronic machine or device that is capable
of displaying information on a screen or other mechanism and that is owned,
leased, or otherwise possessed by any person conducting a scheme of chance,
or by that person’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, or contractors.



   SEAL CARD. A form of instant bingo that uses instant bingo tickets in
conjunction with a board or placard that contains one or more seals that,
when removed or opened, reveal predesignated winning numbers, letters, or
symbols.



   SECURITY PERSONNEL. Includes any person who either is a sheriff, deputy
sheriff, marshal, deputy marshal, township constable, or member of an
organized police department of a municipal corporation or has successfully
completed a peace officer's training course pursuant to R.C. §§ 109.71 to
109.79 and who is hired to provide security for the premises on which a bingo
game is conducted.



   SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINE.



      (1)   (a)   A mechanical, video, digital, or electronic
device that rewards the player or players, if at all, only with merchandise
prizes or with redeemable vouchers redeemable only for merchandise prizes,
provided that with respect to rewards for playing the game all of the
following apply:



            1.   The wholesale value of a merchandise prize
awarded as a result of the single play of a machine does not exceed $10;



            2.   Redeemable vouchers awarded for any single
play of a machine are not redeemable for a merchandise prize with a wholesale
value of more than $10;



            3.   Redeemable vouchers are not redeemable for a
merchandise prize that has a wholesale value of more than $10 times the
fewest number of single plays necessary to accrue the redeemable vouchers
required to obtain that prize; and



            4.   Any redeemable vouchers or merchandise prizes
are distributed at the site of the skill-based amusement machine at the time
of play.



         (b)   A card for the purchase of gasoline is a
redeemable voucher for purposes of division (1) of this definition even if
the skill-based amusement machine for the play of which the card is awarded
is located at a place where gasoline may not be legally distributed to the
public or the card is not redeemable at the location of, or at the time of
playing, the skill-based amusement machine.



      (2)   A device shall not be considered a skill-based amusement
machine and shall be considered a slot machine if it pays cash or one or more
of the following apply:



         (a)   The ability of a player to succeed at the game is
impacted by the number or ratio of prior wins to prior losses of players
playing the game;



         (b)   Any reward of redeemable vouchers is not based
solely on the player achieving the object of the game or the players score;



         (c)   The outcome of the game, or the value of the
redeemable voucher or merchandise prize awarded for winning the game, can be
controlled by a source other than any player playing the game;



         (d)   The success of any player is or may be determined
by a chance event that cannot be altered by player actions;



         (e)   The ability of any player to succeed at the game
is determined by game features not visible or known to the player;



         (f)   The ability of the player to succeed at the game
is impacted by the exercise of a skill that no reasonable player could
exercise.



      (3)   All of the following apply to any machine that is
operated as described in division (1) of this definition:



         (a)   As used in this definition of “skill-based
amusement machine”, GAME and PLAY mean one event from the initial
activation of the machine until the results of play are determined without
payment of additional consideration. An individual utilizing a machine that
involves a single game, play, contest, competition, or tournament may be
awarded redeemable vouchers or merchandise prizes based on the results of
play.



         (b)   Advance play for a single game, play, contest,
competition, or tournament participation may be purchased. The cost of the
contest, competition, or tournament participation may be greater than a
single non-contest, competition, or tournament play.



         (c)   To the extent that the machine is used in a
contest, competition, or tournament, that contest, competition, or tournament
has a defined starting and ending date and is open to participants in
competition for scoring and ranking results toward the awarding of redeemable
vouchers or merchandise prizes that are stated prior to the start of the
contest, competition, or tournament.



      (4)   For purposes of division (1) of this definition, the
mere presence of a device, such as a pin-setting, ball-releasing, or scoring
mechanism, that does not contribute to or affect the outcome of the play of
the game does not make the device a skill-based amusement machine.



   SLOT MACHINE.



      (1)   Means either of the following:



         (a)   Any mechanical, electronic, video, or digital
device that is capable of accepting anything of value, directly or
indirectly, from or on behalf of a player who gives the thing of value in the
hope of gain, the outcome of which is determined largely or wholly by chance;



         (b)   Any mechanical, electronic, video, or digital
device that is capable of accepting anything of value, directly or
indirectly, from or on behalf of a player to conduct bingo or a scheme or
game of chance.



      (2)   SLOT MACHINE does not include a skill-based amusement
machine or an instant bingo ticket dispenser.



   SPORTING ORGANIZATION. A hunting, fishing, or trapping organization,
other than a college or high school fraternity or sorority, that is not
organized for profit, that is affiliated with a state ornational sporting
organization, including but not limited to, the League of Ohio Sportsmen, and
that has been in continuous existence in this state for a period of three
years.



   SUSPEND. To interrupt temporarily all rights and privileges of the
holder of a license issued under R.C. §§ 2915.08, 2915.081, or 2915.082 or
a charitable gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.



   SWEEPSTAKES. Any game, contest, advertising scheme or plan, or other
promotion where consideration is not required for a person to enter to win or
become eligible to receive any prize, the determination of which is based
upon chance. “Sweepstakes” does not include bingo as authorized under
R.C. Chapter 2915, parimutuel wagering as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3769,
lotteries conducted by the State Lottery Commission as authorized by R.C.
Chapter 3770, and casino gaming as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3772.



   SWEEPSTAKES TERMINAL DEVICE.



      (1)   A mechanical, video, digital, or electronic machine or
device that is owned, leased, or otherwise possessed by any person conducting
a sweepstakes, or by that person’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, or
contractors, that is intended to be used by a sweepstakes participant, and
that is capable of displaying information on a screen or other mechanism. A
device is a sweepstakes terminal device if any of the following apply:



         (a)   The device uses a simulated game terminal as a
representation of the prizes associated with the results of the sweepstakes
entries.



         (b)   The device utilizes software such that the
simulated game influences or determines the winning of or value of the prize.



         (c)   The device selects prizes from a predetermined
finite pool of entries.



         (d)   The device utilizes a mechanism that reveals the
content of a predetermined sweepstakes entry.



         (e)   The device predetermines the prize results and
stores those results for delivery at the time the sweepstakes entry results
are revealed.



         (f)   The device utilizes software to create a game
result.



         (g)   The device reveals the prize incrementally, even
though the device does not influence the awarding of the prize or the value
of any prize awarded.



         (h)   The device determines and associates the prize
with an entry or entries at the time the sweepstakes is entered.



      (2)   As used in this definition and in § 134.02:



         ENTER. The act by which a person becomes eligible to
receive any prize offered in a sweepstakes.



         ENTRY. One event from the initial activation of the
sweepstakes terminal device until all the sweepstakes prize results from that
activation are revealed.



         PRIZE. Any gift, award, gratuity, good, service, credit,
reward, or any other thing of value that may be transferred to a person,
whether possession of the prize is actually transferred, or placed on an
account or other record as evidence of the intent to transfer the prize.



         SWEEPSTAKES TERMINAL DEVICE FACILITY. Any location in this
state where a sweepstakes terminal device is provided to a sweepstakes
participant, except as provided in § 134.02(G) and R.C. § 2915.02(G).



   VETERAN'S ORGANIZATION. Any individual post or state headquarters of a
national veteran's association or an auxiliary unit of any individual post of
a national veteran's association, which post, state headquarters, or
auxiliary unit is incorporated as a nonprofit corporation and either has
received a letter from the state headquarters of the national veteran's
association indicating that the individual post or auxiliary unit is in good
standing with the national veteran's association or has received a letter
from the national veteran's association indicating that the state
headquarters is in good standing with the national veteran's association. As
used in this definition, NATIONAL VETERAN'S ASSOCIATION means any veteran's
association that has been in continuous existence as such for a period of at
least five years and either is incorporated by an act of the United States
Congress or has a national dues-paying membership of at least 5,000 persons.



   VOLUNTEER FIREFIGHTER'S ORGANIZATION. Any organization of volunteer
firefighters, as defined in R.C. § 146.01, that is organized and operated
exclusively to provide financial support for a volunteer fire department or a
volunteer fire company and that is recognized or ratified by a county,
municipal corporation, or township.



   VOLUNTEER RESCUE SERVICE ORGANIZATION. Any organization of volunteers
organized to function as an emergency medical service organization, as
defined in R.C. § 4765.01.



   YOUTH ATHLETIC ORGANIZATION. Any organization, not organized for
profit, that is organized and operated exclusively to provide financial
support to, or to operate, athletic activities for persons who are 21 years
of age or younger by means of sponsoring, organizing, operating, or
contributing to the support of an athletic team, club, league, or association.



   YOUTH ATHLETIC PARK ORGANIZATION. Any organization, not organized for
profit, that satisfies both of the following:



      (1)   It owns, operates, and maintains playing fields that
satisfy both of the following:



         (a)   The playing fields are used at least 100 days per
year for athletic activities by one or more organizations, not organized for
profit, each of which is organized and operated exclusively to provide
financial support to, or to operate, athletic activities for persons who are
18 years of age or younger by means of sponsoring, organizing, operating, or
contributing to the support of an athletic team, club, league, or association.



         (b)   The playing fields are not used for any
profit-making activity at any time during the year.



      (2)   It uses the proceeds of bingo it conducts exclusively
for the operation, maintenance, and improvement of its playing fields of the
type described in division (1) of this definition.



(R.C. § 2915.01)  ('69 Code, § 137.01)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



§ 134.02  PROHIBITIONS AGAINST GAMBLING; EXCEPTION.



   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Engage in bookmaking, or knowingly engage in conduct
that facilitates bookmaking.



      (2)   Establish, promote, or operate or knowingly engage in
conduct that facilitates any game of chance conducted for profit or any
scheme of chance.



      (3)   Knowingly procure, transmit, exchange, or engage in
conduct that facilitates the procurement, transmission, or exchange of
information for use in establishing odds or determining winners in connection
with bookmaking or with any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme
of chance.



      (4)   Engage in betting or in playing any scheme or game of
chance as a substantial source of income or livelihood.



      (5)   Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes
with the use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal
device facility and either:



         (a)   Give to another person any item described in R.C.
§ 2915.01(VV)(1), (VV)(2), (VV)(3), or (VV)(4) as a prize for playing or
participating in a sweepstakes; or



         (b)   Give to another person any merchandise prize, or a
redeemable voucher for a merchandise prize, the wholesale value of which is
in excess of $10 and which is awarded as a single entry for playing or
participating in a sweepstakes. Redeemable vouchers shall not be redeemable
for a merchandise prize that has a wholesale value of more than $10.



      (6)   Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes
with the use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal
device facility without first obtaining a current annual “certificate of
registration” from the Attorney General as required by R.C. § 2915.02(F).



      (7)   With purpose to violate division (A)(1), (2), (3), (4),
(5), or (6) of this section, acquire, possess, control, or operate any
gambling device.



   (B)   For purposes of division (A)(1) of this section, a person
facilitates bookmaking if the person in any way knowingly aids an illegal
bookmaking operation, including, without limitation, placing a bet with a
person engaged in or facilitating illegal bookmaking. For purposes of
division (A)(2) of this section, a person facilitates a game of chance
conducted for profit or a scheme of chance if the person in any way knowingly
aids in the conduct or operation of any such game or scheme, including,
without limitation, playing any such game or scheme.



   (C)   This section does not prohibit conduct in connection with
gambling expressly permitted by law.



   (D)   This section does not apply to any of the following:



      (1)   Games of chance, if all of the following apply:



         (a)   The games of chance are not craps for money or
roulette for money.



         (b)   The games of chance are conducted by a charitable
organization that is and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a
determination letter that is currently in effect, stating that the
organization is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and
described in IRC 501(c)(3).



         (c)   The games of chance are conducted at festivals of
the charitable organization that are conducted not more than a total of five
days a calendar year, and are conducted on premises owned by the charitable
organization for a period of no less than one year immediately preceding the
conducting of the games of chance, on premises leased from a governmental
unit, or on premises that are leased from a veteran's or fraternal
organization and that have been owned by the lessor veteran's or fraternal
organization for a period of no less than one year immediately preceding the
conducting of the games of chance. A charitable organization shall not lease
premises from a veteran's or fraternal organization to conduct a festival
described in this division, if the veteran's or fraternal organization
already has leased the premises twelve times during the preceding year to
charitable organizations for that purpose. If a charitable organization
leases premises from a veteran's or fraternal organization to conduct a
festival described in this division, the charitable organization shall not
pay a rental rate for the premises per day of the festival that exceeds the
rental rate per bingo session that a charitable organization may pay under
R.C. § 2915.09(B)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance when
it leases premises from another charitable organization to conduct bingo
games.



         (d)   All of the money or assets received from the games
of chance after deduction only of prizes paid out during the conduct of the
games of chance are used by, given, donated or otherwise transferred to any
organization that is described in IRC 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is
either a governmental unit or an organization that is tax exempt under IRC
501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3).



         (e)   The games of chance are not conducted during or
within ten hours of a bingo game conducted for amusement purposes only
pursuant to R.C. § 2915.12 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance. No person shall receive any commission, wage, salary, reward, tip,
donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation, directly or indirectly,
for operating or assisting in the operation of any game of chance.



      (2)   Any tag fishing tournament, as defined in R.C. §
1531.01, operated under a permit issued under R.C. § 1533.92.



      (3)   Bingo conducted by a charitable organization that holds
a license issued under R.C. § 2915.08.



   (E)   Division (D) of this section shall not be construed to
authorize the sale, lease, or other temporary or permanent transfer of the
right to conduct games of chance, as granted by that division, by any
charitable organization that is granted that right.



   (F)   Any person desiring to conduct, or participate in the conduct
of, a sweepstakes with the use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a
sweepstakes terminal device facility shall first register with the Office of
the Attorney General and obtain an annual certificate of registration by
providing a filing fee of $200 and all information as required by rule
adopted under R.C. § 2915.02(H). Not later than the tenth day of each month,
each sweepstakes terminal device operator shall file a sweepstakes terminal
device monthly report with the Attorney General and provide a filing fee of
$50 and all information required by rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.02(H).
All information provided to the Attorney General under this division shall be
available to law enforcement upon request.



   (G)   (1)   A person may apply to the Attorney General, on a form
prescribed by the Attorney General, for a certificate of compliance that the
person is not operating a sweepstakes terminal device facility. The form
shall require the person to include the address of the business location
where sweepstakes terminal devices will be used and to make the following
certifications:



         (a)   That the person will not use more than two
sweepstakes terminal devices at the business location;



         (b)   That the retail value of sweepstakes prizes to be
awarded at the business location using sweepstakes terminal devices during a
reporting period will be less than 3% of the gross revenue received at the
business location during the reporting period;



         (c)   That no other form of gaming except lottery ticket
sales as authorized under R.C. Chapter 3770 will be conducted at the business
location or in an adjoining area of the business location;



         (d)   That any sweepstakes terminal device at the
business location will not allow any deposit of any money, coin, or token, or
the use of any credit card, debit card, prepaid card, or any other method of
similar payment to be used, directly or indirectly, to participate in a
sweepstakes;



         (e)   That notification of any prize will not take place
on the same day as a participant’s sweepstakes entry; and



         (f)   That the person consents to provide any other
information to the Attorney General as required by rule adopted under R.C. §
2915.02(H).



      (2)   The filing fee for a certificate of compliance is $250.
The Attorney General may charge up to an additional $250 for reasonable
expenses resulting from any investigation related to an application for a
certificate of compliance.



      (3)   A certificate of compliance is effective for one year.
The certificate holder may reapply for a certificate of compliance. A person
issued a certificate of compliance shall file semiannual reports with the
Attorney General stating the number of sweepstakes terminal devices at the
business location and that the retail value of prizes awarded at the business
location using sweepstakes terminal devices is less than 3% of the gross
revenue received at the business location.



   (H)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of gambling, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been
convicted of any gambling offense, gambling is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law. Notwithstanding this division, failing to file a
sweepstakes terminal device monthly report as required by division (F) of
this section or the semiannual report required by division (G) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2915.02(A) - (G), (K))



§ 134.03  OPERATING A GAMBLING HOUSE.



   (A)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody,
control, or supervision of premises, shall:



      (1)   Use or occupy the premises for gambling in violation of
R.C. § 2915.02 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



      (2)   Recklessly permit the premises to be used or occupied
for gambling in violation of R.C. § 2915.02 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.



   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
operating a gambling house, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of a gambling offense, operating a
gambling house is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



   (C)   Premises used or occupied in violation of this section
constitute a nuisance subject to abatement under R.C. Chapter 3767.



(R.C. § 2915.03)  ('69 Code, § 137.04)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



§ 134.04  PUBLIC GAMING.



   (A)   No person, while at a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena,
hall, or other place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort
shall make a bet or play any game of chance or scheme of chance.



   (B)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody,
control, or supervision of a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall,
or other place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort shall
recklessly permit those premises to be used or occupied in violation of
division (A) of this section.



   (C)   Divisions (A) and (B) of this section do not prohibit conduct
in connection with gambling expressly permitted by law.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public gaming.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, public gaming is a minor
misdemeanor. If the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling
offense, public gaming is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



   (E)   Premises used or occupied in violation of division (B) of this
section constitute a nuisance subject to abatement under R.C. Chapter 3767.



(R.C. § 2915.04)  ('69 Code, § 137.05)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



§ 134.05  CHEATING.



   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person
is facilitating a fraud, shall engage in conduct designed to corrupt the
outcome of any of the following:



      (1)   The subject of a bet.



      (2)   A contest of knowledge, skill, or endurance that is not
an athletic or sporting event.



      (3)   A scheme or game of chance.



      (4)   Bingo.



   (B)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:



      (1)   Offer, give, solicit, or accept anything of value to
corrupt the outcome of an athletic or sporting event.



      (2)   Engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome of an
athletic or sporting event.



   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is
guilty of cheating. Except as otherwise provided in this division, cheating
is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the potential gain from the cheating
is $1,000 or more or if the offender previously has been convicted of any
gambling offense or of any theft offense as defined in R.C. § 2913.01,
cheating is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty
of corrupting sports. Corrupting sports is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2915.05)  ('69 Code, § 137.06)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



§ 134.06  REGULATIONS CONCERNING OPERATION OF LICENSED BINGO GAME.



   (A)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo shall fail to
do any of the following:



      (1)   Own all of the equipment used to conduct bingo or lease
that equipment from a charitable organization that is licensed to conduct
bingo, or from the landlord of a premises where bingo is conducted, for a
rental rate that is not more than is customary and reasonable for that
equipment;



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(3) of this
section, use all of the gross receipts from bingo for paying prizes, for
reimbursement of expenses for or for renting premises in which to conduct
bingo, for reimbursement of expenses for or for purchasing or leasing bingo
supplies used in conducting bingo, for reimbursement of expenses for or for
hiring security personnel, for reimbursement of expenses for or for
advertising bingo, or for reimbursement of other expenses or for other
expenses listed in the definition for "expenses" in R.C. § 2915.01, provided
that the amount of the receipts so spent is not more than is customary and
reasonable for a similar purchase, lease, hiring, advertising, or expense. If
the building in which bingo is conducted is owned by the charitable
organization conducting bingo and the bingo conducted includes a form of
bingo described in division (1) of the definition of "bingo" in R.C. §
2915.01, the charitable organization may deduct from the total amount of the
gross receipts from each session a sum equal to the lesser of $600 or 45% of
the gross receipts from the bingo described in that division as consideration
for the use of the premises;



      (3)   Use, or give, donate, or otherwise transfer, all of the
net profit derived from bingo, other than instant bingo, for a charitable
purpose listed in its license application and described in the definition for
"charitable purpose" in R.C. § 2915.01, or distribute all of the net profit
from the proceeds of the sale of instant bingo as stated in its license
application and in accordance with R.C. § 2915.101.



   (B)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game
described in division (1) of the definition of "bingo" in R.C. § 2915.01
shall fail to do any of the following:



      (1)   Conduct the bingo game on premises that are owned by the
charitable organization, on premises that are owned by another charitable
organization and leased from that charitable organization for a rental rate
not in excess of the lesser of $650 per bingo session or 45% of the gross
receipts of the bingo session, on premises that are leased from a person
other than a charitable organization for a rental rate that is not more than
is customary and reasonable for premises that are similar in location, size,
and quality but not in excess of $450 per bingo session, or on premises that
are owned by a person other than a charitable organization, that are leased
from that person by another charitable organization, and that are subleased
from that other charitable organization by the charitable organization for a
rental rate not in excess of $450 per bingo session. No charitable
organization is required to pay property taxes or assessments on premises
that the charitable organization leases from another person to conduct bingo
sessions. If the charitable organization leases from a person other than a
charitable organization the premises on which it conducts bingo sessions, the
lessor of the premises shall provide only the premises to the organization
and shall not provide the organization with bingo game operators, security
personnel, concessions or concession operators, bingo supplies, or any other
type of service. A charitable organization shall not lease or sublease
premises that it owns or leases to more than three other charitable
organizations per calendar week for the purpose of conducting bingo sessions
on the premises. A person that is not a charitable organization shall not
lease premises that it owns, leases, or otherwise is empowered to lease to
more than three charitable organizations per calendar week for conducting
bingo sessions on the premises. In no case shall more than nine bingo
sessions be conducted on any premises in any calendar week;



      (2)   Display its license conspicuously at the premises where
the bingo session is conducted;



      (3)   Conduct the bingo session in accordance with division
(1) of the definition of "bingo" in R.C. § 2915.01.



   (C)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game
described in division (1) of the definition of "bingo" in R.C. § 2915.01
shall not do any of the following:



      (1)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for
operating a bingo session that is conducted by the charitable organization or
for preparing, selling, or serving food or beverages at the site of the bingo
session, permit any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization
to pay compensation to any bingo game operator who prepares, sells, or serves
food or beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable
organization, or permit any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable
organization to prepare, sell, or serve food or beverages at a bingo session
conducted by the charitable organization, if the auxiliary unit or society
pays any compensation to the bingo game operators who prepare, sell, or serve
the food or beverages;



      (2)   Pay consulting fees to any person for any services
performed in relation to the bingo session;



      (3)   Pay concession fees to any person who provides
refreshments to the participants in the bingo session;



      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(4) of this
section, conduct more than three bingo sessions in any seven-day period. A
volunteer firefighter's organization or a volunteer rescue service
organization that conducts not more than five bingo sessions in a calendar
year may conduct more than three bingo sessions in a seven-day period after
notifying the Attorney General when it will conduct the sessions;



      (5)   Pay out more than $6,000 in prizes for bingo games
described in R.C. § 2915.01(S)(1) during any bingo session that is conducted
by the charitable organization. "Prizes" does not include awards from the
conduct of instant bingo.



      (6)   Conduct a bingo session at any time during the ten-hour
period between midnight and 10:00 a.m., at any time during, or within ten
hours of, a bingo game conducted for amusement only pursuant to R.C. §
2915.12 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, at any premises
not specified on its license, or on any day of the week or during any time
period not specified on its license. This division does not prohibit the sale
of instant bingo tickets beginning at 9:00 a.m. for a bingo session that
begins at 10:00 a.m. If circumstances make it impractical for the charitable
organization to conduct a bingo session at the premises, or on the day of the
week or at the time specified on its license or if a charitable organization
wants to conduct bingo sessions on a day of the week or at a time other than
the day or time specified on its license, the charitable organization may
apply in writing to the Attorney General for an amended license pursuant to
R.C. § 2915.08(F). A charitable organization may apply twice in each
calendar year for an amended license to conduct bingo sessions on a day of
the week or at a time other than the day or time specified on its license. If
the amended license is granted, the organization may conduct bingo sessions
at the premises, on the day of the week, and at the time specified on its
amended license;



      (7)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization
knows, or should have known, is under the age of 18 to work as a bingo game
operator;



      (8)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization
knows, or should have known, has been convicted of a felony or gambling
offense in any jurisdiction to be a bingo game operator;



      (9)   Permit the lessor of the premises on which the bingo
session is conducted, if the lessor is not a charitable organization, to
provide the charitable organization with bingo game operators, security
personnel, concessions, bingo supplies, or any other type of service;



      (10)   Purchase or lease bingo supplies from any person except
a distributor issued a license under R.C. § 2915.081;



      (11)   (a)   Use or permit the use of electronic bingo aids
except under the following circumstances:



            1.   For any single participant, not more than 90
bingo faces can be played using an electronic bingo aid or aids.



            2.   The charitable organization shall provide a
participant using an electronic bingo aid with corresponding paper bingo
cards or sheets.



            3.   The total price of bingo faces played with an
electronic bingo aid shall be equal to the total price of the same number of
bingo faces played with a paper bingo card or sheet sold at the same bingo
session but without an electronic bingo aid.



            4.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be part of an
electronic network other than a network that includes only bingo aids and
devices that are located on the premises at which the bingo is being
conducted or be interactive with any device not located on the premises at
which the bingo is being conducted.



            5.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to
participate in bingo that is conducted at a location other than the location
at which the bingo session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid
is used.



            6.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to
provide for the input of numbers and letters announced by a bingo caller
other than the bingo caller who physically calls the numbers and letters at
the location at which the bingo session is conducted and at which the
electronic bingo aid is used.



         (b)   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119 that govern the use of electronic bingo aids. The rules
may include a requirement that an electronic bingo aid be capable of being
audited by the Attorney General to verify the number of bingo cards or sheets
played during each bingo session.



      (12)   Permit any person the charitable organization knows, or
should have known, to be under 18 years of age to play bingo described in
division (1) of the definition of "bingo" in R.C. § 2915.01.



   (D)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) of
this section, no charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game
operator, and no bingo game operator shall receive or accept, any commission,
wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation,
directly or indirectly, regardless of the source, for conducting bingo or
providing other work or labor at the site of bingo during a bingo session.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) of this
section, no charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator
any commission, wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or other form
of compensation, directly or indirectly regardless of the source, for
conducting instant bingo other than at a bingo session at the site of instant
bingo other than at a bingo session.



      (3)   Nothing in this division (D) of this section prohibits
an employee of a fraternal organization, veteran's organization, or sporting
organization from selling instant bingo tickets or cards to the
organization's members or invited guests, as long as no portion of the
employee's compensation is paid from any receipts of bingo.



   (E)   Notwithstanding division (B)(1) of this section, a charitable
organization that, prior to December 6, 1977, has entered into written
agreements for the lease of premises it owns to another charitable
organization or other charitable organizations for the conducting of bingo
sessions so that more than two bingo sessions are conducted per calendar week
on the premises, and a person that is not a charitable organization and that,
prior to December 6, 1977, has entered into written agreements for the lease
of premises it owns to charitable organizations for the conducting of more
than two bingo sessions per calendar week on the premises, may continue to
lease the premises to those charitable organizations, provided that no more
than four sessions are conducted per calendar week, that the lessor
organization or person has notified the Attorney General in writing of the
organizations that will conduct the sessions and the days of the week and the
times of the day on which the sessions will be conducted, that the initial
lease entered into with each organization that will conduct the sessions was
filed with the Attorney General prior to December 6, 1977, and that each
organization that will conduct the sessions was issued a license to conduct
bingo games by the Attorney General prior to December 6, 1977.



   (F)   This section does not prohibit a bingo licensed charitable
organization or a game operator from giving any person an instant bingo
ticket as a prize.



   (G)   Whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section is guilty of
illegally conducting a bingo game, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever
violates division (A)(1), (A)(3), (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3), (C)(1) to (C)(11),
or (D) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of division (A)(1), (A)(3),
(B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3), (C)(1) to (C)(11), or (D) of this section, a
violation of division (A)(1), (A)(3), (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3), (C)(1) to
(C)(11), or (D) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Whoever
violates division (C)(12) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
division (C)(12) of this section, a violation of division (C)(12) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2915.09)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 134.07  RECORDS TO BE KEPT.



   (A)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo or a game of
chance pursuant to R.C. § 2915.02(D), or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, shall fail to maintain the following records for at
least three years from the date on which the bingo or game of chance is
conducted:



      (1)   An itemized list of the gross receipts of each bingo
session, each game of instant bingo by serial number, each raffle, each punch
board game, and each game of chance, and an itemized list of the gross
profits of each game of instant bingo by serial number;



      (2)   An itemized list of all expenses, other than prizes,
that are incurred in conducting bingo or instant bingo, the name of each
person to whom the expenses are paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses;



      (3)   A list of all prizes awarded during each bingo session,
each raffle, each punch board game, and each game of chance conducted by the
charitable organization, the total prizes awarded from each game of instant
bingo by serial number, and the name, address, and social security number of
all persons who are winners of prizes of $600 or more in value;



      (4)   An itemized list of the recipients of the net profit of
bingo or game of chance, including the name and address of each recipient to
whom the money is distributed, and if the organization uses the net profit of
bingo, or the money or assets received from a game of chance, for any
charitable or other purpose set forth in R.C. § 2915.01(V), R.C. §
2915.02(D), or R.C. § 2915.101, a list of each purpose and an itemized list
of each expenditure for each purpose;



      (5)   The number of persons who participate in any bingo
session or game of chance that is conducted by the charitable organization;



      (6)   A list of receipts from the sale of food and beverages
by the charitable organization or one of its auxiliary units or societies, if
the receipts were excluded from “gross receipts” under R.C. § 2915.01(T);



      (7)   An itemized list of all expenses incurred at each bingo
session, each raffle, each punch board game, or each game of instant bingo
conducted by the charitable organization in the sale of food and beverages by
the charitable organization or by an auxiliary unit or society of the
charitable organization, the name of each person to whom the expenses are
paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses.



   (B)   A charitable organization shall keep the records that it is
required to maintain pursuant to division (A) of this section at its
principal place of business in this state or at its headquarters in this
state and shall notify the Attorney General of the location at which those
records are kept.



   (C)   The gross profit from each bingo session or game described in
division (1) or (2) of the definition of "bingo" in R.C. § 2915.01 shall be
deposited into a checking account devoted exclusively to the bingo session or
game. Payments for allowable expenses incurred in conducting the bingo
session or game and payments to recipients of some or all of the net profit
of the bingo session or game shall be made only by checks drawn on the bingo
session or game account.



   (D)   Each charitable organization shall conduct and record an
inventory of all of its bingo supplies as of the first day of November of
each year.



   (E)   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with R.C.
Chapter 119 that establish standards of accounting, record keeping, and
reporting to ensure that gross receipts from bingo or games of chance are
properly accounted for.



   (F)   A distributor shall maintain, for a period of three years
after the date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of
its selling or otherwise providing to another person bingo supplies for use
in this state. The record shall include all of the following for each
instance:



      (1)   The name of the manufacturer from which the distributor
purchased the bingo supplies and the date of the purchase;



      (2)   The name and address of the charitable organization or
other distributor to which the bingo supplies were sold or otherwise provided;



      (3)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies;



      (4)   Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of
all paper bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or
otherwise provided to each charitable organization.



   (G)   A manufacturer shall maintain, for a period of three years
after the date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of
its selling or otherwise providing bingo supplies for use in this state. The
record shall include all of the following for each instance:



      (1)   The name and address of the distributor to whom the
bingo supplies were sold or otherwise provided;



      (2)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo
supplies, including serial numbers;



      (3)   Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of
all paper bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or
otherwise provided to each distributor.



   (H)   (1)   The Attorney General or any law enforcement agency
may do all of the following:



         (a)   Investigate any charitable organization or any
officer, agent, trustee, member, or employee of the organization;



         (b)   Examine the accounts and records of the
organization;



         (c)   Conduct inspections, audits, and observations of
bingo or games of chance;



         (d)   Conduct inspections of the premises where bingo or
games of chance are conducted;



         (e)   Take any other necessary and reasonable action to
determine if a violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter
2915 has occurred and to determine whether R.C. § 2915.11, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, has been complied with.



      (2)   If any law enforcement agency has reasonable grounds to
believe that a charitable organization or an officer, agent, trustee, member,
or employee of the organization has violated any provision of this chapter or
R.C. Chapter 2915, the law enforcement agency may proceed by action in the
proper court to enforce this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915, provided that the
law enforcement agency shall give written notice to the Attorney General when
commencing an action as described in this division.



   (I)   No person shall destroy, alter, conceal, withhold, or deny
access to any accounts or records of a charitable organization that have been
requested for examination, or obstruct, impede, or interfere with any
inspection, audit, or observation of bingo or a game of chance or premises
where bingo or a game of chance is conducted, or refuse to comply with any
reasonable request of, or obstruct, impede, or interfere with any other
reasonable action undertaken by, the Attorney General or a law enforcement
agency pursuant to division (H) of this section.



   (J)   Whoever violates division (A) or (I) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2915.10)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 134.08  REQUIREMENTS FOR BINGO GAME OPERATORS.



   (A)   No person shall be a bingo game operator unless the person is
18 years of age or older.



   (B)   No person who has been convicted of a felony or a gambling
offense in any jurisdiction shall be a bingo game operator.



   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree. Whoever violates division (B) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2915.11)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 134.09  BINGO GAMES FOR AMUSEMENT ONLY.



   (A)   Sections 134.06 to 134.13 do not apply to bingo games that are
conducted for the purpose of amusement only. A bingo game is conducted for
the purpose of amusement only if it complies with all of the requirements
specified in either division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section.



      (1)   (a)   The participants do not pay any money or any
other thing of value, including an admission fee or any fee, for bingo cards
or sheets, objects to cover the spaces, or other devices used in playing
bingo, for the privilege of participating in the bingo game, or to defray any
costs of the game, or pay tips or make donations during or immediately before
or after the bingo game.



         (b)   All prizes awarded during the course of the game
are non-monetary, and in the form of merchandise, goods, or entitlement to
goods or services only, and the total value of all prizes awarded during the
game is less than $100.



         (c)   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip,
donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation, either directly or
indirectly, and regardless of the source, is paid to any bingo game operator
for work or labor performed at the site of the bingo game.



         (d)   The bingo game is not conducted either during or
within ten hours of any of the following:



            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable
bingo game is conducted pursuant to R.C. §§ 2915.07 through 2915.11 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



            2.   A scheme or game of chance, or bingo
described in R.C. § 2915.01(O)(2).



         (e)   The number of players participating in the bingo
game does not exceed 50.



      (2)   (a)   The participants do not pay money or any other
thing of value as an admission fee, and no participant is charged more than
$0.25 to purchase a bingo card or sheet, objects to cover the spaces, or
other devices used in playing bingo.



         (b)   The total amount of money paid by all of the
participants for bingo cards or sheets, objects to cover the spaces, or other
devices used in playing bingo does not exceed $100.



         (c)   All of the money paid for bingo cards or sheets,
objects to cover spaces, or other devices used in playing bingo is used only
to pay winners monetary and nonmonetary prizes and to provide refreshments.



         (d)   The total value of all prizes awarded during the
game does not exceed $100.



         (e)   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip,
donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation, either directly or
indirectly, and regardless of the source, is paid to any bingo game operator
for work or labor performed at the site of the bingo game.



         (f)   The bingo game is not conducted during or within
ten hours of either of the following:



            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable
bingo game is conducted pursuant to R.C. §§ 2915.07 through 2915.11 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;



            2.   A scheme of chance or a game of chance, or
bingo described in R.C. § 2915.01(O)(2).



         (g)   All of the participants reside at the premises
where the bingo game is conducted.



         (h)   The bingo games are conducted on different days of
the week and not more than twice in a calendar week.



   (B)   The Attorney General or any local law enforcement agency may
investigate the conduct of a bingo game that purportedly is conducted for
purposes of amusement only if there is reason to believe that the purported
amusement bingo game does not comply with the requirements of either division
(A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section. A local law enforcement agency may proceed
by action in the proper court to enforce this section if the local law
enforcement agency gives written notice to the Attorney General when
commencing the action.



(R.C. § 2915.12)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 134.10  PROHIBITIONS WHERE INSTANT BINGO GAME IS CONDUCTED.



   (A)   No charitable organization that conducts instant bingo shall
do any of the following:



      (1)   Fail to comply with the requirements of R.C. §
2915.09(A)(1), (A)(2), and (A)(3), or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance;



      (2)   Conduct instant bingo unless either of the following
applies:



         (a)   That organization is, and has received from the
Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that is currently in effect
stating that the organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under
IRC 501(a), is described in IRC 501(c)(3), is a charitable organization as
defined in R.C. § 2915.01, is in good standing in the state pursuant to R.C.
§ 2915.08, and is in compliance with R.C. Chapter 1716;



         (b)   That organization is, and has received from the
Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that is currently in effect
stating that the organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under
IRC 501(a), is described in IRC 501(c)(7), (c)(8), (c)(10), or (c)(19) or is
a veteran's organization described in IRC 501(c)(4), and conducts instant
bingo under R.C. § 2915.13.



      (3)   Conduct instant bingo on any day, at any time, or at any
premises not specified on the organization's license issued pursuant to R.C.
§ 2915.08;



      (4)   Permit any person whom the organization knows or should
have known has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any
jurisdiction to be a bingo game operator in the conduct of instant bingo;



      (5)   Purchase or lease supplies used to conduct instant bingo
or punch board games from any person except a distributor licensed under R.C.
§ 2915.081;



      (6)   Sell or provide any instant bingo ticket or card for a
price different from the price printed on it by the manufacturer on either
the instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare;



      (7)   Sell an instant bingo ticket or card to a person under
18 years of age;



      (8)   Fail to keep unsold instant bingo tickets or cards for
less than three years;



      (9)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for
conducting instant bingo that is conducted by the organization or for
preparing, selling, or serving food or beverages at the site of the instant
bingo game, permit any auxiliary unit or society of the organization to pay
compensation to any bingo game operator who prepares, sells, or serves food
or beverages at an instant bingo game conducted by the organization, or
permit any auxiliary unit or society of the organization to prepare, sell, or
serve food or beverages at an instant bingo game conducted by the
organization, if the auxiliary unit or society pays any compensation to the
bingo game operators who prepare, sell, or serve the food or beverages;



      (10)   Pay fees to any person for any services performed in
relation to an instant bingo game, except as provided in R.C. § 2915.093(D);



      (11)   Pay fees to any person who provides refreshments to the
participants in an instant bingo game;



      (12)   (a)   Allow instant bingo tickets or cards to be
sold to bingo game operators at a premises at which the organization sells
instant bingo tickets or cards or to be sold to employees of a D permit
holder who are working at a premises at which instant bingo tickets or cards
are sold;



         (b)   Division (A)(12)(a) of this section does not
prohibit a licensed charitable organization or a bingo game operator from
giving any person an instant bingo ticket as a prize in place of a cash prize
won by a participant in an instant bingo game. In no case shall an instant
bingo ticket or card be sold or provided for a price different from the price
printed on it by the manufacturer on either the instant bingo ticket or card
or on the game flare.



      (13)   Fail to display its bingo license, and the serial
numbers of the deal of instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold,
conspicuously at each premises at which it sells instant bingo tickets or
cards;



      (14)   Possess a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards that
was not purchased from a distributor licensed under R.C. § 2915.081 as
reflected on an invoice issued by the distributor that contains all of the
information required by R.C. § 2915.10(E);



      (15)   Fail, once it opens a deal of instant bingo tickets or
cards, to continue to sell the tickets or cards in that deal until the
tickets or cards with the top two highest tiers of prizes in that deal are
sold;



      (16)   Possess bingo supplies that were not obtained in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 2915.



   (B)   A charitable organization may purchase, lease, or use instant
bingo ticket dispensers to sell instant bingo tickets or cards.



   (C)   Pursuant to R.C. § 2915.091(C), the Attorney General may
adopt rules in accordance with R.C. Chapter 119 that govern the conduct of
instant bingo by charitable organizations.



   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section or a rule
adopted under division (C) of this section is guilty of illegal instant bingo
conduct. Except as otherwise provided in this division, illegal instant bingo
conduct is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of a violation of division (A) of this section or of such a
rule adopted under division (C) of this section, illegal instant bingo
conduct is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2915.091)



§ 134.11  RAFFLE DRAWINGS.



   (A)   (1)   Subject to division (A)(2) of this section, a
charitable organization, a public school, a chartered nonpublic school, a
community school, or a veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or
sporting organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC
501(a) and is described in IRC 501(c)(3), 501(c)(4), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8),
501(c)(10), or 501(c)(19) may conduct a raffle to raise money for the
organization or school and does not need a license to conduct bingo in order
to conduct a raffle drawing that is not for profit.



      (2)   If a charitable organization that is described in
division (A)(1) of this section, but that is not also described in IRC
501(c)(3), conducts a raffle, the charitable organization shall distribute at
least 50% of the net profit from the raffle to a charitable purpose described
in R.C. § 2915.01(V) or to a department or agency of the federal government,
the state, or any political subdivision.



   (B)   A chamber of commerce may conduct not more than one raffle per
year to raise money for the chamber of commerce.



   (C)   Except as provided in division (A) or (B) of this section, no
person shall conduct a raffle drawing that is for profit or a raffle drawing
that is not for profit.



   (D)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of
illegal conduct of a raffle. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
illegal conduct of a raffle is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of a violation of division (C) of this
section, illegal conduct of a raffle is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2915.092)



§ 134.12  INSTANT BINGO OTHER THAN AT BINGO SESSIONS.



   (A)   As used in this section, RETAIL INCOME FROM ALL COMMERCIAL
ACTIVITY means the income that a person receives from the provision of goods,
services, or activities that are provided at the location where instant bingo
other than at a bingo session is conducted, including the sale of instant
bingo tickets. A religious organization that is exempt from federal income
taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3), at not more than
one location at which it conducts its charitable programs, may include
donations from its members and guests as retail income.



   (B)   (1)   If a charitable instant bingo organization conducts
instant bingo other than at a bingo session, the charitable instant bingo
organization shall enter into a written contract with the owner or lessor of
the location at which the instant bingo is conducted to allow the owner or
lessor to assist in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo
session, identify each location where the instant bingo other than at a bingo
session is being conducted, and identify the owner or lessor of each location.



      (2)   A charitable instant bingo organization that conducts
instant bingo other than at a bingo session is not required to enter into a
written contract with the owner or lessor of the location at which the
instant bingo is conducted provided that the owner or lessor is not assisting
in the conduct of the instant bingo other than at a bingo session and
provided that the conduct of the instant bingo other than at a bingo session
at that location is not more than five days per calendar year and not more
than ten hours per day.



   (C)   Except as provided in division (F) of this section, no
charitable instant bingo organization shall conduct instant bingo other than
at a bingo session at a location where the primary source of retail income
from all commercial activity at that location is the sale of instant bingo
tickets.



   (D)   (1)   The owner or lessor of a location that enters into a
contract pursuant to division (B) of this section shall pay the full gross
profit to the charitable instant bingo organization, in return for the deal
of instant bingo tickets. The owner or lessor may retain the money that the
owner or lessor receives for selling the instant bingo tickets, provided,
however, that after the deal has been sold, the owner or lessor shall pay to
the charitable instant bingo organization the value of any unredeemed instant
bingo prizes remaining in the deal of instant bingo tickets.



      (2)   The charitable instant bingo organization shall pay 6%
of the total gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo tickets for the
purpose of reimbursing the owner or lessor for expenses described in this
division.



      (3)   As used in this division, EXPENSES means those items
provided for in R.C. § 2915.01(GG)(4), (GG)(5), (GG)(6), (GG)(7), (GG)(8),
(GG)(12), and (GG)(13) and that percentage of the owner’s or lessor’s
rent for the location where instant bingo is conducted. Expenses, in the
aggregate, shall not exceed 6% of the total gross receipts of any deal of
instant bingo tickets.



      (4)   As used in this division, FULL GROSS PROFIT means the
amount by which the total receipts of all instant bingo tickets, if the deal
has been sold in full, exceeds the amount that would be paid out if all
prizes were redeemed.



   (E)   A charitable instant bingo organization shall provide the
Attorney General with all of the following information:



      (1)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has
terminated a contract entered into pursuant to division (B) of this section
with an owner or lessor of a location;



      (2)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has
entered into a written contract pursuant to division (B) of this section with
a new owner or lessor of a location;



      (3)   That the charitable instant bingo organization is aware
of conduct by the owner or lessor of a location at which instant bingo is
conducted that is in violation of R.C. Chapter 2915.



   (F)   Division (C) of this section does not apply to a volunteer
firefighter's organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under
IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3), that conducts instant bingo other
than at a bingo session on the premises where the organization conducts
firefighter training, that has conducted instant bingo continuously for at
least five years prior to July 1, 2003, and that, during each of those five
years, had gross receipts of at least $1,500,000.



(R.C. § 2915.093)



   (G)   (1)   A veteran's organization, a fraternal organization,
or a sporting organization authorized to conduct a bingo session pursuant to
R.C. Chapter 2915 may conduct instant bingo other than at a bingo session if
all of the following apply:



         (a)   The veteran's organization, fraternal
organization, or sporting organization limits the sale of instant bingo to 12
hours during any day, provided that the sale does not begin earlier than
10:00 a.m. and ends not later than 2:00 a.m.



         (b)   The veteran's organization, fraternal
organization, or sporting organization limits the sale of instant bingo to
its own premises and to its own members and invited guests.



         (c)   The veteran's organization, fraternal
organization, or sporting organization is raising money for an organization
that is described in IRC 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a
governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal place of
business in this state, that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC
501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3), and that is in good standing in this
state and executes a written contract with that organization as required in
division (G)(1) of this section.



      (2)   If a veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or
sporting organization authorized to conduct instant bingo pursuant to
division (G)(1) of this section is raising money for another organization
that is described in IRC 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a
governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal place of
business in this state, that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC
501(a) and described in IRC 501(c), and that is in good standing in this
state, the veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization shall execute a written contract with the organization that is
described in IRC 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a governmental
unit or an organization that maintains its principal place of business in
this state, that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and
described in IRC 501(c), and that is in good standing in this state in order
to conduct instant bingo. That contract shall include a statement of the
percentage of the net proceeds that the veteran's, fraternal, or sporting
organization will be distributing to the organization that is described in
IRC 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an
organization that maintains its principal place of business in this state,
that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in
IRC 501(c)(3), and that is in good standing in this state.



      (3)   (a)   If a veteran's organization, fraternal
organization, or sporting organization authorized to conduct instant bingo
pursuant to division (G)(1) of this section has been issued a liquor permit
under R.C. Chapter 4303, that permit may be subject to suspension,
revocation, or cancellation if the veteran's organization, fraternal
organization, or sporting organization violates a provision of this chapter
or R.C. Chapter 2915.



         (b)   No veteran's organization, fraternal organization,
or sporting organization that enters into a written contract pursuant to
division (G)(2) of this section shall violate any provision of this chapter
or R.C. Chapter 2915, or permit, aid, or abet any other person in violating
any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.



      (4)   A veteran's organization, fraternal organization, or
sporting organization shall give all required proceeds earned from the
conduct of instant bingo to the organization with which the veteran's
organization, fraternal organization, or sporting organization has entered
into a written contract.



      (5)   Whoever violates division (G) of this section is guilty
of illegal instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, illegal instant bingo conduct is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of division (G)
of this section, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2915.13)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 134.13  RESTRICTIONS ON OWNER OR LESSOR OF LOCATION AT INSTANT BINGO.



   (A)   No owner or lessor of a location shall assist a charitable
instant bingo organization in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a
bingo session at thatlocation unless the owner or lessor has entered into a
written contract, as described in R.C. § 2915.093, with the charitable
instant bingo organization to assist in the conduct of instant bingo other
than at a bingo session.



   (B)   The location of the lessor or owner shall be designated as a
location where the charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant
bingo other than at a bingo session.



   (C)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written
contract as prescribed in division (A) of this section shall violate any
provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915, or permit, aid, or abet any
other person in violating any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915.



   (D)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written
contract as prescribed in division (A) of this section shall violate the
terms of the contract.



   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this section
is guilty of illegal instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, illegal instant bingo conduct is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
division (C) or (D) of this section, illegal instant bingo conduct is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)   If an owner or lessor of a location knowingly,
intentionally, or recklessly violates division (C) or (D) of this section,
any license that the owner or lessor holds for the retail sale of any goods
on the owner's or lessor's premises that is issued by the state or a
political subdivision is subject to suspension, revocation, or payment of a
monetary penalty at the request of the Attorney General.



(R.C. § 2915.094)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 134.14  SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINES; PROHIBITED CONDUCT.



   (A)   No person shall give to another person any item described in
division (1), (2), (3), or (4) of the definition for "merchandise prize" in
§ 134.01 in exchange for a noncash prize, toy, or novelty received as a
reward for playing or operating a skill-based amusement machine or for a free
or reduced-price game won on a skill-based amusement machine.



   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
skill-based amusement machine prohibited conduct. A violation of division (A)
of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree for each redemption of a
prize that is involved in the violation. If the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of division (A) of this section, a violation of that
division is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2915.06)



CHAPTER 135: OFFENSES AGAINST PERSONS



Section



   135.01   Negligent homicide



   135.02   Vehicular homicide; vehicular manslaughter



   135.03   Assault



   135.04   Negligent assault



   135.041   Injury to persons by hunters



   135.05   Aggravated menacing



   135.06   Menacing



   135.061   Menacing by stalking



   135.07   Unlawful restraint



   135.08   Coercion



   135.09   Hazing prohibited



   135.091   Housing discrimination prohibited



   135.092   Ethnic intimidation



   135.093   Unlawful collection of bodily substances



Offenses Against the Family



   135.10   Bigamy



   135.11   (Reserved)



   135.12   Domestic violence



   135.13   Nonsupport of dependents



   135.14   Endangering children



   135.15   Interference with custody



   135.151   Interference with support orders



   135.16   Contributing to unruliness or delinquency of a child



§ 135.01  NEGLIGENT HOMICIDE.



   (A)   No person shall negligently cause the death of another or the
unlawful termination of another's pregnancy by means of a deadly weapon or
dangerous ordnance, as defined in R.C. § 2923.11.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent homicide,
a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2903.05)  ('69 Code, § 131.01)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



Statutory reference:



   Reckless homicide, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.041



§ 135.02  VEHICULAR HOMICIDE; VEHICULAR MANSLAUGHTER.



   (A)   No person, while operating or participating in the operation
of a motor vehicle, motorcycle, snowmobile, locomotive, watercraft, or
aircraft, shall cause the death of another or the unlawful termination of
another's pregnancy in any of the following ways:



      (1)   (a)   As the proximate result of committing a
violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or of a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance;



         (b)   As the proximate result of committing a violation
of R.C. § 1547.11(A), or of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;



         (c)   As the proximate result of committing a violation
of R.C. § 4561.15(A)(3), or of a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.



      (2)   In one of the following ways:



         (a)   Recklessly;



         (b)   As the proximate result of committing, while
operating or participating in the operation of a motor vehicle or motorcycle
in a construction zone, a reckless operation offense, provided that this
division applies only if the person whose death is caused or whose pregnancy
is unlawfully terminated is in the construction zone at the time of the
offender's commission of the reckless operation offense in the construction
zone and does not apply as described in division (D) of this section.



      (3)   In one of the following ways:



         (a)   Negligently;



         (b)   As the proximate result of committing, while
operating or participating in the operation of a motor vehicle or motorcycle
in a construction zone, a speeding offense, provided that this division
applies only if the person whose death is caused or whose pregnancy is
unlawfully terminated is in the construction zone at the time of the
offender's commission of the speeding offense in the construction zone and
does not apply as described in division (D) of this section.



      (4)   As the proximate result of committing a violation of any
provision of any section contained in R.C. Title 45 that is a minor
misdemeanor or of a municipal ordinance that, regardless of the penalty set
by ordinance for the violation, is substantially equivalent to any provision
of any section contained in R.C. Title 45 that is a minor misdemeanor.



   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) or (2) of this
section is guilty of aggravated vehicular homicide, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.



      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A)(3) of this
section is guilty of vehicular homicide. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, vehicular homicide is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Vehicular
homicide committed in violation of division (A)(3) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law if, at the time of the
offense, the offender was driving under a suspension or cancellation imposed
under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other provision of the Ohio Revised Code or
was operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle, did not have a valid driver's
license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege, and was not
eligible for renewal of the offender's driver's license or commercial
driver's license without examination under R.C. § 4507.10 or if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this
section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense. 
The court shall impose a mandatory jail term on the offender when required by
division (C) of this section.



         (b)   In addition to any other sanctions imposed
pursuant to this division, the court shall impose upon the offender a class
four suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4) or, if
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
violation of this section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or
assault offense, a class three suspension of the offender's driver's license,
commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C.
§ 4510.02(A)(3), or, if the offender previously had been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a traffic-related murder, felonious assault, or attempted
murder offense, a class two suspension of the offender's driver's license,
commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege as specified in R.C. §
4510.02(A)(2).



      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) of this
section is guilty of vehicular manslaughter. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, vehicular manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
Vehicular manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the first degree if, at the time
of the offense, the offender was driving under a suspension or cancellation
imposed under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other provision of the Revised Code or
was operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle, did not have a valid driver's
license, commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege, and was not
eligible for renewal of the offender's driver's license or commercial
driver's license without examination under R.C. § 4507.10 or if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this
section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense.



         (b)   In addition to any other sanctions imposed
pursuant to this division, the court shall impose upon the offender a class
six suspension of the offender's driver's license, commercial driver's
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(6) or, if
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
violation of this section, any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or
assault offense, or a traffic-related murder, felonious assault, or attempted
murder offense, a class four suspension of the offender's driver's license,
commercial driver's license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C.
§ 4510.02(A)(4).



   (C)   The court shall impose a mandatory prison term on an offender
who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a felony violation of this section,
as provided in R.C. § 2903.06(E). The court shall impose a mandatory jail
term of at least 15 days on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty
to a misdemeanor violation of division (A)(3)(b) of this section and may
impose upon the offender a longer jail term as authorized pursuant to R.C. §
2929.24.



   (D)   Divisions (A)(2)(b) and (A)(3)(b) of this section do not apply
in a particular construction zone unless signs of the type described in R.C.
§ 2903.081 are erected in that construction zone in accordance with the
guidelines and design specifications established by the Director of
Transportation under R.C. § 5501.27. The failure to erect signs of the type
described in R.C. § 2903.081 in a particular construction zone in accordance
with those guidelines and design specifications does not limit or affect the
application of division (A)(1), (A)(2)(a), (A)(3)(a), or (A)(4) of this
section in that construction zone or the prosecution of any person who
violates any of those divisions in that construction zone.



   (E)   (1)   As used in this section:



         CONSTRUCTION ZONE has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5501.27.



         MANDATORY PRISON TERM and MANDATORY JAIL TERM have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 2929.01.



         MOTOR VEHICLE has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4501.01.



         RECKLESS OPERATION OFFENSE means a violation of R.C. §
4511.20 or a municipal ordinance substantially equivalent to R.C. § 4511.20.



         SPEEDING OFFENSE means a violation of R.C. § 4511.21 or a
municipal ordinance pertaining to speed.



         TRAFFIC-RELATED HOMICIDE, MANSLAUGHTER, OR ASSAULT OFFENSE
means a violation of R.C. § 2903.04 in circumstances in which division (D)
of that section applies, a violation of R.C. §§ 2903.06 or 2903.08, or a
violation of R.C. §§ 2903.06, 2903.07, or 2903.08 as they existed prior to
March 23, 2000.



         TRAFFIC-RELATED MURDER, FELONIOUS ASSAULT, OR ATTEMPTED
MURDER OFFENSE means a violation of R.C. § 2903.01 or R.C. § 2903.02 in
circumstances in which the offender used a motor vehicle as the means to
commit the violation, a violation of R.C. § 2903.11(A)(2) in circumstances
in which the deadly weapon used in the commission of the violation is a motor
vehicle, or an attempt to commit aggravated murder or murder in violation of
R.C. § 2923.02 in circumstances in which the offender used a motor vehicle
as the means to attempt to commit the aggravated murder or murder.



      (2)   For the purposes of this section, when a penalty or
suspension is enhanced because of a prior or current violation of a specified
law or a prior or current specified offense, the reference to the violation
of the specified law or the specified offense includes any violation of any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of this state, or
current or former law of this or another state or the United States.



(R.C. § 2903.06) ('69 Code, § 131.02)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



Statutory reference:



   Aggravated vehicular assault, felony, see R.C. § 2903.08



   Trial court to suspend driver's license, see R.C. § 4510.05



§ 135.03  ASSAULT.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical
harm to another or to another's unborn.



   (B)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to
another or to another's unborn.



   (C)   Except as provided in R.C. § 2903.13(C), whoever violates
this section is guilty of assault, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



   (D)   If an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to assault
when it is a misdemeanor also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
specification as described in R.C. § 2941.1423 (victim of the offense was a
woman whom the defendant knew was pregnant at the time of the offense) that
was included in the indictment, count in the indictment, or information
charging the offense, the court shall sentence the offender to a mandatory
jail term as provided in R.C. § 2929.24(G).



(R.C. § 2903.13)  ('69 Code, § 131.03)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



Statutory reference:



   Felony offenses, see R.C. § 2903.13(C)



§ 135.04  NEGLIGENT ASSAULT.



   (A)   No person shall negligently, by means of a deadly weapon or
dangerous ordnance as defined in R.C. § 2923.11, cause physical harm to
another or to another's unborn.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent assault,
a misdemeanor of the third degree.



(R.C. § 2903.14)  ('69 Code, § 131.04)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 135.041  INJURY TO PERSONS BY HUNTERS.



   (A)   No person in the act of hunting, pursuing, taking, or killing
a wild animal shall act in a negligent, careless, or reckless manner so as to
injure persons.



(R.C. § 1533.171(A))



   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 1533.99(C))



Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory Reference:



   Revocation of license for violation, see R.C. § 1533.171(B) – (E)



§ 135.05  AGGRAVATED MENACING.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the
offender will cause serious physical harm to the person or property of the
other person, the other person's unborn, or a member of such other person's
immediate family.  In addition to any other basis for the other person’s
belief that the offender will cause serious physical harm to the person or
property of the other person, the other person’s unborn, or a member of the
other person’s immediate family, the other person’s belief may be based
on words or conduct of the offender that are directed at or identify a
corporation, association, or other organization that employs the other person
or to which the other person belongs.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of aggravated
menacing. Except as otherwise provided in this division, aggravated menacing
is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the victim of the offense is an
officer or employee of a public children services agency or a private child
placing agency and the offense relates to the officer’s or employee’s
performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or
duties, aggravated menacing is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law or, if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an
officer or employee of a public children services agency or private child
placing agency, and that prior offense related to the officer’s or
employee’s performance or anticipated performance of official
responsibilities or duties, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.



   (C)   As used in this section, ORGANIZATION includes an entity that
is a governmental employer.



(R.C. § 2903.21)  ('69 Code, § 131.05)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 135.06  MENACING.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the
offender will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other
person, the other person's unborn,  or a member of such other person's
immediate family.  In addition to any other basis for the other person’s
belief that the offender will cause physical harm to the person or property
of the other person, the other person’s unborn, or a member of the other
person’s immediate family, the other person’s belief may be based on
words or conduct of the offender that are directed at or identify a
corporation, association, or other organization that employs the other person
or to which the other person belongs.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of menacing. Except as
otherwise provided in this section, menacing is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If the victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a public
children services agency or a private child placing agency and the offense
relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated
performance of official responsibilities or duties, menacing is a misdemeanor
of the first degree or, if the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense
was an officer or employee of a public children services agency or private
child placing agency, and that prior offense related to the officer’s or
employee’s performance or anticipated performance of official
responsibilities or duties, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.



   (C)   As used in this section, ORGANIZATION includes an entity that
is a governmental employer.



(R.C. § 2903.22)  ('69 Code, § 131.06)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 135.061  MENACING BY STALKING.



   (A)   (1)   (a)   No person by engaging in a pattern of
conduct shall knowingly cause another person to believe that the offender
will cause physical harm to the other person or a family or household member
of the other person or cause mental distress to the other person or a family
or household member of the other person. In addition to any other basis for
the other person’s belief that the offender will cause physical harm to the
other person or the other person’s family or household member or mental
distress to the other person or the other person’s family or household
member, the other person’s belief or mental distress may be based on words
or conduct of the offender that are directed at or identify a corporation,
association, or other organization that employs the other person or to which
the other person belongs.



         (b)   No person, through the use of any form of written
communication or any electronic method of remotely transferring information,
including but not limited to any computer, computer network, computer
program, computer system, or telecommunication device, shall post a message
or use any intentionally written or verbal graphic gesture with purpose to do
either of the following:



            1.   Violate division (C)(1)(a) of this section;



            2.   Urge or incite another to commit a violation
of division (C)(1)(a) of this section.



      (2)   No person, with a sexual motivation, shall violate
division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of menacing by
stalking.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (B)(2) of this
section, menacing by stalking is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (2)   Menacing by stalking is a felony, to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law, if any of the following applies:



         (a)   The offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a violation of R.C. § 2903.211 or a violation of R.C. §
2911.211, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to either of
these offenses.



         (b)   In committing the offense under division (A)(1),
(A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section, the offender made a threat of physical harm
to or against the victim, or as a result of an offense committed under
division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section, a third person induced by the
offender's posted message made a threat of physical harm to or against the
victim.



         (c)   In committing the offense under division (A)(1),
(A)(2) or (A)(3) of this section, the offender trespassed on the land or
premises where the victim lives, is employed, or attends school, or as a
result of an offense committed under division (A)(2) or (A)(3) of this
section, a third person induced by the offender's posted message trespassed
on the land or premises where the victim lives, is employed, or attends
school.



         (d)   The victim of the offense is a minor.



         (e)   The offender has a history of violence towards the
victim or any other person or a history of other violent acts towards the
victim or any other person.



         (f)   While committing the offense under division (A)(1)
of this section or a violation of division (A)(3) of this section based on
conduct in violation of division (A)(1) of this section, the offender had a
deadly weapon on or about the offender's person or under the offender's
control. This division does not apply in determining the penalty for a
violation of division (A)(2) of this section or a violation of division
(A)(3) of this section based on conduct in violation of division (A)(2) of
this section.



         (g)   At the time of the commission of the offense, the
offender was the subject of aprotection order issued under R.C. § 2903.213
or R.C. § 2903.214, regardless of whether or not the person to be protected
under the order is the victim of the offense or another person.



         (h)   In committing the offense under division (A)(1),
(A)(2) or (A)(3) or (A)(2) of this section, the offender caused serious
physical harm to the premises at which the victim resides, to the real
property on which that premises is located, or to any personal property
located on that premises, or as a result of an offense committed under
division (A)(2) of this section or an offense committed under division (A)(3)
of this section based on a violation of division (A)(2) of this section, a
third person induced by the offender's posted message caused serious physical
harm to that premises, that real property, or any personal property on that
premises.



         (i)   Prior to committing the offense, the offender had
been determined to represent a substantial risk of physical harm to others as
manifested by evidence of then-recent homicidal or other violent behavior,
evidence of then-recent threats that placed another in reasonable fear of
violent behavior and serious harm, or other evidence of then-present
dangerousness.



         (j)   The victim of the offense is an officer or
employee of a public children services agency or a private child placing
agency and the offense relates to the officer's or employee's performance or
anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties.



         (k)   The offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense
was an officer or employee of a public children services agency or private
child placing agency, and that prior offense related to the officer's or
employee's performance or anticipated performance of official
responsibilities or duties.



   (C)   R.C. § 2919.271 applies in relation to a defendant charged
with a violation of this section.



   (D)   As used in this section:



   COMPUTER, COMPUTER NETWORK, COMPUTER PROGRAM, COMPUTER SYSTEM, and
TELECOMMUNICATIONS DEVICE. Have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.



   EMERGENCY FACILITY PERSON. Is the singular of "emergency facility
personnel" as defined in R.C. § 2909.04



   EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES PERSON.  Is the singular of "emergency
medical services personnel" as defined in R.C. § 2133.21.



   FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Means any of the following:



            1.   Any of the following who is residing or has
resided with the person against whom the act prohibited in division (C)(1)(a)
of this section is committed:



               a.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse,
or a former spouse of the person;



               b.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child
of the person, or another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the
person;



               c.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person
living as a spouse, or former spouse of the person, or another person related
by consanguinity or affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or
former spouse of the person.



            2.   The natural parent of any child of whom the
person against whom the act prohibited in division (C)(1)(a) of this section
is committed is the other natural parent or is the putative other natural
parent.



   MENTAL DISTRESS. Means any of the following:



      (1)   Any mental illness or condition that involves some
temporary substantial incapacity;



      (2)   Any mental illness or condition that would normally
require psychiatric treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental
health services, whether or not any person requested or received psychiatric
treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental health services.



   ORGANIZATION. Includes an entity that is a governmental employer.



   PATTERN OF CONDUCT. Two or more actions or incidents closely related in
time, whether or not there has been a prior conviction based on any of those
actions or incidents, or two or more actions or incidents closely related in
time, whether or not there has been a prior conviction based on any of those
actions or incidents, directed at one or more persons employed by or
belonging to the same corporation, association, or other organization.
Actions or incidents that prevent, obstruct, or delay the performance by a
public official, firefighter, rescuer, emergency medical services person, or
emergency facility person of any authorized act within the public official's,
firefighter's, rescuer's, emergency medical services person's, or emergency
facility person’s official capacity, or the posting of messages, use of
intentionally written or verbal graphic gestures, or receipt of information
or data through the use of any form of written communication or an electronic
method of remotely transferring information, including but not limited to a
computer, computer network, computer program, computer system, or
telecommunications device, may constitute a “pattern of conduct.”



   PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE. Means a person who is living or has lived
with the person against whom the act prohibited in division (C)(1)(a) of this
section is committed in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise is
cohabiting with that person, or who otherwise has cohabited with the person
within five years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the act in
question.



   POST A MESSAGE. Transferring, sending, posting, publishing,
disseminating, or otherwise communicating, or attempting to transfer, send,
post, publish, disseminate, or otherwise communicate, any message or
information, whether truthful or untruthful, about an individual, and whether
done under one's own name, under the name of another, or while impersonating
another.



   PUBLIC OFFICIAL.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2921.01.



   SEXUAL MOTIVATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2971.01.



   THIRD PERSON. In relation to conduct as described in division (A)(2) of
this section, an individual who is neither the offender nor the victim of the
conduct.



      (5)   The prosecution does not need to prove in a prosecution
under division (A) of this section that a person requested or received
psychiatric treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental heal services
in order to show that the person was caused mental distress as described in
division (2) of the definition for "mental distress" in this section.



      (6)   (a)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to
a person solely because the person provided access or connection to or from
an electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that
person's control, including having provided capabilities that are incidental
to providing access or connection to or from the electronic method of
remotely transferring the information, and that do not include the creation
of the content of the material that is the subject of the access or
connection. In addition, any person providing access or connection to or from
an electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that
person's control shall not be liable for any action voluntarily taken in good
faith to block the receipt or transmission through its service of any
information that it believes is or will be sent in violation of division (A)
of this section.



         (b)   Division (A)(6)(a) of this section does not create
an affirmative duty for any person providing access or connection to or from
an electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that
person's control to block the receipt or transmission through its service of
any information that it believes is or will be sent in violation of division
(A) of this section except as otherwise provided by law.



         (c)   Division (A)(6)(a) of this section does not apply
to a person who conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or
knowing distribution of material in violation of division (A) of this section
or who knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.



(R.C. § 2903.211)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Authority of corporations to seek protection orders in certain
circumstances, see R.C. § 2903.215



   Conditions of bail for violators, see R.C. § 2903.212



   Persons who may seek relief under anti-stalking protection order; ex
parte orders, see R.C. § 2903.214



   Protection order as pretrial condition of release, see R.C. § 2903.213



§ 135.07  UNLAWFUL RESTRAINT.



   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly
restrain another of the other person's liberty.



   (B)   No person, without privilege to do so and with a sexual
motivation, shall knowingly restrain another of the other person's liberty.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful restraint,
a misdemeanor of the third degree.



   (D)   As used in this section, SEXUAL MOTIVATION has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 2971.01



(R.C. § 2905.03)  ('69 Code, § 131.07)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 135.08  COERCION.



   (A)   No person, with purpose to coerce another into taking or
refraining from action concerning which he or she has a legal freedom of
choice, shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Threaten to commit any offense.



      (2)   Utter or threaten any slander against any person.



      (3)   Expose or threaten to expose any matter tending to
subject any person to hatred, contempt, or ridicule, or to damage his or her
personal or business repute, or to impair his or her credit.



      (4)   Institute or threaten criminal proceedings against any
person.



      (5)   Take or withhold, or threaten to take or withhold
official action, or cause or threaten to cause official action to be taken or
withheld.



   (B)   Divisions (A)(4) and (5) of this section shall not be
construed to prohibit a prosecutor or court from doing any of the following
in good faith and in the interests of justice:



      (1)   Offering or agreeing to grant, or granting immunity from
prosecution pursuant to R.C. § 2945.44.



      (2)   In return for a plea of guilty to one or more offenses
charged or to one or more other or lesser offenses, or in return for the
testimony of the accused in a case to which he or she is not a party,
offering or agreeing to dismiss, or dismissing one or more charges pending
against an accused, or offering or agreeing to impose, or imposing a certain
sentence or modification of sentence.



      (3)   Imposing probation on certain conditions, including
without limitation requiring the offender to make restitution or redress to
the victim of his or her offense.



   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division
(A)(3), (4), or (5) of this section that the actor's conduct was a reasonable
response to the circumstances which occasioned it, and that his or her
purpose was limited to:



      (1)   Compelling another to refrain from misconduct or to
desist from further misconduct.



      (2)   Preventing or redressing a wrong or injustice.



      (3)   Preventing another from taking action for which the
actor reasonably believed the other person to be disqualified.



      (4)   Compelling another to take action which the actor
reasonably believed the other person to be under a duty to take.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of coercion, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.



   (E)   As used in this section, THREAT includes a direct threat and a
threat by innuendo.



(R.C. § 2905.12)  ('69 Code, § 131.09)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 135.09  HAZING PROHIBITED.



   (A)   As used in this section, HAZING means doing any act or
coercing another, including the victim, to do any act of initiation into any
student or other organization that causes or creates a substantial risk of
causing mental or physical harm to any person.



   (B)   (1)   No person shall recklessly participate in the hazing
of another.



      (2)   No administrator, employee, or faculty member of any
primary, secondary, or post-secondary school or of any other educational
institution, public or private, shall recklessly permit the hazing of any
person.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of hazing, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 2903.31)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 135.091  HOUSING DISCRIMINATION PROHIBITED.



   (A)   No person shall attempt to or willfully injure, intimidate, or
interfere with any of the following:



      (1)   Any person from renting, purchasing, selling, financing
or occupying any housing accommodations; from contracting or negotiating for
any housing accommodations; or from applying for or participating in any
service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or
renting housing accommodations because of race, color, religion, sex, sexual
orientation, gender identification or expression, national origin, ancestry,
familial status as defined in R.C. § 4112.01, military status as defined in
R.C. § 4112.01, or disability as defined in R.C. § 4112.01.



      (2)   Any person because that person is or has been doing
either of the following:



         (a)   Participating in any of the activities, services,
organizations, or facilities described in division (A)(1) of this section;



         (b)   Affording another person or class of persons
opportunity or protection so to participate in any of the activities,
services, organizations, or facilities described in division (A)(1) of this
section.



      (3)   Any person because that person is or has been lawfully
aiding or encouraging other persons to participate in any of the activities,
services, organizations, or facilities described in division (A)(1) of this
section, or participating lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing
any denial of the opportunity to so participate.



   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.



(Ord. 2018-4, passed 4-9-18)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 135.092  ETHNIC INTIMIDATION.



   (A)   No person shall violate R.C. § 2903.21, 2903.22, 2909.06, or
2909.07, or R.C. § 2917.21(A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5), by reason of a person
or group's membership in a protected class, as defined in § 102.01 of the
Village Municipal Code of Ordinances.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of ethnic
intimidation. Ethnic intimidation is an offense of the next higher degree
than the offense the commission of which is a necessary element of ethnic
intimidation. In the case of an offense that is a misdemeanor of the first
degree, ethnic intimidation is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.



(Ord. 2018-4, passed 4-9-18)



§ 135.093  UNLAWFUL COLLECTION OF BODILY SUBSTANCES.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly collect any blood, urine, tissue, or
other bodily substance of another person without privilege or consent to do
so.



   (B)   (1)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any of
the following:



         (a)   The collection of any bodily substance of a person
by a law enforcement officer, or by another person pursuant to the direction
or advice of a law enforcement officer, for purposes of a chemical test or
tests of the substance under R.C. § 1547.111(A)(1) or R.C. § 4511.191(A)(2)
to determine the alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a
controlled substance, or combination content of the bodily substance;



         (b)   The collection of any bodily substance of a person
by a peace officer, or by another person pursuant to the direction or advice
of a peace officer, for purposes of a test or tests of the substance as
provided in R.C. § 4506.17(A) to determine the person's alcohol
concentration or the presence of any controlled substance or metabolite of a
controlled substance.



      (2)   Division (B)(1) of this section shall not be construed
as implying that the persons identified in divisions (B)(1)(a) and (b) of
this section do not have privilege to collect the bodily substance of another
person as described in those divisions or as limiting the definition of
"privilege" set forth in R.C. § 2901.01.



   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
unlawful collection of a bodily substance. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, unlawful collection of a bodily substance is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (A) of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, unlawful collection of a bodily
substance is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2927.15)



OFFENSES AGAINST THE FAMILY



§ 135.10  BIGAMY.



   (A)   No married person shall marry another or continue to cohabit
with such other person in this municipality.



   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section
that the actor's spouse was continuously absent for five years immediately
preceding the purported subsequent marriage, and was not known by the actor
to be alive within that time.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of bigamy, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2919.01)  ('69 Code, § 139.01)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 135.11  (RESERVED).



§ 135.12  DOMESTIC VIOLENCE.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical
harm to a family or household member.



   (B)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to a
family or household member.



   (C)   No person, by threat of force, shall knowingly cause a family
or household member to believe that the offender will cause imminent physical
harm to the family or household member.



   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of domestic
violence, and the court shall sentence the offender as provided in divisions
(D)(2) to (D)(5) of this section.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3), (D)(4)
or (D)(5) of this section, a violation of division (C) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree and a violation of division (A) or (B) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(4) of this
section, if the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted
of domestic violence, a violation of an existing or former municipal
ordinance or law of this or any other state or the United States that is
substantially equivalent to domestic violence, a violation of R.C. §
2903.14, 2909.06, 2909.07, 2911.12, 2911.211, or 2919.22 if the victim of the
violation was a family or household member at the time of the violation, a
violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any
other state or the United States that is substantially equivalent to any of
those sections if the victim of the violation was a family or household
member at the time of the commission of the violation, or any offense of
violence if the victim of the offense was a family or household member at the
time of the commission of the offense, a violation of division (A) or (B) is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law, and a violation of
division (C) is a misdemeanor of the second degree.



      (4)   If the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been
convicted of two or more offenses of domestic violence or two or more
violations or offenses of the type described in division (D)(3) of this
section involving a person who was a family or household member at the time
of the violations or offenses, a violation of division (A) or (B) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law, and a
violation of division (C) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.



      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) or
(D)(4) of this section, if the offender knew that the victim of the violation
was pregnant at the time of the violation, a violation of division (A) or (B)
of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law, and
a violation of division (C) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third
degree.



   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no court
or unit of state or local government shall charge any fee, cost, deposit, or
money in connection with the filing of charges against a person alleging that
the person violated this section or a municipal ordinance substantially
equivalent to this section or in connection with the prosecution of any
charges so filed.



   (F)   As used in this section:



      FAMILY OR HOUSEHOLD MEMBER. Means any of the following:



         (a)   Any of the following who is residing or has
resided with the offender:



            1.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse as
defined below, or a former spouse of the offender;



            2.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the
offender, or another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the
offender;



            3.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person
living as a spouse, or former spouse of the offender, or another person
related by consanguinity or affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse,
or former spouse of the offender.



         (b)   The natural parent of any child of whom the
offender is the other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent.



      PERSON LIVING AS A SPOUSE. Means a person who is living or has
lived with the offender in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise
is cohabiting with the offender, or who otherwise has cohabited with the
offender within five years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the
act in question.



(R.C. § 2919.25)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Temporary protection orders, see R.C. § 2919.26



   Violation of protection order or consent agreement, factors to
consider, bail, see R.C. § 2919.251



§ 135.13  NONSUPPORT OF DEPENDENTS.



   (A)   No person shall abandon, or fail to provide adequate support
to:



      (1)   His or her spouse, as required by law;



      (2)   His or her legitimate or illegitimate child who is under
age 18, or mentally or physically disabled child who is under age 21;



      (3)   His or her aged or infirm parent or adoptive parent, who
from lack of ability and means is unable to provide adequately for his or her
own support.



   (B)   (1)   No person shall abandon, or fail to provide support
as established by a court order to, another person whom, by court order or
decree, the person:



         (a)   Is legally obligated to support; or



         (b)   Was legally obligated to support, and an amount
for support:



            1.   Was due and owing prior to the date the
person’s duty to pay current support terminated; and



            2.   Remains unpaid.



      (2)   The period of limitation under R.C. § 2901.13
applicable to division (B)(1)(b) of this section shall begin to run on the
date the person’s duty to pay current support terminates.



   (C)   No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage, or
contribute to a child or a ward of the juvenile court becoming a dependent
child, as defined in R.C. § 2151.04, or a neglected child, as defined in
R.C. § 2151.03.



   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of failure to provide
adequate support under division (A) of this section or a charge of failure to
provide support established by a court order under division (B) of this
section that the accused was unable to provide adequate support or the
established support, but did provide the support that was within his or her
ability and means.



   (E)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(3)
of this section that the parent abandoned the accused, or failed to support
the accused as required by law, while the accused was under age 18, or was
mentally or physically disabled and under age 21.



   (F)   It is not a defense to a charge under division (B) of this
section that the person whom a court has ordered the accused to support is
being adequately supported by someone other than the accused.



   (G)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division,
whoever violates division (A) or (B) of this section is guilty of nonsupport
of dependents, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division
(A)(2) or (B) of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, or if the offender has failed to provide support under
division (A)(2) or (B) of this section for a total accumulated period of 26
weeks out of 104 consecutive weeks, whether or not the 26 weeks were
consecutive, then a violation of division (A)(2) or (B) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a felony violation of
this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
a violation of division (A)(2) or (B) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)   If the offender is guilty of nonsupport of dependents by
reason of failing to provide support to his or her child as required by a
child support order issued on or after April 15, 1985, pursuant to R.C. §
2151.23, 2151.231, 2151.232, 2151.33, 3105.21, 3109.05, 3111.13, 3113.04,
3113.31, 3115.401, or former R.C. § 3115.31, the court, in addition to any
other sentence imposed, shall assess all court costs arising out of the
charge against the person and require the person to pay any reasonable
attorney's fees of any adverse party other than the state, as determined by
the court, that arose in relation to the charge.



      (3)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty
of contributing to the nonsupport of dependents, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.  Each day of a violation of division (C) of this section is a
separate offense.



(R.C. § 2919.21)  ('69 Code, § 139.02)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 135.14  ENDANGERING CHILDREN.



   (A)   No person, who is the parent, guardian, custodian, person
having custody or control, or person in loco parentis of a child under 18
years of age or a mentally or physically disabled child under 21 years of
age, shall create a substantial risk to the health or safety of the child by
violating a duty of care, protection, or support.  It is not a violation of
a duty of care, protection, or support under this division when the parent,
guardian, custodian, or person having custody or control of a child treats
the physical or mental illness or disability of the child by spiritual means
through prayer alone, in accordance with the tenets of a recognized religious
body.



   (B)   No person shall do any of the following to a child under 18
years of age or a mentally or physically disabled child under 21 years of age:



      (1)   Abuse the child.



      (2)   Torture or cruelly abuse the child.



      (3)   Administer corporal punishment or other physical
disciplinary measure, or physically restrain the child in a cruel manner or
for a prolonged period, which punishment, discipline or restraint is
excessive under the circumstances and creates a substantial risk of serious
physical harm to the child.



      (4)   Repeatedly administer unwarranted disciplinary measures
to a child when there is a substantial risk that such conduct, if continued,
will seriously impair or retard the child's mental health or development.



      (5)   Entice, coerce, permit, encourage, compel, hire, employ,
use, or allow the child to act, model, or in any other way participate in, or
be photographed for, the production, presentation, dissemination, or
advertisement of any material or performance that the offender knows or
reasonably should know is obscene, is sexually oriented matter, or is
nudity-oriented matter;



      (6)   Allow the child to be on the same parcel of real
property and within 100 feet of, or, in the case of more than one housing
unit on the same parcel of real property, in the same housing unit and within
100 feet of, any act in violation of R.C. § 2925.04 or 2925.041 when the
person knows that the act is occurring, whether or not any person is
prosecuted for or convicted of the violation of R.C. § 2925.04 or 2925.041
that is the basis of the violation of this division.



   (C)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle, as defined by R.C.
§ 4511.01, within the municipality and in violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A),
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, when one or more children
under 18 years of age are in the vehicle.  Notwithstanding any other
provision of law, a person may be convicted at the same trial or proceeding
of a violation of this division and a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that constitutes the basis of
the charge of the violation of this division.  For purposes of R.C. §
4511.191 and all related provisions of law, a person arrested for a violation
of this division shall be considered to be under arrest for operating a
vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or alcohol and
a drug of abuse or for operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of
alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a controlled substance in
the blood, breath, or urine.



      (2)   As used in division (C)(1) of this section:



         CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE has the same meaning as in R.C. §
3719.01.



         VEHICLE has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.



   (D)   (1)   Division (B)(5) of this section does not apply to any
material or performance that is produced, presented, or disseminated for a
bona fide medical, scientific, educational, religious, governmental,
judicial, or other proper purpose, by or to a physician, psychologist,
sociologist, scientist, teacher, person pursing bona fide studies for
research, librarian, member of the clergy, prosecutor, judge, or other person
having a proper interest in the material or performance.



      (2)   Mistake of age is not a defense to a charge under
division (B)(5) of this section.



      (3)   In a prosecution under division (B)(5) of this section,
the trier of fact may infer that an actor, model, or participant in the
material or performance involved is a juvenile if the material or
performance, through its title, text, visual representation, or otherwise,
represents or depicts the actor, model, or participant as a juvenile.



      (4)   As used in this division and division (B)(5) of this
section:



         MATERIAL, PERFORMANCE, OBSCENE, and SEXUAL ACTIVITY have
the same meanings as in R.C. § 2907.01.



         NUDITY-ORIENTED MATTER means any material or performance
that shows a minor in a state of nudity and that, taken as a whole by the
average person applying contemporary community standards, appeals to the
prurient interest.



         SEXUALLY ORIENTED MATTER means any material or performance
that shows a minor participating or engaging in sexual activity,
masturbation, or bestiality.



   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of endangering
children.



      (1)   If the offender violates division (A) or (B)(1) of this
section, endangering children is one of the following:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division
(E)(1)(b),(c) or (d), a misdemeanor of the first degree.



         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of
an offense under this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, or of any offense involving neglect, abandonment, or
contributing to the delinquency of or physical abuse of a child, except as
otherwise provided in division (E)(1)(c) or (d) of this section, endangering
children is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



         (c)   If the violation is a violation of division (A) of
this section and results in serious physical harm to the child involved,
endangering children is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



         (d)   If the violation is a violation of division (B)(1)
of this section and results in serious physical harm to the child involved,
endangering children is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)   If the offender violates division (B)(2), (3), (4), (5)
or (6) of this section, endangering children is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.



      (3)   If the offender violates division (C) of this section,
the offender shall be punished as follows:



         (a)   Except as provided in (E)(3)(b) or (c),
endangering children in violation of division (C) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.



         (b)   If the violation results in serious physical harm
to the child or if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation
of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, or of any offense involving neglect, abandonment, or contributing
to the delinquency of or physical abuse of a child, except as otherwise
provided in division (E)(3)(c) of this section, endangering children in
violation of division (C) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



         (c)   If the violation results in serious physical harm
to the child and if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation
of this section, R.C. §§ 2903.06, 2903.08, 2919.22(C) or former R.C. §
2903.07 as it existed prior to March 23, 2000, or R.C. § 2903.04, in a case
in which the offender was subject to the sanctions described in division (D)
of that section, endangering children in children in violation of division
(C) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



         (d)   In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine, or
other sentence, penalty or sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to
divisions (E)(3)(a), (b) or (c) of this section or pursuant to any other
provision of law, the court may also impose upon the offender one or both of
the following sanctions:



            1.   It may require the offender, as part of his
or her sentence and in the manner described in R.C. § 2919.22(F), to perform
not more than 200 hours of supervised community service work under the
authority of any agency, political subdivision, or charitable organization of
the type described in R.C. § 2951.02(F)(1), provided that the court shall
not require the offender to perform supervised community service work under
this division unless the offender agrees to perform the supervised community
service work.



            2.   It may suspend the driver's license or
commercial driver's license or permit or nonresident operating privilege of
the offender for up to 90 days, in addition to any suspension or revocation
of the offender's driver's license or commercial driver's license or permit
or nonresident operating privilege under R.C. Chapter 4506, 4507, 4509 or
4511, or any other provision of law.



         (e)   In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine, or
other sentence, penalty or sanction imposed upon the offender pursuant to
division (D)(3)(a), (b), (c) or (d) of this section or pursuant to any other
provision of law for the violation of division (C) of this section, if as a
part of the same trial or proceeding the offender also is convicted of or
pleads guilty to a separate charge charging the violation of R.C. §
4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the
basis of the charge of the violation of division (C) of this section, the
offender also shall be sentenced in accordance with R.C. § 4511.99, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and also shall be subject to
all other sanctions that are required or authorized by any provision of law
for that violation of R.C.§ 4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.



   (F)   (1)   If a person violates division (C) of this section and
if, at the time of the violation, there were two or more children under 18
years of age in the motor vehicle involved in the violation, the offender may
be convicted of a violation of division (C) of this section for each of the
children, but the court may sentence the offender for only one of the
violations.



      (2)   (a)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to
a violation of division (C) of this section but the person is not also
convicted of and does not also plead guilty to a separate charge of violating
R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that
was the basis of the charge of the violation of division (C) of this section,
both the following apply:



            1.   For purposes of the provisions of R.C. §
4511.99, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that set forth
the penalties and sanctions for a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the conviction of or plea of
guilty to the violation of division (C) of this section shall not constitute
a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.



            2.   For purposes of the provisions of law that
refers to a conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of R.C. §
4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and that is
not described in division (E)(2)(a)1. of this section, the conviction of or
plea of guilty to the violation of division (C) of this section shall
constitute a conviction or plea of guilty to a violation of R.C. §
4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



         (b)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of division (C) of this section and the person also is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a separate charge of violating R.C. § 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the
charge of the violation of division (C) of this section, the conviction of or
plea of guilty to the violation of division (C) of this section shall not
constitute, for the purposes of any provision of law that refers to a
conviction of or a plea of guilty to a violation of R.C. § 4511.19(A) or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, a conviction of or a plea of
guilty to a violation of R.C.  § 4511.19(A) or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.



(R.C. § 2919.22(A) - (E))  ('69 Code, § 139.03)  (Ord. C-417, passed
1-12-76)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Community service, requirements, see R.C. § 2919.22(F)



   License suspension, requirements, see R.C. § 2919.22(G)



   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2903.15



§ 135.15  INTERFERENCE WITH CUSTODY.



   (A)   No person, knowing that he or she is without privilege to do
so or being reckless in that regard, shall entice, take, keep, or harbor a
person identified in division (A)(1), (2) or (3) of this section from the
parent, guardian, or custodian of the person identified in division (A)(1),
(2) or (3) of this section:



      (1)   A child under the age of 18, or a mentally or physically
disabled child under the age of 21;



      (2)   A person committed by law to an institution for
delinquent, unruly, neglected, abused, or dependent children;



      (3)   A person committed by law to an institution for the
mentally ill or an institution for persons with intellectual disabilities.



   (B)   No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause, or encourage a child
or a ward of the juvenile court who has been committed to the custody of any
person, department, or public or private institution to leave the custody of
that person, department, or institution without legal consent.



   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of enticing or taking
under division (A)(1) of this section that the actor reasonably believed that
his or her conduct was necessary to preserve the child's health or safety. 
It is an affirmative defense to a charge of keeping or harboring under
division (A) of this section that the actor in good faith gave notice to law
enforcement or judicial authorities within a reasonable time after the child
or committed person came under his or her shelter, protection, or influence.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference with
custody.



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subdivision, a
violation of division (A)(1) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If
the child who is the subject of a violation of division (A)(1) is removed
from the state or if the offender previously has been convicted of an offense
under this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, a violation of division (A)(1) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.  If the child who is the subject of
a violation of division (A)(1) suffers physical harm as a result of the
violation, a violation of division (A)(1) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)   A violation of division (A)(2) or (3) of this section is
a misdemeanor of the third degree.



      (3)   A violation of division (B) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  Each day of a violation of division (B) is
a separate offense.



(R.C. § 2919.23)  ('69 Code, § 139.04)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 135.151  INTERFERENCE WITH SUPPORT ORDERS.



   (A)   No person, by using physical harassment or threats of violence
against another person, shall interfere with the other person's initiation or
continuance of, or attempt to prevent the other person from initiating or
continuing, an action to issue or modify a support order under R.C. Chapter
3115, or under R.C. § 2151.23, 2151.231, 2151.232, 2151.33, 2151.36,
2151.361, 2151.49, 3105.18, 3105.21, 3109.05, 3109.19, 3111.13, 3113.04,
3113.07, or 3113.31.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interfering with an
action to issue or modify a support order, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.  If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, or R.C. § 3111.19, interfering with an action to issue
or modify a support order is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.



(R.C. § 2919.231)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 135.16  CONTRIBUTING TO UNRULINESS OR DELINQUENCY OF A CHILD.



   (A)   As used in this section:



      DELINQUENT CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2152.02.



      UNRULY CHILD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.022.



   (B)   No person, including a parent, guardian, or other custodian of
a child, shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage, or contribute to a
child or a ward of the juvenile court becoming an unruly child or a
delinquent child;



      (2)   Act in a way tending to cause a child or a ward of the
juvenile court to become an unruly child or a delinquent child;



      (3)   Act in a way that contributes to an adjudication of the
child as a delinquent child based on the child’s violation of a court order
adjudicating the child an unruly child for being an habitual truant;



      (4)   If the person is the parent, guardian, or custodian of a
child who has the duties under R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950 to register,
register a new residence address, and periodically verify a residence
address, and, if applicable, to send a notice of intent to reside, and if the
child is not emancipated, as defined in R.C. § 2919.121, fail to ensure that
the child complies with those duties under R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of contributing to the
unruliness or delinquency of a child, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each
day of violation of this section is a separate offense.



(R.C. § 2919.24)  Penalty, see § 130.99



CHAPTER 136: OFFENSES AGAINST JUSTICE AND ADMINISTRATION



Section



   136.01   Definitions



   136.02   Falsification



   136.03   Compounding a crime



   136.04   Failure to report a crime



   136.05   Failure to aid a law enforcement officer



   136.06   Obstructing official business



   136.07   Obstructing justice



   136.08   Resisting arrest



   136.09   Having an unlawful interest in a public contract



   136.10   Soliciting or receiving improper compensation



   136.11   Dereliction of duty



   136.12   Interfering with civil rights



   136.13   Personating an officer



   136.14   Unlawful display of law enforcement emblem



   136.15   Impersonating a peace officer



   136.16   Misuse of 9-1-1 system



   136.17   Assaulting police dog or horse, or assistance dog



   136.18   Failure to disclose personal information



   136.19   Disclosure of confidential peace officer information



§ 136.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CAMPAIGN COMMITTEE, CONTRIBUTION, LEGISLATIVE CAMPAIGN FUND, POLITICAL
ACTION COMMITTEE, POLITICAL CONTRIBUTING ENTITY, and POLITICAL PARTY.  Have
the same meanings as in R.C. § 3517.01.



   DETENTION.  Arrest; confinement in any vehicle subsequent to an
arrest; confinement in any public or private facility for custody of persons
charged with or convicted of crime in this state or another state or under
the laws of the United States or alleged or found to be a delinquent child or
unruly child in this state or another state or under the laws of the United
States; hospitalization, institutionalization, or confinement in any public
or private facility that is ordered pursuant to or under the authority of
R.C. § 2945.37, 2945.371, 2945.38, 2945.39, 2945.40, 2945.401 or 2945.402;
confinement in any vehicle for transportation to or from any facility of any
of those natures; detention for extradition or deportation; except as
provided in this division, supervision by any employee of any facility of any
of those natures that is incidental to hospitalization, institutionalization,
or confinement in the facility but that occurs outside the facility;
supervision by an employee of the Department of Rehabilitation and Correction
of a person on any type of release from a state correctional institution; or
confinement in any vehicle, airplane, or place while being returned from
outside of this state into this state by a private person or entity pursuant
to a contract entered into under R.C. § 311.29(E) or R.C. § 5149.03(B). 
For a person confined in a county jail who participates in a county jail
industry program pursuant to R.C. § 5147.30, DETENTION includes time spent
at an assigned work site and going to and from the work site.



   DETENTION FACILITY.  Any public or private place used for the
confinement of a person charged with or convicted of any crime in this state
or another state or under the laws of the United States or alleged or found
to be a delinquent child or an unruly child in this state or another state or
under the laws of the United States.



   OFFICIAL PROCEEDING.  Any proceeding before a legislative, judicial,
administrative, or other governmental agency or official authorized to take
evidence under oath, and includes any proceeding before a referee, hearing
examiner, commissioner, notary, or other person taking testimony or a
disposition in connection with an official proceeding.



   PARTY OFFICIAL.  Any person who holds an elective or appointive post
in a political party in the United States or this state, by virtue of which
he or she directs, conducts, or participates in directing or conducting party
affairs at any level of responsibility.



   PROVIDER AGREEMENT.   Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.



   PUBLIC OFFICIAL.  Any elected or appointed officer, employee, or agent
of the state or any political subdivision thereof, whether in a temporary or
permanent capacity, and includes but is not limited to legislators, judges,
and law enforcement officers.  The term does not include an employee,
officer, or governor-appointed member of the board of directors of the
nonprofit corporation formed under R.C. § 187.01.



   PUBLIC SERVANT.



      (1)   Any of the following:



         (a)   Any public official.



         (b)   Any person performing ad hoc a governmental
function, including but not limited to a juror, member of a temporary
commission, master, arbitrator, advisor, or consultant.



         (c)   A person who is a candidate for public office,
whether or not he or she is elected or appointed to the office for which he
or she is a candidate.  A person is a candidate for purposes of this
division if he or she has been nominated according to law for election or
appointment to public office, or if he or she has filed a petition or
petitions as required by law to have his or her name placed on the ballot in
a primary, general, or special election, or if he or she campaigns as a
write-in candidate in any primary, general, or special election.



      (2)   The term does not include an employee, officer, or
governor-appointed member of the board of directors of the nonprofit
corporation formed under R.C. § 187.01.



   VALUABLE THING or VALUABLE BENEFIT.  Includes, but is not limited to,
a contribution.  This inclusion does not indicate or imply that a
contribution was not included in those terms before September 17, 1986.



(R.C. § 2921.01)  ('69 Code, § 140.01)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76)



§ 136.02  FALSIFICATION.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly make a false statement, or knowingly
swear or affirm the truth of a false statement previously made, when any of
the following applies:



      (1)   The statement is made in any official proceeding.



      (2)   The statement is made with purpose to incriminate
another.



      (3)   The statement is made with purpose to mislead a public
official in performing his or her official function.



      (4)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the payment
of unemployment compensation; Ohio Works First; prevention, retention and
contingency benefits and services; disability financial assistance;
retirement benefits or health care coverage from a state retirement system;
economic development assistance as defined in R.C. § 9.66; or other benefits
administered by a governmental agency or paid out of a public treasury.



      (5)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the
issuance by a governmental agency of a license, permit, authorization,
certificate, registration, release, or provider agreement.



      (6)   The statement is sworn or affirmed before a notary
public or another person empowered to administer oaths.



      (7)   The statement is in writing on or in connection with a
report or return that is required or authorized by law.



      (8)   The statement is in writing, and is made with purpose to
induce another to extend credit to or employ the offender, or to confer any
degree, diploma, certificate of attainment, award of excellence, or honor on
the offender, or to extend to or bestow upon the offender any other valuable
benefit or distinction, when the person to whom the statement is directed
relies upon it to his or her detriment.



      (9)   The statement is made with purpose to commit or
facilitate the commission of a theft offense.



      (10)   The statement is knowingly made to a probate court in
connection with any action, proceeding, or other matter within its
jurisdiction, either orally or in a written document, including, but not
limited to, an application, petition, complaint, or other pleading, or an
inventory, account, or report.



      (11)   The statement is made on an account, form, record,
stamp, label or other writing that is required by law.



      (12)   The statement is made in connection with the purchase
of a firearm, as defined in R.C. § 2923.11, and in conjunction with the
furnishing to the seller of the firearm of a fictitious or altered driver's
or commercial driver's license or permit, a fictitious or altered
identification card, or any other document that contains false information
about the purchaser's identity.



      (13)   The statement is made in a document or instrument of
writing that purports to be a judgment, lien, or claim of indebtedness and is
filed or recorded with the Secretary of State, a county recorder, or the
clerk of a court of record.



      (14)   The statement is made in an application filed with a
county sheriff pursuant to R.C. § 2923.125 in order to obtain or renew a
concealed handgun license or is made in an affidavit submitted to a county
sheriff to obtain a concealed handgun license on a temporary emergency basis
under R.C. § 2923.1213.



      (15)   The statement is required under R.C. § 5743.71 in
connection with the person's purchase of cigarettes or tobacco products in a
delivery sale.



   (B)   No person, in connection with the purchase of a firearm as
defined in R.C. § 2923.11, shall knowingly furnish to the seller of the
firearm a fictitious or altered driver's or commercial driver's license or
permit, a fictitious or altered identification card, or any other document
that contains false information about the purchaser's identity.



   (C)   No person, in an attempt to obtain a concealed handgun license
under R.C. § 2923.125, shall knowingly present to a sheriff a fictitious or
altered document that purports to be certification of the person’s
competence in handling a handgun as described in division (B)(3) of that
section.



   (D)   It is no defense to a charge under division (A)(6) of this
section that the oath or affirmation was administered or taken in an
irregular manner.



   (E)   If contradictory statements relating to the same fact are made
by the offender within the period of the statute of limitations for
falsification, it is not necessary for the prosecution to prove which
statement was false, but only that one or the other was false.



   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1), (2), (3), (4), (5),
(6), (7), (8), (10), (11), (13), or (15) of this section is guilty of
falsification.  Except as otherwise provided in this division, falsification
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(9) of this section is
guilty of falsification in a theft offense. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, falsification in a theft offense is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the value of the property or services stolen is $1,000 or more,
falsification in a theft offense is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



      (3)   Whoever violates division (A)(12) or (B) of this section
is guilty of falsification to purchase a firearm, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.



      (4)   Whoever violates division (A)(14) or (C) of this section
is guilty of falsification to obtain a concealed handgun license, a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (5)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section in removal
proceedings under R.C. § 319.26, 321.37, 507.13 or 733.78 is guilty of
falsification regarding a removal proceeding, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2921.13)



   (G)   (1)   No person who has knowingly failed to maintain proof
of financial responsibility in accordance with R.C. § 4509.101 shall produce
any document or present to a peace officer an electronic wireless
communications device that is displaying any text or images with the purpose
to mislead a peace officer upon the request of a peace officer for proof of
financial responsibility made in accordance with R.C. § 4509.101(D)(2).



      (2)   Whoever violates this division (G) is guilty of
falsification, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 4509.102)  ('69 Code, § 140.02)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Civil liability for violations of this section, see R.C. § 2921.13(G)



§ 136.03  COMPOUNDING A CRIME.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly demand, accept, or agree to accept
anything of value in consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon a
pending criminal prosecution.



   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section
when both of the following apply:



      (1)   The pending prosecution involved is for a violation of
R.C. § 2913.02, 2913.11, 2913.21(B)(2), or 2913.47, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, of which the actor under this section was the
victim.



      (2)   The thing of value demanded, accepted, or agreed to be
accepted, in consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon the
prosecution, did not exceed an amount that the actor reasonably believed due
him or her as restitution for the loss caused him or her by the offense.



   (C)   When a prosecuting witness abandons or agrees to abandon a
prosecution under division (B) of this section, the abandonment or agreement
in no way binds the state to abandoning the prosecution.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of compounding a
crime, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2921.21)  ('69 Code, § 135.01)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 136.04  FAILURE TO REPORT A CRIME.



   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(2) of this
section, no person, knowing that a felony has been or is being committed,
shall knowingly fail to report the information to law enforcement authorities.



      (2)   No person, knowing that a violation of R.C. §
2913.04(B) has been or is being committed or that the person has received
information derived from such a violation, shall knowingly fail to report the
violation to law enforcement authorities.



   (B)   Except for conditions that are within the scope of division
(E) of this section, no person giving aid to a sick or injured person shall
negligently fail to report to law enforcement authorities any gunshot or stab
wound treated or observed by the person, or any serious physical harm to
persons that the person knows or has reasonable cause to believe resulted
from an offense of violence.



   (C)   No person who discovers the body or acquires the first
knowledge of the death of a person shall fail to report the death immediately
to a physician or advanced practice registered nurse whom the person knows to
be treating the deceased for a condition from which death at such time would
not be unexpected, or to a law enforcement officer, an ambulance service, an
emergency squad, or the coroner in a political subdivision in which the body
is discovered, the death is believed to have occurred, or knowledge
concerning the death is obtained. For purposes of this division, “advanced
practice registered nurse” does not include a certified registered nurse
anesthetist.



   (D)   No person shall fail to provide upon request of the person to
whom a report required by division (C) of this section was made, or to any
law enforcement officer who has reasonable cause to assert the authority to
investigate the circumstances surrounding the death, any facts within his or
her knowledge that may have a bearing on the investigation of the death.



   (E)   (1)   As used in this section, BURN INJURY means any of the
following:



         (a)   Second or third degree burns;



         (b)   Any burns to the upper respiratory tract or
laryngeal edema due to the inhalation of super-heated air;



         (c)   Any burn injury or wound that may result in death.



      (2)   No physician, nurse, physician assistant, or limited
practitioner who, outside a hospital, sanitarium, or other medical facility,
attends or treats a person who has sustained a burn injury inflicted by an
explosion or other incendiary device, or that shows evidence of having been
inflicted in a violent, malicious, or criminal manner, shall fail to report
the burn injury immediately to the local arson bureau, if there is such a
bureau in the jurisdiction in which the person is attended or treated, or
otherwise to local law enforcement authorities.



      (3)   No manager, superintendent, or other person in charge of
a hospital, sanitarium, or other medical facility in which a person is
attended or treated for any burn injury inflicted by an explosion or other
incendiary device, or that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a
violent, malicious, or criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury
immediately to the local arson bureau, if there is such a bureau in the
jurisdiction in which the person is attended or treated, or otherwise to
local law enforcement authorities.



      (4)   No person who is required to report any burn injury
under division (E)(2) or (3) of this section shall fail to file, within three
working days after attending or treating the victim, a written report of the
burn injury with the office of the State Fire Marshal.  The report shall be
made on a form provided by the State Fire Marshal.



      (5)   Anyone participating in the making of reports under
division (E) of this section or anyone participating in a judicial proceeding
resulting from the reports is immune from any civil or criminal liability
that otherwise might be incurred or imposed as a result of such actions.
Notwithstanding R.C. § 4731.22, the physician-patient relationship or
advanced practice registered nurse-patient relationship is not a ground for
excluding evidence regarding a person’s burn injury or the cause of the
burn injury in any judicial proceeding resulting from a report submitted
under division (E) of this section.



   (F)   (1)   Any doctor of medicine or osteopathic medicine,
hospital intern or resident, nurse, psychologist, social worker, independent
social worker, social work assistant, licensed professional clinical
counselor, licensed professional counselor, independent marriage and family
therapist, or marriage and family therapist who knows or has reasonable cause
to believe that a patient or client has been the victim of domestic violence,
as defined in R.C. § 3113.31, shall note that knowledge or belief and the
basis for it in the patient’s or client’s records.



      (2)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 4731.22, the physician-patient
privilege or advanced practice registered nurse-patient privilege shall not
be a ground for excluding any information regarding the report containing the
knowledge or belief noted under division (F)(1) of this section, and the
information may be admitted as evidence in accordance with the Rules of
Evidence.



   (G)   Division (A) or (D) of this section does not require
disclosure of information, when any of the following applies:



      (1)   The information is privileged by reason of the
relationship between attorney and client; physician and patient; advanced
practice registered nurse and patient; licensed psychologist or licensed
school psychologist and client; licensed professional clinical counselor,
licensed professional counselor, independent social worker, social worker,
independent marriage and family therapist, or marriage and family therapist
and client; member of the clergy, rabbi, minister, or priest and any person
communicating information confidentially to the member of the clergy, rabbi,
minister, or priest for a religious counseling purpose of a professional
character; husband and wife; or a communications assistant and those who are
a party to a telecommunications relay service call.



      (2)   The information would tend to incriminate a member of
the actor's immediate family.



      (3)   Disclosure of the information would amount to revealing
a news source, privileged under R.C. § 2739.04 or 2739.12.



      (4)   Disclosure of the information would amount to disclosure
by a member of the ordained clergy of an organized religious body of a
confidential communication made to him or her in his or her capacity as such
by a person seeking his or her aid or counsel.



      (5)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information
acquired by the actor in the course of his or her duties in connection with a
bona fide program of treatment or services for drug dependent persons or
persons in danger of drug dependence, which program is maintained or
conducted by a hospital, clinic, person, agency, or community addiction
services provider whose alcohol and drug addiction services are certified
pursuant to R.C. § 5119.36.



      (6)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information
acquired by the actor in the course of his or her duties in connection with a
bona fide program for providing counseling services to victims of crimes that
are violations of R.C. § 2907.02 or 2907.05, or to victims of felonious
sexual penetration in violation of former R.C. § 2907.12.  As used in this
division, COUNSELING SERVICES include services provided in an informal
setting by a person who, by education or experience, is competent to provide
such services



   (H)   No disclosure of information pursuant to this section gives
rise to any liability or recrimination for a breach of privilege or
confidence.



   (I)   Whoever violates division (A) or (B) of this section is guilty
of failure to report a crime.  Violation of division (A)(1) of this section
is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.  Violation of division (A)(2) or (B)
of this section is a misdemeanor of the second degree.



   (J)   Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this section is guilty
of failure to report knowledge of a death, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



   (K)   (1)   Whoever negligently violates division (E) of this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.



      (2)   Whoever knowingly violates division (E) of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the second degree.



   (L)   As used in this section, NURSE includes an advanced practice
registered nurse, registered nurse, and licensed practical nurse.



(R.C. § 2921.22)  ('69 Code, § 135.02)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 136.05  FAILURE TO AID A LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.



   (A)   No person shall negligently fail or refuse to aid a law
enforcement officer, when called upon for assistance in preventing or halting
the commission of an offense, or in apprehending or detaining an offender,
when the aid can be given without a substantial risk of physical harm to the
person giving it.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to aid a
law enforcement officer, a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 2921.23)  ('69 Code, § 135.03)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 136.06  OBSTRUCTING OFFICIAL BUSINESS.



   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so and with purpose to
prevent, obstruct, or delay the performance by a public official of any
authorized act within the public official's official capacity, shall do any
act that hampers or impedes a public official in the performance of the
public official's lawful duties.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing
official business.  Except as otherwise provided in this division,
obstructing official business is a misdemeanor of the second degree.  If a
violation of this section creates a risk of physical harm to any person,
obstructing official business is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.



(R.C. § 2921.31)  ('69 Code, § 135.04)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 136.07  OBSTRUCTING JUSTICE.



   (A)   No person, with purpose to hinder the discovery, apprehension,
prosecution, conviction, or punishment of another for crime, or to assist
another to benefit from the commission of a crime, and no person, with
purpose to hinder the discovery, apprehension, prosecution, adjudication as a
delinquent child, or disposition of a child for an act that if committed by
an adult would be a crime or to assist a child to benefit from the commission
of an act that if committed by an adult would be a crime, shall do any of the
following:



      (1)   Harbor or conceal the other person or child.



      (2)   Provide the other person or child with money,
transportation, a weapon, a disguise, or other means of avoiding discovery or
apprehension.



      (3)   Warn the other person or child of impending discovery or
apprehension.



      (4)   Destroy or conceal physical evidence of the crime or
act, or induce any person to withhold testimony or information or to elude
legal process summoning him or her to testify or supply evidence.



      (5)   Communicate false information to any person.



      (6)   Prevent or obstruct any person, by means of force,
intimidation, or deception, from performing any act to aid in the discovery,
apprehension, or prosecution of the other person or child.



   (B)   A person may be prosecuted for, and may be convicted of or
adjudicated a delinquent child for committing, a violation of division (A) of
this section regardless of whether the person or child aided ultimately is
apprehended for, is charged with, is convicted of, pleads guilty to, or is
adjudicated a delinquent child for committing the crime or act the person or
child aided committed.  The crime or act the person or child aided committed
shall be used under division (C) of this section in determining the penalty
for violation of division (A) of this section, regardless of whether the
person or child aided ultimately is apprehended for, is charge with, is
convicted of, pleads guilty to, or is adjudicated a delinquent child for
committing the crime or act the person or child aided committed.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing justice.



      (1)   If the crime committed by the person aided is a
misdemeanor or if the act committed by the child aided would be a misdemeanor
if committed by an adult, obstructing justice is a misdemeanor of the same
degree as the crime committed by the person aided or a misdemeanor of the
same degree that the act committed by the child aided would be if committed
by an adult.



      (2)   If the crime committed by the person aided is a felony
or if the act committed by the child aided would be a felony if committed by
an adult, or if the crime or act committed by the person or child aided is an
act of terrorism, obstructing justice is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



   (D)   As used in this section:



   ACT OF TERRORISM has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.21.



   ADULT and CHILD have the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.011.



   DELINQUENT CHILD has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2152.02.



(R.C. § 2921.32)  ('69 Code, § 135.05)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 136.08  RESISTING ARREST.



   (A)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere
with a lawful arrest of himself, herself or another.



   (B)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere
with a lawful arrest of the person or another person and, during the course
of or as a result of the resistance or interference, cause physical harm to a
law enforcement officer.



   (C)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere
with a lawful arrest of the person or another person if either of the
following applies:



      (1)   The offender, during the course of or as a result of the
resistance or interference, recklessly causes physical harm to a law
enforcement officer by means of a deadly weapon; or



      (2)   The offender, during the course of the resistance or
interference, brandishes a deadly weapon.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of resisting arrest. 
A violation of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the second
degree.  A violation of division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.  A violation of division (C) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.



   (E)   As used in this section, DEADLY WEAPON has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 2923.11.



(R.C. § 2921.33)  ('69 Code, § 135.06)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Unlawful taking of deadly weapon from a law enforcement officer, felony
offense, see R.C. § 2911.01



§ 136.09  HAVING AN UNLAWFUL INTEREST IN A PUBLIC CONTRACT.



   (A)   No public official shall knowingly do any of the following:



      (1)   Authorize or employ the authority of the public
official's office to secure authorization of any public contract in which the
public official, a member of the public official's family, or any of the
public official's business associates has an interest.



      (2)   Authorize or employ the authority or influence of the
public official's office to secure the investment of public funds in any
share, bond, mortgage, or other security with respect to which the public
official, a member of the public official's family, or any of the public
official's business associates either has an interest, is an underwriter, or
receives any brokerage, origination, or servicing fees.



      (3)   During the public official's term of office or within
one year thereafter, occupy any position of profit in the prosecution of a
public contract authorized by the public official him or her or by a
legislative body, commission, or board of which the public official he or she
was a member at the time of authorization, unless the contract was let by
competitive bidding to the lowest and best bidder.



      (4)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public
contract entered into by or for the use of the political subdivision or
governmental agency or instrumentality with which the public official he or
she is connected.



      (5)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public
contract that is not let by competitive bidding when required by law, and
that involves more than $150.



   (B)   In the absence of bribery or a purpose to defraud, a public
official, member of a public official's family, or any of a public official's
business associates shall not be considered as having an interest in a public
contract or the investment of public funds, if all of the following apply:



      (1)   The interest of that person is limited to owning or
controlling shares of the corporation, or being a creditor of the corporation
or other organization, that is the contractor on the public contract
involved, or that is the issuer of the security in which public funds are
invested.



      (2)   The shares owned or controlled by that person do not
exceed 5% of the outstanding shares of the corporation, and the amount due
that person as creditor does not exceed 5% of the total indebtedness of the
corporation or other organization.



      (3)   That person, prior to the time the public contract is
entered into, files with the political subdivision or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved, an affidavit giving that person's exact status in
connection with the corporation or other organization.



   (C)   This section does not apply to a public contract in which a
public official, member of a public official's family, or one of a public
official's business associates has an interest, when all of the following
apply:



      (1)   The subject of the public contract is necessary supplies
or services for the political subdivision or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved.



      (2)   The supplies or services are unobtainable elsewhere for
the same or lower cost, or are being furnished to the political subdivision
or governmental agency or instrumentality as part of a continuing course of
dealing established prior to the public official's becoming associated with
the political subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality involved.



      (3)   The treatment accorded the political subdivision or
governmental agency or instrumentality is either preferential to or the same
as that accorded other customers or clients in similar transactions.



      (4)   The entire transaction is conducted at arm's length,
with full knowledge by the political subdivision or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved, of the interest of the public official, member of
the public official's family, or business associate, and the public official
takes no part in the deliberations or decision of the political subdivision
or governmental agency or instrumentality with respect to the public contract.



   (D)   Division (A)(4) of this section does not prohibit
participation by a public employee in any housing program funded by public
monies if the public employee otherwise qualifies for the program and does
not use the authority or influence of the public employee's office or
employment to secure benefits from the program and if the monies are to be
used on the primary residence of the public employee.  Such participation
does not constitute an unlawful interest in a public contract in violation of
this section.



   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of having an unlawful
interest in a public contract.  Violation of division (A)(1) or (2) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  Violation
of division (A)(3), (4), or (5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.



   (F)   It is not a violation of this section for a prosecuting
attorney to appoint assistants and employees in accordance with R.C. §§
309.06 and 2921.421, or for a chief legal officer of a municipality or an
official designated as prosecutor in a municipality to appoint assistants and
employees in accordance with R.C. §§ 733.621 and 2921.421, or for a
township law director appointed under R.C. § 504.15 to appoint assistants
and employees in accordance with R.C. §§ 504.151 and 2921.421.



   (G)   Any public contract in which a public official, a member of
the public official's family, or any of the public official's business
associates has an interest in violation of this section is void and
unenforceable. Any contract securing the investment of public funds in which
a public official, a member of the public official's family, or any of the
public official's business associates has an interest, is an underwriter, or
receives any brokerage, origination or servicing fees and that was entered
into in violation of this section is void and unenforceable.



   (H)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



   CHIEF LEGAL OFFICER.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 733.621.



   PUBLIC CONTRACT.  Any of the following:



      (1)   The purchase or acquisition, or a contract for the
purchase or acquisition, of property or services by or for the use of the
state or any of its political subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality
of either, including the employment of an individual by the state, any of its
political subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either.



      (2)   A contract for the design, construction, alteration,
repair, or maintenance of any public property.



(R.C. § 2921.42)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 136.10  SOLICITING OR RECEIVING IMPROPER COMPENSATION.



   (A)   No public servant shall knowingly solicit or accept and no
person shall knowingly promise or give to a public servant either of the
following:



      (1)   Any compensation, other than as allowed by R.C. §
102.03(G), (H), (I), or other provisions of law, to perform the public
servant's official duties, to perform any other act or service in the public
servant's public capacity, for the general performance of the duties of the
public servant's public office or public employment, or as a supplement to
the public servant's public compensation.



      (2)   Additional or greater fees or costs than are allowed by
law to perform the public servant's official duties.



   (B)   No public servant for the public servant's own personal or
business use and no person for the person's own personal or business use or
for the personal or business use of a public servant or party official, shall
solicit or accept anything of value in consideration of either of the
following:



      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining, or renewing the
appointment of any person to any public office, employment, or agency.



      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public
employee with respect to compensation, duties, placement, location,
promotion, or other material aspects of employment.



   (C)   No person for the benefit of a political party, campaign
committee, legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political
contributing entity shall coerce any contribution in consideration of either
of the following:



      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining, or renewing the
appointment of any person to any public office, employment, or agency.



      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public
employee with respect to compensation, duties, placement, location,
promotion, or other material aspects of employment.



   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of soliciting improper
compensation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



   (E)   A public servant who is convicted of a violation of this
section is disqualified from holding any public office, employment, or
position of trust in this state for a period of seven years from the date of
conviction.



   (F)   Divisions (A), (B), and (C) of this section do not prohibit
any person from making voluntary contributions to a political party, campaign
committee, legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political
contributing entity or prohibit a political party, campaign committee,
legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political
contributing entity from accepting voluntary contributions.



(R.C. § 2921.43)  ('69 Code, § 140.04)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 136.11  DERELICTION OF DUTY.



   (A)   No law enforcement officer shall negligently do any of the
following:



      (1)   Fail to serve a lawful warrant without delay.



      (2)   Fail to prevent or halt the commission of an offense or
to apprehend an offender, when it is in the law enforcement officer's power
to do so alone or with available assistance.



   (B)   No law enforcement, ministerial, or judicial officer shall
negligently fail to perform a lawful duty in a criminal case or proceeding.



   (C)   No officer, having charge of a detention facility, shall
negligently do any of the following:



      (1)   Allow the detention facility to become littered or
unsanitary.



      (2)   Fail to provide persons confined in the detention
facility with adequate food, clothing, bedding, shelter, and medical
attention.



      (3)   Fail to control an unruly prisoner, or to prevent
intimidation of or physical harm to a prisoner by another.



      (4)   Allow a prisoner to escape.



      (5)   Fail to observe any lawful and reasonable regulation for
the management of the detention facility.



   (D)   No public official shall recklessly create a deficiency, incur
a liability, or expend a greater sum than is appropriated by the Legislative
Authority for the use in any one year of the department, agency, or
institution with which the public official is connected.



   (E)   No public servant shall recklessly fail to perform a duty
expressly imposed by law with respect to the public servant's office, or
recklessly do any act expressly forbidden by law with respect to the public
servant's office.



   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of dereliction of
duty, a misdemeanor of the second degree.



   (G)   Except as otherwise provided by law, a public servant who is a
county treasurer; county auditor; township fiscal officer; city auditor; city
treasurer; village fiscal officer; village clerk-treasurer; village clerk; in
the case of a municipal corporation having a charter that designates an
officer who, by virtue of the charter, has duties and functions similar to
those of the city or village officers referred to in this section, the
officer so designated by the charter; school district treasurer; fiscal
officer of a community school established under R.C. Chapter 3314; treasurer
of a science, technology, engineering, and mathematics school established
under R.C. Chapter 3326; or fiscal officer of a college-preparatory boarding
school established under R.C. Chapter 3328 and is convicted of or pleads
guilty to dereliction of duty is disqualified from holding any public office,
employment, or position of trust in this state for four years following the
date of conviction or of entry of the plea, and is not entitled to hold any
public office until any repayment or restitution required by the court is
satisfied.



   (H)   As used in this section, PUBLIC SERVANT includes the following:



      (1)   An officer or employee of a contractor as defined in
R.C. § 9.08;



      (2)   A fiscal officer employed by the operator of a community
school established under R.C. Chapter 3314 or by the operator of a college-
preparatory boarding school established under R.C. Chapter 3328.



(R.C. § 2921.44)  ('69 Code, § 140.05)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 136.12  INTERFERING WITH CIVIL RIGHTS.



   (A)   No public servant, under color of his or her office,
employment, or authority, shall knowingly deprive, conspire or attempt to
deprive any person of a constitutional or statutory right.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interfering with
civil rights, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2921.45)  ('69 Code, § 140.06)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 136.13  PERSONATING AN OFFICER.



   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she
is facilitating a fraud, or with purpose to induce another to purchase
property or services, shall personate a law enforcement officer, or an
inspector, investigator, or agent of any governmental agency.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of personating an
officer, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2913.44)  ('69 Code, § 135.07)  (Ord. C-417, passed 1-12-76) 
Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 136.14  UNLAWFUL DISPLAY OF LAW ENFORCEMENT EMBLEM.



   (A)   No person who is not entitled to do so shall knowingly display
on a motor vehicle the emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization
of law enforcement officers.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of the unlawful
display of the emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law
enforcement officers, a minor misdemeanor.



(R.C. § 2913.441)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 136.15  IMPERSONATING A PEACE OFFICER.



   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER. An employee of the United States
who serves in a position the duties of which are primarily the investigation,
apprehension, or detention of individuals suspected or convicted of offenses
under the criminal laws of the United States.



      IMPERSONATE. To act the part of, assume the identity of, wear the
uniform or any part of the uniform of, or display the identification of a
particular person or of a member of a class of persons with purpose to make
another person believe that the actor is that particular person or is a
member of that class of persons.



      INVESTIGATOR OF THE BUREAU OF CRIMINAL IDENTIFICATION AND
INVESTIGATION. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2903.11.



      PEACE OFFICER. A Sheriff, deputy sheriff, Marshal, deputy
marshal, member of the organized police department of a municipal
corporation, or township constable, who is employed by a political
subdivision of this state; a member of a police force employed by a
metropolitan housing authority under R.C. § 3735.31(D); a member of a police
force employed by a regional transit authority under R.C. § 306.35(Y); a
state university law enforcement officer appointed under R.C. § 3345.04; a
veterans' home police officer appointed under R.C. § 5907.02; a special
police officer employed by a port authority under R.C. § 4582.04 or 4582.28;
an officer, agent, or employee of the state or any of its agencies,
instrumentalities, or political subdivisions, upon whom, by statute, a duty
to conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is imposed and the
authority to arrest violators is conferred, within limits of that statutory
duty and authority; or a state highway patrol trooper whose primary duties
are to preserve the peace, to protect life and property, and to enforce the
laws, ordinances, or rules of the state or any of its political subdivisions.



      PRIVATE POLICE OFFICER. Any security guard, special police
officer, private detective, or other person who is privately employed in a
police capacity.



   (B)   No person shall impersonate a peace officer, private police
officer, investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation, or federal law enforcement officer.



   (C)   No person, by impersonating a peace officer, private police
officer, investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation, or federal law enforcement officer, shall arrest or detain any
person, search any person, or search the property of any person.



   (D)   No person, with purpose to commit or facilitate the commission
of an offense, shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer,
federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of the
municipality or the state, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal
Identification and Investigation.



   (E)   No person shall commit a felony while impersonating a peace
officer, private police officer, federal law enforcement officer, an officer,
agent or employee of the municipality or of the state, or investigator of the
Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation.



   (F)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B) of
this section that the impersonation of the peace officer, private police
officer, federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of
the municipality or of the state, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal
Identification and Investigation was for a lawful purpose.



   (G)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the purpose
of a violation of division (D) of this section is to commit or facilitate the
commission of a felony, a violation of division (D) is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. Whoever violates division (E) of this
section is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



(R.C. § 2921.51)



§ 136.16  MISUSE OF 9-1-1 SYSTEM.



   (A)   As used in this section, 9-1-1 SYSTEM means a system through
which individuals can request emergency service using the telephone number
9-1-1.



(R.C. § 128.01(A))



   (B)   No person shall knowingly use the telephone number of a 9-1-1
system established under R.C. Chapter 128 to report an emergency if the
person knows that no emergency exists.



   (C)   No person shall knowingly use a 9-1-1 system for a purpose
other than obtaining emergency service.



   (D)   No person shall disclose or use any information concerning
telephone numbers, addresses, or names obtained from the database that serves
the public safety answering point of a 9-1-1 system established under R.C.
Chapter 128, except for any of the following purposes or under any of the
following circumstances:



      (1)   For the purpose of the 9-1-1 system;



      (2)   For the purpose of responding to an emergency call to an
emergency service provider;



      (3)   In the circumstance of the inadvertent disclosure of
such information due solely to technology of the wireless telephone network
portion of the 9-1-1 system not allowing access to the database to be
restricted to 9-1-1 specific answering lines at a public safety answering
point;



      (4)   In the circumstance of access to a database being given
by a telephone company that is a wireless service provider to a public
utility or municipal utility in handling customer calls in times of public
emergency or service outages. The charge, terms, and conditions for the
disclosure or use of such information for the purpose of such access to a
database shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the Steering Committee;



      (5)   In the circumstance of access to a database given by a
telephone company that is a wireline service provider to a state and local
government in warning of a public emergency, as determined by the Steering
Committee. The charge, terms and conditions for the disclosure or use of that
information for the purpose of access to a database is subject to the
jurisdiction of the Steering Committee.



(R.C. § 128.32(E) - (G))



   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree on a first offense and a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.



(R.C. § 128.99(A), (B))



§ 136.17  ASSAULTING POLICE DOG OR  HORSE, OR ASSISTANCE DOG.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical
harm to a police dog or horse in either of the following circumstances:



      (1)   The police dog or horse is assisting a law enforcement
officer in the performance of the officer's official duties at the time the
physical harm is caused or attempted.



      (2)   The police dog or horse is not assisting a law
enforcement officer in the performance of the officer's official duties at
the time the physical harm is caused or attempted, but the offender has
actual knowledge that the dog or horse is a police dog or horse.



   (B)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:



      (1)   Taunt, torment, or strike a police dog or horse;



      (2)   Throw an object or substance at a police dog or horse;



      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct a police dog or horse, or
interfere with or obstruct a law enforcement officer who is being assisted by
a police dog or horse, in a manner that does any of the following:



         (a)   Inhibits or restricts the law enforcement
officer's control of the police dog or horse;



         (b)   Deprives the law enforcement officer of control of
the police dog or horse;



         (c)   Releases the police dog or horse from its area of
control;



         (d)   Enters the area of control of the police dog or
horse without the consent of the law enforcement officer, including placing
food or any other object or substance into that area;



         (e)   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the police
dog or horse to assist a law enforcement officer;



      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious
physical injury or death to a police dog or horse;



      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a
dog, fail to reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing,
approaching in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or
attempting to bite or otherwise endanger a police dog or horse that at the
time of the conduct is assisting a law enforcement officer in the performance
of the officer's duties or that the person knows is a police dog or horse.



   (C)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical
harm to an assistance dog in either of the following circumstances:



      (1)   The dog is assisting or serving a blind, deaf or hearing
impaired, or mobility impaired person at the time the physical harm is caused
or attempted.



      (2)   The dog is not assisting or serving a blind, deaf or
hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person at the time the physical harm
is caused or attempted, but the offender has actual knowledge that the dog is
an assistance dog.



   (D)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:



      (1)   Taunt, torment, or strike an assistance dog;



      (2)   Throw an object or substance at an assistance dog;



      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct an assistance dog, or
interfere with or obstruct a blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility
impaired person who is being assisted or served by an assistance dog, in a
manner that does any of the following:



         (a)   Inhibits or restricts the assisted or served
person's control of the dog;



         (b)   Deprives the assisted or served person of control
of the dog;



         (c)   Releases the dog from its area of control;



         (d)   Enters the area of control of the dog without the
consent of the assisted or served person, including placing food or any other
object or substance into that area;



         (e)   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the dog to
assist the assisted or served person;



      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious
physical injury or death to an assistance dog;



      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a
dog, fail to reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing,
approaching in a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or
attempting to bite or otherwise endanger an assistance dog that at the time
of the conduct is assisting or serving a blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or
mobility impaired person or that the person knows is an assistance dog.



   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is
guilty of assaulting a police dog or horse. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, assaulting a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the
second degree. If the violation results in physical harm to the police dog or
horse other than death or serious physical harm, assaulting a police dog or
horse is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in
serious physical harm to the police dog or horse or results in its death,
assaulting a police dog or horse is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty
of harassing a police dog or horse. Except as otherwise provided this
division, harassing a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the second
degree. If the violation results in physical harm to the police dog or horse
but does not result in its death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing
a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation
results in serous physical harm to the police dog or horse or results in its
death, harassing a police dog or horse is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



      (3)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty
of assaulting an assistance dog. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
If the violation results in physical harm to the assistance dog other than
death or serious physical harm, assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. If the violation results in serious physical harm to the
assistance dog or results in its death, assaulting an assistance dog is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (4)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty
of harassing an assistance dog. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, harassing an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
If the violation results in physical harm to the assistance dog but does not
result in the death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing an
assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results
in serious physical harm to the assistance dog or results in its death,
harassing an assistance dog is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.



      (5)   In addition to any other sanctions or penalty imposed
for the offense under this section, R.C. Chapter 2929 or any other provision
of the Revised Code or this code, whoever violates division (A), (B), (C), or
(D) of this section is responsible for the payment of all of the following:



         (a)   Any veterinary bill or bill for medication
incurred as a result of the violation by the Police Department regarding a
violation of division (A) or (B) of this section or by the blind, deaf or
hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person assisted or served by the
assistance dog regarding a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section;



         (b)   The cost of any damaged equipment that results
from the violation;



         (c)   If the violation did not result in the death of
the police dog or horse or the assistance dog that was the subject of the
violation and if, as a result of that dog or horse being the subject of the
violation, the dog or horse needs further training or retraining to be able
to continue in the capacity of a police dog or horse or an assistance dog,
the cost of any further training or retraining of that dog or horse by a law
enforcement officer or by the blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility
impaired person assisted or served by the assistance dog;



         (d)   If the violation resulted in the death of the
assistance dog that was the subject of the violation or resulted in serious
physical harm to the police dog or horse or the assistance dog that was the
subject of the violation to the extent that the dog or horse needs to be
replaced on either a temporary or a permanent basis, the cost of replacing
that dog or horse and of any further training of a new police dog or horse or
a new assistance dog by a law enforcement officer or by the blind, deaf or
hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person assisted or served by the
assistance dog, which replacement or training is required because of the
death of or the serious physical harm to the dog or horse that was the
subject of the violation.



   (F)   This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian whose
conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4741.



   (G)   This section only applies to an offender who knows or should
know at the time of the violation that the police dog or horse or assistance
dog that is the subject of a violation under this section is a police dog or
horse or an assistance dog.



   (H)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.



      ASSISTANCE DOG, BLIND and MOBILITY IMPAIRED PERSON. Have the same
meaning as in R.C. § 955.011.



      PHYSICAL HARM. Any injury, illness, or other psychological
impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.



      POLICE DOG OR HORSE. A dog or horse that has been trained and may
be used to assist law enforcement officers in the performance of their
official duties.



      SERIOUS PHYSICAL HARM. Any of the following:



         (a)   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk
of death.



         (b)   Any physical harm that causes permanent maiming or
that involves some temporary, substantial maiming.



         (c)   Any physical harm that causes acute pain of a
duration that results in substantial suffering.



(R.C. § 2921.321)



§ 136.18  FAILURE TO DISCLOSE PERSONAL INFORMATION.



   (A)   No person who is in a public place shall refuse to disclose
the person's name, address, or date of birth, when requested by a law
enforcement officer who reasonably suspects either of the following:



      (1)   The person is committing, has committed, or is about to
commit a criminal offense.



      (2)   The person witnessed any of the following:



         (a)   An offense of violence that would constitute a
felony under the laws of this state;



         (b)   A felony offense that causes or results in, or
creates a substantial risk of, serious physical harm to another person or
property;



         (c)   Any attempt or conspiracy to commit, or complicity
in committing, any offenses identified in division (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) of
this section;



         (d)   Any conduct reasonably indicating that any offense
identified in division (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) of this section or any attempt,
conspiracy, or complicity described in division (A)(2)(c) of this section has
been, is being, or is about to be committed.



   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
failure to disclose one's personal information, a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.



   (C)   Nothing in division (A) of this section requires a person to
answer any questions beyond that person's name, address, or date of birth.
Nothing in division (A) of this section authorizes a law enforcement officer
to arrest a person for not providing any information beyond the person's
name, address, or date of birth or for refusing to describe the offense
observed.



   (D)   It is not a violation of division (A) of this section to
refuse to answer a question that would reveal a person's age or date of birth
if age is an element of the crime that the person is suspected of committing.



(R.C. § 2921.29)



   (E)   No person entering an airport, train station, port, or other
similar critical transportation infrastructure site shall refuse to show
identification when requested by a law enforcement officer when there is a
threat to security and the law enforcement officer is requiring
identification of all persons entering the site.



   (F)   A law enforcement officer may prevent any person who refuses
to show identification when asked under the circumstances described in
division (E) of this section from entering the critical transportation
infrastructure site.



(R.C. § 2909.31) 



§ 136.19  DISCLOSURE OF CONFIDENTIAL PEACE OFFICER INFORMATION.



   (A)   No officer or employee of a law enforcement agency or court,
or of the clerk's office of any court, shall disclose during the pendency of
any criminal case the home address of any peace officer, parole officer,
prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional employee,
or youth services employee who is a witness or arresting officer in the case.



   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not prohibit a peace
officer, parole officer, prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting
attorney, correctional employee, or youth services employee from disclosing
the peace officer's, parole officer's, prosecuting attorney's, assistant
prosecuting attorney's, correctional employee's, or youth services employee's
own home address, and does not apply to any person who discloses the home
address of a peace officer, parole officer, prosecuting attorney, assistant
prosecuting attorney, correctional employee, or youth services employee
pursuant to a court-ordered disclosure under division (C) of this section.



   (C)   The court in which any criminal case is pending may order the
disclosure of the home address of any peace officer, parole officer,
prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional employee,
or youth services employee who is a witness or arresting officer in the case,
if the court determines after a written request for the disclosure that good
cause exists for disclosing the home address of the peace officer, parole
officer, prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional
employee, or youth services employee.



   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
disclosure of confidential information, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 2921.24)



   (E)   No judge of a court of record, or Mayor presiding over a
Mayor's Court, shall order a peace officer, parole officer, prosecuting
attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, correctional employee, or youth
services employee who is a witness in a criminal case, to disclose his or her
the peace officer's, parole officer's, prosecuting attorney's, assistant
prosecuting attorney's, correctional employee's, or youth services employee's
home address during the peace officer's, parole officer's, prosecuting
attorney's, assistant prosecuting attorney's, correctional employee's, or
youth services employee's examination in the case unless the judge or Mayor
determines that the defendant has a right to the disclosure.



   (F)   As used in this section:



      PEACE OFFICER has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2935.01.



      CORRECTIONAL EMPLOYEE and YOUTH SERVICES EMPLOYEE have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 149.43.



(R.C. § 2921.25)



CHAPTER 137: WEAPONS CONTROL



Section



   137.01   Definitions



   137.02   Carrying concealed weapons



   137.03   Using weapons while intoxicated



   137.04   Improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle



   137.05   Discharging firearms



   137.06   Failure to secure dangerous ordnance



   137.07   Unlawful transactions in weapons



   137.08   Underage purchase of firearms or handguns



   137.09   Concealed handgun licenses: possession of a revoked or
suspended license; additional restrictions; posting of signs prohibiting
possession



   137.10   Defaced firearms



Cross-reference:



   Using weapons to endanger or damage aircraft, airport operations, see
§ 131.23



§ 137.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall
have the following meanings ascribed to them respectively.



   ACTIVE DUTY.  Has the same meaning as defined in 10 U.S.C. § 101.



   ALIEN REGISTRATION NUMBER. The number issued by the United States
Citizenship and Immigration Services Agency that is located on the alien’s
permanent resident card and may also be commonly referred to as the “USCIS
number” or the “alien number”.



   AUTOMATIC FIREARM. Any firearm designed or specially adapted to fire a
succession of cartridges with a single function of the trigger.



   BALLISTIC KNIFE.  A knife with a detachable blade that is propelled by
a spring-operated mechanism.



   CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSE or LICENSE TO CARRY A CONCEALED HANDGUN.



      (1)   Means, subject to division (2) of this definition, a
license or temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun issued
under R.C. § 2923.125 or R.C. § 2923.1213 or a license to carry a concealed
handgun issued by another state with which the Attorney General has entered
into a reciprocity agreement under R.C. § 109.69.



      (2)   A reference in any provision of this Code to a concealed
handgun license issued under R.C. § 2923.125 or a license to carry a
concealed handgun issued under R.C. § 2923.125 means only a license of the
type that is specified in that section. A reference in any provision of this
Code to a concealed handgun license issued under R.C. § 2923.1213, a license
to carry a concealed handgun issued under R.C. § 2923.1213, or a license to
carry a concealed handgun on a temporary emergency basis means only a license
of the type that is specified in R.C. § 2923.1213. A reference in any
provision of this Code to a concealed handgun license issued by another state
or a license to carry a concealed handgun issued by another state means only
a license issued by another state with which the Attorney General has entered
into a reciprocity agreement under R.C. § 109.69.



   DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.



      (1)   Any of the following, except as provided in division (2)
of this definition:



         (a)   Any automatic or sawed-off firearm, zip-gun, or
ballistic knife;



         (b)   Any explosive device or incendiary device;



         (c)   Nitroglycerin, nitrocellulose, nitro-starch, PETN,
cyclonite, TNT, picric acid, and other high explosives; amatol, tritonal,
tetrytol, pentolite, pecretol, cyclotol, and other high explosive
compositions; plastic explosives; dynamite, blasting gelatin, gelatin
dynamite, sensitized ammonium nitrate, liquid-oxygen blasting explosives,
blasting powder, and other blasting agents; and any other explosive substance
having sufficient brisance or power to be particularly suitable for use as a
military explosive, or for use in mining, quarrying, excavating, or
demolitions;



         (d)   Any firearm, rocket launcher, mortar, artillery
piece, grenade, mine, bomb, torpedo, or similar weapon, designed and
manufactured for military purposes, and the ammunition therefor.



         (e)   Any firearm muffler or suppressor;



         (f)   Any combination of parts that is intended by the
owner for use in converting any firearm or other device into a dangerous
ordnance.



      (2)   DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.  Does not include any of the
following:



         (a)   Any firearm, including a military weapon and the
ammunition for that weapon, and regardless of its actual age, that employs a
percussion cap or other obsolete ignition system, or that is designed and
safe for use only with black powder;



         (b)   Any pistol, rifle, or shotgun, designed or
suitable for sporting purposes, including a military weapon as issued or as
modified, and the ammunition for that weapon, unless the firearm is an
automatic or sawed-off firearm;



         (c)   Any cannon or other artillery piece that,
regardless of its actual age, is of a type in accepted use prior to 1887, has
no mechanical, hydraulic, pneumatic, or other system for absorbing recoil and
returning the tube into battery without displacing the carriage, and is
designed and safe for use only with black powder;



         (d)   Black powder, priming quills, and percussion caps
possessed and lawfully used to fire a cannon of a type defined in division
(2)(c) of this definition during displays, celebrations, organized matches or
shoots, and target practice, and smokeless and black powder, primers, and
percussion caps possessed and lawfully used as a propellant or ignition
device in small-arms or small-arms ammunition;



         (e)   Dangerous ordnance that is inoperable or inert and
cannot readily be rendered operable or activated, and that is kept as a
trophy, souvenir, curio, or museum piece;



         (f)   Any device that is expressly excepted from the
definition of a destructive device pursuant to the "Gun Control Act of 1968,"
82 Stat. 1213, 18 U.S.C. 921 (A) (4), as amended and regulations issued under
that act.



   DEADLY WEAPON.  Any instrument, device, or thing capable of inflicting
death, and designed or specially adapted for use as a weapon, or possessed,
carried, or used as a weapon.



   EXPLOSIVE.  Any chemical compound, mixture, or device, the primary or
common purpose of which is to function by explosion. The term includes all
materials that have been classified as division 1.1, division 1.2, division
1.3, or division 1.4 explosives by the United States Department of
Transportation in its regulations and includes but is not limited to
dynamite, black powder, pellet powders, initiating explosives, blasting caps,
electric blasting caps, safety fuses, fuse igniters, squibs, cordeau detonant
fuses, instantaneous fuses, and igniter cords and igniters. The term does not
include "fireworks," as defined in R.C. § 3743.01, or any substance or
material otherwise meeting the definition of explosive set forth in this
section that is manufactured, sold, possessed, transported, stored, or used
in any activity described in R.C. § 3743.80, provided the activity is
conducted in accordance with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations,
including but not limited to the provisions of R.C. § 3743.80 and the rules
of the Fire Marshal adopted pursuant to R.C. § 3737.82.



   EXPLOSIVE DEVICE.  Any device designed or specially adapted to cause
physical harm to persons or property by means of an explosion, and consisting
of an explosive substance or agency and a means to detonate it.  EXPLOSIVE
DEVICE includes without limitation any bomb, any explosive demolition device,
any blasting cap, or detonator containing an explosive charge, and any
pressure vessel which has been knowingly tampered with or arranged so as to
explode.



   FIREARM.



      (1)   Any deadly weapon capable of expelling or propelling one
or more projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible
propellant.  FIREARM includes an unloaded firearm, and any firearm that is
inoperable but that can readily be rendered operable.



      (2)   When determining whether a firearm is capable of
expelling or propelling one or more projectiles by the action of an explosive
or combustible propellant, the trier of fact may rely upon circumstantial
evidence, including, but not limited to, the representations and actions of
the individual exercising control over the firearm.



   HANDGUN. Means any of the following:



      (1)   Any firearm that has a short stock and is designed to be
held and fired by the use of a single hand;



      (2)   Any combination of parts from which a firearm of a type
described in division (1) of this definition can be assembled.



   INCENDIARY DEVICE.  Any firebomb, and any device designed or specially
adapted to cause physical harm to persons or property by means of fire, and
consisting of an incendiary substance or agency and a means to ignite it.



   MISDEMEANOR PUNISHABLE BY IMPRISONMENT FOR A TERM EXCEEDING ONE YEAR.
The phrase does not include any of the following:



      (1)   Any federal or state offense pertaining to antitrust
violations, unfair trade practices, restraints of trade, or other similar
offenses relating to the regulation of business practices;



      (2)   Any misdemeanor offense punishable by a term of
imprisonment of two years or less.



   SAWED-OFF FIREARM.  A shotgun with a barrel less than 18 inches long,
or a rifle with a barrel less than 16 inches long, or a shotgun or rifle less
than 26 inches long overall.



   SEMI-AUTOMATIC FIREARM.  Any firearm designed or specially adapted to
fire a single cartridge and automatically chamber a succeeding cartridge
ready to fire, with a single function of the trigger.



   VALID CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSE or VALID LICENSE TO CARRY A CONCEALED
HANDGUN. A concealed handgun license that is currently valid, that is not
under a suspension under R.C. § 2923.128(A)(1), under R.C. § 2923.1213, or
under a suspension provision of the state other than this state in which the
license was issued, and that has not been revoked under R.C. §
2923.128(B)(1), under R.C. § 2923.1213, or under a revocation provision of
the state other than this state in which the license was issued.



   ZIP-GUN.  Any of the following:



      (1)   Any firearm of crude and extemporized manufacture;



      (2)   Any device, including without limitation a starter's
pistol, not designed as a firearm, but that is specially adapted for use as a
firearm;



      (3)   Any industrial tool, signaling device, or safety device,
not designed as a firearm, but that as designed is capable of use as such,
when possessed, carried, or used as a firearm.



(R.C. § 2923.11)



§ 137.02  CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly carry or have, concealed on the
person's person or concealed ready at hand, any of the following:



      (1)   A deadly weapon other than a handgun;



      (2)   A handgun other than a dangerous ordnance;



      (3)   A dangerous ordnance.



   (B)   No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license
shall do any of the following:



      (1)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose,
and is carrying a concealed handgun, fail to promptly inform any law
enforcement officer who approaches the person after the person has been
stopped that the person has been issued a concealed handgun license and that
the person then is carrying a concealed handgun;



      (2)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose
and is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to keep the person’s
hands in plain sight at any time after any law enforcement officer begins
approaching the person while stopped and before the law enforcement officer
leaves, unless the failure is pursuant to and in accordance with directions
given by a law enforcement officer;



      (3)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose,
if the person is carrying a concealed handgun, and if the person is
approached by any law enforcement officer while stopped, knowingly remove or
attempt to remove the loaded handgun from the holster, pocket, or other place
in which the person is carrying it, knowingly grasp or hold the loaded
handgun, or knowingly have contact with the loaded handgun by touching it
with the person’s hands or fingers at any time after the law enforcement
officer begins approaching and before the law enforcement officer leaves,
unless the person removes, attempts to remove, grasps, holds, or has contact
with the loaded handgun pursuant to and in accordance with directions given
by the law enforcement officer;



      (4)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose
and is carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly disregard or fail to comply
with any lawful order of any law enforcement officer given while the person
is stopped, including, but not limited to, a specific order to the person to
keep the person’s hands in plain sight.



   (C)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:



         (a)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any
other state or the United States, or to a law enforcement officer, who is
authorized to carry concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized
to carry handguns and is acting within the scope of the officer’s,
agent’s, or employee’s duties;



         (b)   Any person who is employed in this state, who is
authorized to carry concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized
to carry handguns, and who is subject to and in compliance with the
requirements of R.C. § 109.801, unless the appointing authority of the
person has expressly specified that the exemption provided in this division
(C)(1)(b) does not apply to the person;



         (c)   A person’s transportation or storage of a
firearm, other than a firearm described in R.C. § 2923.11(G) to (M), in a
motor vehicle for any lawful purpose if the firearm is not on the actor’s
person;



         (d)   A person’s storage or possession of a firearm,
other than a firearm described in R.C. § 2923.11(G) to (M), in the actor’s
own home for any lawful purpose.



      (2)   Division (A)(2) of this section does not apply to any
person who, at the time of the alleged carrying or possession of a handgun,
either is carrying a valid concealed handgun license or is an active duty
member of the armed forces of the United States and is carrying a valid
military identification card and documentation of successful completion of
firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements described
in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), unless the person knowingly is in a place
described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).



   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(1)
of this section of carrying or having control of a weapon other than a
handgun and other than a dangerous ordnance, that the actor was not otherwise
prohibited by law from having the weapon, and that any of the following
applies:



      (1)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the
actor for defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in or was going to
or from the  actor's lawful business or occupation, which business or
occupation was of a character or was necessarily carried on in a manner or at
a time or place as to render the actor particularly susceptible to criminal
attack, such as would justify a prudent person in going armed.



      (2)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the
actor for defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in a lawful
activity and had reasonable cause to fear a criminal attack upon the actor, a
member of the actor's family, or the actor's home, such as would justify a
prudent person in going armed.



      (3)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the
actor for any lawful purpose and while in the actor's own home.



   (E)   No person who is charged with a violation of this section
shall be required to obtain a concealed handgun license as a condition for
the dismissal of the charge.



   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of carrying
concealed weapons. Except as otherwise provided in this division or divisions
(F)(2), (F)(6), and (F)(7) of this section, carrying concealed weapons in
violation of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. Except as otherwise provided in this division or divisions (F)(2),
(F)(6), and (F)(7) of this section, if the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation  of this section or any substantially equivalent
state law or municipal ordinance or of any offense of violence, if the weapon
involved is a firearm that is either loaded or for which the offender has
ammunition ready at hand, or if the weapon involved is dangerous ordnance,
carrying concealed weapons in violation of division (A) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. Except as otherwise
provided in divisions (F)(2), (F)(6), and (F)(7) of this section, if the
offense is committed aboard an aircraft, or with purpose to carry a concealed
weapon aboard an aircraft, regardless of the weapon involved, carrying
concealed weapons in violation of division (A) of this section is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)   Except as provided in division (F)(6) of this section,
if a person being arrested for a violation of division (A)(2) of this section
promptly produces a valid concealed handgun license, and if at the time of
the violation the person was not knowingly in a place described in R.C. §
2923.126(B), the officer shall not arrest the person for a violation of that
division. If the person is not able to promptly produce any concealed handgun
license and if the person is not in a place described in that section, the
officer may arrest the person for a violation of that division, and the
offender shall be punished as follows:



         (a)   The offender shall be guilty of a minor
misdemeanor if both of the following apply:



            1.   Within 10 days after the arrest, the offender
presents a concealed handgun license, which license was valid at the time of
the arrest to the law enforcement agency that employs the arresting officer.



            2.   At the time of the arrest, the offender was
not knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).



         (b)   The offender shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
shall be fined $500 if all of the following apply:



            1.   The offender previously had been issued a
concealed handgun license, and that license expired within the two years
immediately preceding the arrest.



            2.   Within 45 days after the arrest, the offender
presents a concealed handgun license to the law enforcement agency that
employed the arresting officer, and the offender waives in writing the
offender’s right to a speedy trial on the charge of the violation that is
provided in R.C. § 2945.71.



            3.   At the time of the commission of the offense,
the offender was not knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).



         (c)   If divisions (F)(2)(a) and (F)(2)(b) and (F)(6) of
this section do not apply, the offender shall be punished under division
(F)(1) or (F)(7) of this section.



      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, carrying
concealed weapons in violation of division (B)(1) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree, and, in addition to any other penalty or
sanction imposed for a violation of division (B)(1) of this section, the
offender’s concealed handgun license shall be suspended pursuant to R.C. §
2923.128(A)(2). If, at the time of the stop of the offender for a law
enforcement purpose that was the basis of the violation, any law enforcement
officer involved with the stop had actual knowledge that the offender has
been issued a concealed handgun license, carrying concealed weapons in
violation of division (B)(1) of this section is a minor misdemeanor, and the
offender’s concealed handgun license shall not be suspended pursuant to
R.C. § 2923.128(A)(2).



      (4)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division
(B)(2) or (B)(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
violation of division (B)(2) or (B)(4) of this section or any substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. In addition to any other penalty or sanction imposed
for a misdemeanor violation of division (B)(2) or (B)(4) of this section, the
offender’s concealed handgun license shall be suspended pursuant to R.C. §
2923.128(A)(2).



      (5)   Carrying concealed weapons in violation of division
(B)(3) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.



      (6)   If a person being arrested for a violation of division
(A)(2) of this section is an active duty m ember of the armed forces of the
United States and is carrying a valid military identification card and
documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets or
exceeds the training requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), and if
at the time of the violation the person was not knowingly in a place
described in R.C. 2923.126(B), the officer shall not arrest the person for a
violation of that division. If the person is not able to promptly produce a
valid military identification card and documentation of successful completion
of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1) and if the person is not in a place
described in R.C. § 2923.126(B), the officer shall issue a citation and the
offender shall be assessed a civil penalty of not more than $500. The
citation shall be automatically dismissed and the civil penalty shall not be
assessed if both of the following apply:



         (a)   Within ten days after the issuance of the
citation, the offender presents a valid military identification card and
documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets or
exceeds the training requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), which
were both valid at the time of the issuance of the citation to the law
enforcement agency that employs the citing officer.



         (b)   At the time of the citation, the offender was not
knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).



      (7)   If a person being arrested for a violation of division
(A)(2) of this section is knowingly in a place described in R.C. §
2923.126(B)(5) and is not authorized to carry a handgun or have a handgun
concealed on the person’s person or concealed ready at hand under that
division, the penalty shall be as follows:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if
the person produces a valid concealed handgun license within ten days after
the arrest and has not previously been convicted or pleaded guilty to a
violation of division (A)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent
state law or municipal ordinance, the person is guilty of a minor misdemeanor;



         (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if
the person has previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation
of division (A)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent state law
or municipal ordinance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree;



         (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if
the person has previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two
violations of division (A)(2) of this section or any substantially equivalent
state law or municipal ordinance, the person is guilty of a misdemeanor of
the third degree;



         (d)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if
the person has previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to three or
more violations of division (A)(2) of this section or any substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or convicted of or pleaded
guilty to any offense of violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that
is either loaded or for which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or
if the weapon involved is a dangerous ordnance, the person is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the second degree.



   (G)   If a law enforcement officer stops a person to question the
person regarding a possible violation of this section, for a traffic stop, or
for any other law enforcement purpose, if the person surrenders a firearm to
the officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the
officer, and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of
this section or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not
otherwise prohibited by law from possessing the  firearm, and the firearm is
not contraband, the officer shall return the firearm to the person at the
termination of the stop.  If a court orders a law enforcement officer to
return a firearm to a person pursuant to the requirement set forth in this
division, R.C. § 2923.163(B) applies.



(R.C. § 2923.12)



Statutory reference:



   Carrying concealed handguns, licensing through county sheriff, see R.C.
§§ 2923.124 et seq.



   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance on
school premises, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.122



   Conveyance, possession, or control of deadly weapon or dangerous
ordinance in a courthouse, felony offense, see R.C. § 2923.123



   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offense, see
R.C. § 2923.131



   Possession of firearm in liquor permit premises, felony offense, see
R.C. § 2923.121



§ 137.03  USING WEAPONS WHILE INTOXICATED.



   (A)   No person, while under the influence of alcohol or any drug of
abuse, shall carry or use any firearm or dangerous ordnance.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of using weapons while
intoxicated, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2923.15)



§ 137.04  IMPROPERLY HANDLING FIREARMS  IN A MOTOR VEHICLE.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly discharge a firearm while in or on a
motor vehicle.



   (B)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded firearm
in a motor vehicle in such a manner that the firearm is accessible to the
operator or any passenger without leaving the vehicle.



   (C)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a firearm in a
motor vehicle, unless the person may lawfully possess that firearm under
applicable law of this state or the United States, the firearm is unloaded,
and the firearm is carried in one of the following ways:



      (1)   In a closed package, box, or case.



      (2)   In a compartment that can be reached only by leaving the
vehicle.



      (3)   In plain sight and secured in a rack or holder made for
the purpose.



      (4)   If the firearm is at least 24 inches in overall length
as measured from the muzzle to the part of the stock furthest from the muzzle
and if the barrel is at least 18 inches in length, either in plain sight with
the action open or the weapon stripped, or, if the firearm is of a type on
which the action will not stay open or which cannot easily be stripped, in
plain sight.



   (D)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded handgun
in a motor vehicle if, at the time of that transportation or possession, any
of the following applies:



      (1)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of
abuse, or a combination of them.



      (2)   The person's whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath,
or urine contains a concentration of alcohol, a listed controlled substance,
or a listed metabolite of a controlled substance prohibited for persons
operating a vehicle, as specified in R.C. § 4511.19(A), regardless of
whether the person at the time of the transportation or possession as
described in this division is the operator of or a passenger in the motor
vehicle.



   (E)   No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license or
who is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training
requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), who is the driver or an
occupant of a motor vehicle that is stopped as a result of a traffic stop or
a stop for another law enforcement purpose or is the driver or an occupant of
a commercial motor vehicle that is stopped by an employee of the motor
carrier enforcement unit for the purposes defined in R.C. § 5503.34, and who
is transporting or has a loaded handgun in the motor vehicle or commercial
motor vehicle in any manner, shall do any of the following:



      (1)   Fail to promptly inform any law enforcement officer who
approaches the vehicle while stopped that the person has been issued a
concealed handgun license or is authorized to carry a concealed handgun as an
active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and that the
person then possesses or has a loaded handgun in the motor vehicle;



      (2)   Fail to promptly inform the employee of the unit who
approaches the vehicle while stopped that the person has been issued a
concealed handgun license or is authorized to carry a concealed handgun as an
active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and that the
person then possesses or has a loaded handgun in the commercial motor vehicle;



      (3)   Knowingly fail to remain in the motor vehicle while
stopped, or knowingly fail to keep the person’s hands in plain sight at any
time after any law enforcement officer begins approaching the person while
stopped and before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the failure is
pursuant to and in accordance with directions given by a law enforcement
officer;



      (4)   Knowingly have contact with the loaded handgun by
touching it with the person’s hands or fingers in the motor vehicle at any
time after the law enforcement officer begins approaching and before the law
enforcement officer leaves, unless the person has contact with the loaded
handgun pursuant to and in accordance with directions given by the law
enforcement officer.



      (5)   Knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any lawful
order of any law enforcement officer given while the motor vehicle is
stopped, including but not limited to a specific order to the person to keep
the person’s hands in plain sight.



   (F)   (1)   Divisions (A), (B), (C), and (E) of this section do
not apply to any of the following:



         (a)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any
other state or the United States, or a law enforcement officer, when
authorized to carry or have loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles
and acting within the scope of the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s
duties;



         (b)   Any person who is employed in this state, who is
authorized to carry or have loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles,
and who is subject to and in compliance with the requirements of R.C. §
109.801, unless the appointing authority of the person has expressly
specified that the exemption provided in this division (F)(1)(b) does not
apply to the person.



      (2)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to a person
if all of the following circumstances apply:



         (a)   The person discharges a firearm from a motor
vehicle at a coyote or groundhog, the discharge is not during the deer gun
hunting season as set by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife of the
Department of Natural Resources, and the discharge at the coyote or
groundhog, but for the operation of this section, is lawful.



         (b)   The motor vehicle from which the person discharges
the firearm is on real property that is located in an unincorporated area of
a township and that is either zoned for agriculture or is used for
agriculture.



         (c)   The person owns the real property described in
division (F)(2)(b) of this section, is the spouse or a child of another
person who owns that real property, is a tenant of another person who owns
that real property, or is the spouse or a child of a tenant of another person
who owns that real property.



         (d)   The person does not discharge the firearm in any
of the following manners:



            1.   While under the influence of alcohol, a drug
of abuse, or alcohol and a drug of abuse;



            2.   In the direction of a street, highway or
other public or private property used by the public for vehicular traffic or
parking;



            3.   At or into an occupied structure that is a
permanent or temporary habitation;



            4.   In the commission of any violation of law,
including but not limited to a felony that includes, as an essential element,
purposely or knowingly causing or attempting to cause the death of or
physical harm to another and that was committed by discharging a firearm from
a motor vehicle.



      (3)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to a person
if all of the following apply:



         (a)   The person possesses a valid all-purpose vehicle
permit issued under R.C. § 1533.103 by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife.



         (b)   The person discharges a firearm at a wild
quadruped or game bird as defined in R.C. § 1531.01 during the open hunting
season for the applicable wild quadruped or game bird.



         (c)   The person discharges a firearm from a stationary
all-purpose vehicle as defined in R.C. § 1531.01 from private or publicly
owned lands or from a motor vehicle that is parked on a road that is owned or
administered by the Division of Wildlife.



         (d)   The person does not discharge the firearm in any
of the following manners:



            1.   While under the influence of alcohol, a drug
of abuse, or alcohol and a drug of abuse;



            2.   In the direction of a street, a highway, or
other public or private property that is used by the public for vehicular
traffic or parking;



            3.   At or into an occupied structure that is a
permanent or temporary habitation;



            4.   In the commission of any violation of law,
including but not limited to a felony that includes, as an essential element,
purposely or knowingly causing or attempting to cause the death of or
physical harm to another and that was committed by discharging a firearm from
a motor vehicle.



      (4)   Divisions (B) and (C) of this section do not apply to a
person if all of the following circumstances apply:



         (a)   At the time of the alleged violation of either of
those divisions, the person is the operator of or a passenger in a motor
vehicle.



         (b)   The motor vehicle is on real property that is
located in an unincorporated area of a township and that is either zoned for
agriculture or is used for agriculture.



         (c)   The person owns the real property described in
division (F)(4)(b) of this section, is the spouse or a child of another
person who owns that real property, is a tenant of another person who owns
that real property, or is the spouse or a child of a tenant of another person
who owns that real property.



         (d)   The person, prior to arriving at the real property
described in division (F)(4)(b) of this section, did not transport or possess
a firearm in the motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by division (B) or (C)
of this section while the motor vehicle was being operated on a street,
highway or other public or private property used by the public for vehicular
traffic or parking.



      (5)   Divisions (B) and (C) of this section do not apply to a
person who transports or possesses a handgun in a motor vehicle if, at the
time of that transportation or possession, both of the following apply:



         (a)   The person transporting or possessing the handgun
is either carrying a valid concealed handgun license or is an active duty
member of the armed forces of the United States and is carrying a valid
military identification card and documentation of successful completion of
firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements described
in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).



         (b)   The person transporting or possessing the handgun
is not knowingly in a place described in R.C. § 2923.126(B).



      (6)   Divisions (B) and (C) of this section do not apply to a
person if all of the following apply:



         (a)   The person possesses a valid all-purpose vehicle
permit issued under R.C. § 1533.103 by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife.



         (b)   The person is on or in an all-purpose vehicle as
defined in R.C. § 1531.01 or a motor vehicle during the open hunting season
for a wild quadruped or game bird.



         (c)   The person is on or in an all-purpose vehicle as
defined in R.C. § 1531.01 on private or publicly owned lands or on or in a
motor vehicle that is parked on a road that is owned or administered by the
Division of Wildlife.



   (G)   (1)   The affirmative defenses authorized in R.C. §
2923.12(D)(1) and (D)(2) are affirmative defenses to a charge under division
(B) or (C) of this section that involves a firearm other than a handgun.



      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division
(B) or (C) of this section of improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle
that the actor transported or had the firearm in the motor vehicle for any
lawful purpose and while the motor vehicle was on the actor's own property,
provided that this affirmative defense is not available unless the person,
immediately prior to arriving at the actor's own property, did not transport
or possess the firearm in a motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by division
(B) or (C) of this section while the motor vehicle was being operated on a
street, highway, or other public or private property used by the public for
vehicular traffic.



   (H)   (1)   No person who is charged with a violation of division
(B), (C), or (D) of this section shall be required to obtain a concealed
handgun license as a condition for the dismissal of the charge.



      (2)   (a)   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of,
pleads guilty to, or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (E) of
this section as it existed prior to September 30, 2011 and if the conduct
that was the basis of the violation no longer would be a violation of
division (E) of this section on or after September 30, 2011, the person may
file an application under R.C. § 2953.37 requesting the expungement of the
record of conviction.



         (b)   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of,
pleads guilty to, or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (B) or (C)
of this section as the division existed prior to September 30, 2011 and if
the conduct that was the basis of the violation no longer would be a
violation of division (B) or (C) of this section on or after September 30,
2011 due to the application of division (F)(5) of this section as it exists
on and after September 30, 2011, the person may file an application under
R.C. § 2953.37 requesting the expungement of the record of conviction.



   (I)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of improperly handling
firearms in a motor vehicle. Violation of division (A) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. Violation of division
(C) of this section is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. A violation of
division (D) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law and, if the loaded handgun is concealed on the person’s person,
it is also a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, a violation of division (E)(1) or (E)(2)
of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree, and, in addition to any
other penalty or sanction imposed for the violation, the offender’s
concealed handgun license shall be suspended pursuant to R.C. §
2923.128(A)(2). If at the time of the stop of the offender for a traffic
stop, for another law enforcement purpose, or for a purpose defined in R.C.
§ 5503.34 that was the basis of the violation any law enforcement officer
involved with the stop or the employee of the motor carrier enforcement unit
who made the stop had actual knowledge of the offender’s status as a
licensee, a violation of division (E)(1) or (E)(2) of this section is a minor
misdemeanor, and the offender’s concealed handgun license shall not be
suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2923.128(A)(2). A violation of division (E)(4)
of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. A
violation of division (E)(3) or (E)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree or, if the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to a violation of division (E)(3) or (E)(5) of this section or
any substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law. In addition to any other penalty or
sanction imposed for a misdemeanor violation of division (E)(3) or (E)(5) of
this section, the offender’s concealed handgun license shall be suspended
pursuant to R.C. § 2923.128(A)(2). A violation of division (B) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



   (J)   If a law enforcement officer stops a motor vehicle for a
traffic stop or any other purpose, if any person in the motor vehicle
surrenders a firearm to the officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a
request or demand of the officer, and if the officer does not charge the
person with a violation of this section or arrest the person for any offense,
the person is not otherwise prohibited by law from possessing the firearm,
and the firearm is not contraband, the officer shall return the firearm to
the person at the termination of the stop.  If a court orders a law
enforcement officer to return a firearm to a person pursuant to the
requirement set forth in this division, R.C. § 2923.163(B) applies.



   (K)   As used in this section:



      AGRICULTURE has the same meaning as in R.C. § 519.01.



      COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4506.25(A).



      MOTOR CARRIER ENFORCEMENT UNIT means the Motor Carrier
Enforcement Unit in the Department of Public Safety, Division of State
Highway Patrol, that is created by R.C. § 5503.34.



      MOTOR VEHICLE, STREET and HIGHWAY have the same meaning as in
R.C. § 4511.01.



      OCCUPIED STRUCTURE has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2909.01.



      TENANT has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1531.01.



      UNLOADED.



         (a)   With respect to a firearm other than a firearm
described in division (d) of this definition, means that no ammunition is in
the firearm in question, no magazine or speed loader containing ammunition is
inserted into the firearm, and one of the following applies:



            1.   There is no ammunition in a magazine or speed
loader that is in the vehicle in question and that may be used with the
firearm in question.



            2.   Any magazine or speed loader that contains
ammunition and that may be used with the firearm in question is stored in a
compartment within the vehicle in question that cannot be accessed without
leaving the vehicle or is stored in a container that provides complete and
separate enclosure.



         (b)   For the purposes of division (a)2. of this
definition, a “container that provides complete and separate enclosure”
includes, but is not limited to, any of the following:



            1.   A package, box, or case with multiple
compartments, as long as the loaded magazine or speed loader and the firearm
in question either are in separate compartments within the package, box, or
case, or, if they are in the same compartment, the magazine or speed loader
is contained within a separate enclosure in that compartment that does not
contain the firearm and that closes using a snap, button, buckle, zipper,
hook and loop closing mechanism, or other fastener that must be opened to
access the contents or the firearm is contained within a separate enclosure
of that nature in that compartment that does not contain the magazine or
speed loader;



            2.   A pocket or other enclosure on the person of
the person in question that closes using a snap, button, buckle, zipper, hook
and loop closing mechanism, or other fastener that must be opened to access
the contents.



         (c)   For the purposes of divisions (a) and (b) of this
definition, ammunition held in stripper-clips or in en-bloc clips is not
considered ammunition that is loaded into a magazine or speed loader.



         (d)   “Unloaded” means, with respect to a firearm
employing a percussion cap, flintlock, or other obsolete ignition system,
when the weapon is uncapped or when the priming charge is removed from the
pan.



   (L)   Divisions (a) and (b) of the definition of “unloaded” in
division (K) of this section do not affect the authority of a person who is
carrying a valid concealed handgun license to have one or more magazines or
speed loaders containing ammunition anywhere in a vehicle, without being
transported as described in those divisions, as long as no ammunition is in a
firearm, other than a handgun, in the vehicle other than as permitted under
any other provision of this chapter. A person who is carrying a valid
concealed handgun license may have one or more magazines or speed loaders
containing ammunition anywhere in a vehicle without further restriction, as
long as no ammunition is in a firearm, other than a handgun, in the vehicle
other than as permitted under any provision of this chapter.



(R.C. § 2923.16)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Return of surrendered firearms by law enforcement, see R.C. § 2923.163



§ 137.05  DISCHARGING FIREARMS.



   (A)   The definitions set forth in R.C. § 2923.11 apply to this
section.



   (B)   No person shall discharge any firearm or ordnance of any kind
within the village.  This section shall not prohibit the firing of a
military salute or the firing of weapons by persons of the nation’s armed
forces acting under military authority, and shall not apply to law
enforcement officials in the proper enforcement of the law or authorized
training, or to any activity conducted under § 90.23 of this code.  This
section shall not prohibit the discharge of a firearm or ordnance on firing
or practice ranges approved by the Village Manager.



(Ord. 2014-01, passed 1-13-14)



Statutory reference:



   Discharge of firearm on or near prohibited  premises, see R.C. §
2923.162



§ 137.06  FAILURE TO SECURE DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.



   (A)   No person, in acquiring, possessing, carrying, or using any
dangerous ordnance, shall negligently fail to take proper precautions:



      (1)   To secure the dangerous ordnance against theft, or
against its acquisition or use by any unauthorized or incompetent person.



      (2)   To insure the safety of persons and property.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to a secure
dangerous ordnance, a misdemeanor of the second degree.



(R.C. § 2923.19)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 137.07  UNLAWFUL TRANSACTIONS IN WEAPONS.



   (A)   No person shall:



      (1)   Recklessly sell, lend, give or furnish any firearm to
any person prohibited by R.C. § 2923.13 or 2923.15, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, from acquiring or using any firearm, or
recklessly sell, lend, give or furnish any dangerous ordnance to any person
prohibited by R.C. § 2923.13, 2923.15 or 2923.17, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, from acquiring or using any dangerous
ordnance;



      (2)   Possess any firearm or dangerous ordnance with purpose
to dispose of it in violation of division (A)(1) of this section;



      (3)   Manufacture, possess for sale, sell, or furnish to any
person other than a law enforcement agency for authorized use in police work,
any brass knuckles, cestus, billy, blackjack, sandbag, switchblade knife,
springblade knife, gravity knife, or similar weapon;



      (4)   When transferring any dangerous ordnance to another,
negligently fail to require the transferee to exhibit such identification,
license, or permit showing him or her to be authorized to acquire dangerous
ordnance pursuant to R.C. § 2923.17, or negligently fail to take a complete
record of the transaction and forthwith forward a copy of the record to the
sheriff of the county or Safety Director or Police Chief of the municipality
where the transaction takes place;



      (5)   Knowingly fail to report to law enforcement authorities
forthwith the loss or theft of any firearm or dangerous ordnance in the
person's possession and under his or her control.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful
transactions in weapons.  A violation of division (A)(1) or (2) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  A
violation of division (A)(3) or (4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
second degree.  A violation of division (A)(5) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 2923.20)



Statutory reference:



   Felony violations, see R.C. § 2923.20(A)(1), (A)(2), and (B)



§ 137.08  UNDERAGE PURCHASE OF FIREARMS OR HANDGUNS.



   (A)   No person under 18 years of age shall purchase or attempt to
purchase a firearm.



   (B)   No person under 21 years of age shall purchase or attempt to
purchase a handgun; provided, that this division does not apply to the
purchase or attempted purchase of a handgun by a person 18 years of age or
older and under 21 years of age if either of the following applies:



      (1)   The person is a law enforcement officer and has received
firearms training approved by the Ohio Peace Officer Training Council or
equivalent firearms training.



      (2)   The person is an active or reserve member of the armed
services of the United States or the Ohio National Guard, or was honorably
discharged from military service in the active or reserve armed services of
the United States or the Ohio National Guard, and the person has received
firearms training from the armed services or the national guard or equivalent
firearms training.



   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
underage purchase of a firearm, a delinquent act that would be a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law if it could be committed by an
adult.  Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of underage
purchase of a handgun, a misdemeanor of the second degree.



(R.C. § 2923.211)



§ 137.09  CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSES:  POSSESSION OF A REVOKED OR
SUSPENDED LICENSE; ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS; POSTING OF SIGNS PROHIBITING
POSSESSION.



   (A)   Possession of a revoked or suspended concealed handgun license.



      (1)   No person, except in the performance of official duties,
shall possess a concealed handgun license that was issued and that has been
revoked or suspended.



      (2)   Whoever violates this division (A) is guilty of
possessing a revoked or suspended concealed handgun license, a misdemeanor of
the third degree.



(R.C. § 2923.1211(B), (C))



   (B)   Additional restrictions. Pursuant to R.C. § 2923.126:



      (1)   (a)   A concealed handgun license that is issued
under R.C. § 2923.125 shall expire five years after the date of issuance. A
licensee who has been issued a license under that section shall be granted a
grace period of 30 days after the licensee’s license expires during which
the licensee’s license remains valid. Except as provided in divisions
(B)(2) and (B)(3) of this section, a licensee who has been issued a concealed
handgun license under R.C. § 2923.125 or 2923.1213 may carry a concealed
handgun anywhere in this state if the licensee also carries a valid license
and valid identification when the licensee is in actual possession of a
concealed handgun. The licensee shall give notice of any change in the
licensee’s residence address to the sheriff who issued the license within
45 days after that change.



         (b)   If a licensee is the driver or an occupant of a
motor vehicle that is stopped as the result of a traffic stop or a stop for
another law enforcement purpose and if the licensee is transporting or has a
loaded handgun in the motor vehicle at that time, the licensee shall promptly
inform any law enforcement officer who approaches the vehicle while stopped
that the licensee has been issued a concealed handgun license and that the
licensee currently possesses or has a loaded handgun; the licensee shall not
knowingly disregard or fail to comply with lawful orders of a law enforcement
officer given while the motor vehicle is stopped, knowingly fail to remain in
the motor vehicle while stopped, or knowingly fail to keep the licensee’s
hands in plain sight after any law enforcement officer begins approaching the
licensee while stopped and before the officer leaves, unless directed
otherwise by a law enforcement officer; and the licensee shall not knowingly
have contact with the loaded handgun by touching it with the licensee’s
hands or fingers, in any manner in violation of R.C. § 2923.16(E), after any
law enforcement officer begins approaching the licensee while stopped and
before the officer leaves. Additionally, if a licensee is the driver or an
occupant of a commercial motor vehicle that is stopped by an employee of the
motor carrier enforcement unit for the purposes defined in R.C. § 5503.34
and if the licensee is transporting or has a loaded handgun in the commercial
motor vehicle at that time, the licensee shall promptly inform the employee
of the unit who approaches the vehicle while stopped that the licensee has
been issued a concealed handgun license and that the licensee currently
possesses or has a loaded handgun.



         (c)   If a licensee is stopped for a law enforcement
purpose and if the licensee is carrying a concealed handgun at the time the
officer approaches, the licensee shall promptly inform any law enforcement
officer who approaches the licensee while stopped that the licensee has been
issued a concealed handgun license and that the licensee currently is
carrying a concealed handgun; the licensee shall not knowingly disregard or
fail to comply with lawful orders of a law enforcement officer given while
the licensee is stopped or knowingly fail to keep the licensee’s hands in
plain sight after any law enforcement officer begins approaching the licensee
while stopped and before the officer leaves, unless directed otherwise by a
law enforcement officer; and the licensee shall not knowingly remove, attempt
to remove, grasp, or hold the loaded handgun or knowingly have contact with
the loaded handgun by touching it with the licensee’s hands or fingers, in
any manner in violation of R.C. § 2923.12(B), after any law enforcement
officer begins approaching the licensee while stopped and before the officer
leaves.



      (2)   A valid concealed handgun license does not authorize the
licensee to carry a concealed handgun in any manner prohibited under R.C. §
2923.12(B) or in any manner prohibited under R.C. § 2923.16. A valid license
does not authorize the licensee to carry a concealed handgun into any of the
following places:



         (a)   A police station, sheriff’s office, or state
highway patrol station, premises controlled by the bureau of criminal
identification and investigation; a state correctional institution, jail,
workhouse, or other detention facility; any area of an airport passenger
terminal that is beyond a passenger or property screening checkpoint or to
which access is restricted through security measures by the airport authority
or a public agency; or an institution that is maintained, operated, managed,
and governed pursuant to R.C. § 5119.14(A) or R.C. § 5123.03(A)(1);



         (b)   A school safety zone if the licensee's carrying
the concealed handgun is in violation of R.C. § 2923.122;



         (c)   A courthouse or another building or structure in
which a courtroom is located, in violation of R.C. § 2923.123;



         (d)   Any premises or open air arena for which a D
permit has been issued under R.C. Chapter 4303 if the licensee's carrying the
concealed handgun is in violation of R.C. § 2923.121;



         (e)   Any premises owned or leased by any public or
private college, university, or other institution of higher education, unless
the handgun is in a locked motor vehicle or the licensee is in the immediate
process of placing the handgun in a locked motor vehicle or unless the
licensee is carrying the concealed handgun pursuant to a written policy,
rule, or other authorization that is adopted by the institution’s board of
trustees or other governing body and that authorizes specific individuals or
classes of individuals to carry a concealed handgun on the premises;



         (f)   Any church, synagogue, mosque, or other place of
worship, unless the church, synagogue, mosque, or other place of worship
posts or permits otherwise;



         (g)   Any building that is a government facility of this
state or a political subdivision of this state and that is not a building
that is used primarily as a shelter, restroom, parking facility for motor
vehicles, or rest facility and is not a courthouse or other building or
structure in which a courtroom is located that is subject to division
(B)(2)(c) of this section, unless the governing body with authority over the
building has enacted a statute, ordinance, or policy that permits a licensee
to carry a concealed handgun into the building;



         (h)   A place in which federal law prohibits the
carrying of handguns.



      (3)   (a)   Nothing in this division (B) shall negate or
restrict a rule, policy, or practice of a private employer that is not a
private college, university, or other institution of higher education
concerning or prohibiting the presence of firearms on the private employer's
premises or property, including motor vehicles owned by the private employer.
Nothing in this division (B) shall require a private employer of that nature
to adopt a rule, policy, or practice concerning or prohibiting the presence
of firearms on the private employer's premises or property, including motor
vehicles owned by the private employer.



         (b)   1.   A private employer shall be immune from
liability in a civil action for any injury, death, or loss to person or
property that allegedly was caused by or related to a licensee bringing a
handgun onto the premises or property of the private employer, including
motor vehicles owned by the private employer, unless the private employer
acted with malicious purpose. A private employer is immune from liability in
a civil action for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that
allegedly was caused by or related to the private employer's decision to
permit a licensee to bring, or prohibit a licensee from bringing, a handgun
onto the premises or property of the private employer.



            2.   A political subdivision shall be immune from
liability in a civil action, to the extent and in the manner provided in R.C.
Chapter 2744, for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that
allegedly was caused by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto any
premises or property owned, leased, or otherwise under the control of the
political subdivision. As used in this division, POLITICAL SUBDIVISION has
the same meaning as in R.C. § 2744.01.



            3.    An institution of higher education shall be
immune from liability in a civil action for any injury, death, or loss to
person or property that allegedly was caused by or related to a licensee
bringing a handgun onto the premises of the institution, including motor
vehicles owned by the institution, unless the institution acted with
malicious purpose. An institution of higher education is immune from
liability in a civil action for any injury, death, or loss to person or
property that allegedly was caused by or related to the institution’s
decision to permit a licensee or class of licensees to bring a handgun onto
the premises of the institution.



         (c)   1.   a.   Except as provided in division
(B)(3)(c)2. of this section, the owner or person in control of private land
or premises, and a private person or entity leasing land or premises owned by
the state, the United States, or a political subdivision of the state or the
United States, may post a sign in a conspicuous location on that land or on
those premises prohibiting persons from carrying firearms or concealed
firearms on or onto that land or those premises. Except as otherwise provided
in this division, a person who knowingly violates a posted prohibition of
that nature is guilty of criminal trespass in violation of R.C. §
2911.21(A)(4) and is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If a
person knowingly violates a posted prohibition of that nature and the posted
land or premises primarily was a parking lot or other parking facility, the
person is not guilty of criminal trespass under R.C. § 2911.21 or under any
other criminal law of this state or criminal law, ordinance, or resolution of
a political subdivision of this state, and instead is subject only to a civil
cause of action for trespass based on the violation.



               b.   If a person knowingly violates a posted
prohibition of the nature described in this division and the posted land or
premises is a child day-care center, type A family day-care home, or type B
family day-care home, unless the person is a licensee who resides in a type A
family day-care home or type B family day-care home, the person is guilty of
aggravated trespass in violation of R.C. § 2911.211. Except as otherwise
provided in this division, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the person previously has been convicted of a violation of
this division or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, or of any offense of violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm
that is either loaded or for which the offender has ammunition ready at hand,
or if the weapon involved is dangerous ordnance, the offender is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



            2.   A landlord may not prohibit or restrict a
tenant who is a licensee and who on or after September 9, 2008 enters into a
rental agreement with the landlord for the use of residential premises, and
the tenant’s guest while the tenant is present, from lawfully carrying or
possessing a handgun on those residential premises.



            3.   As used in division (B)(3)(c) of this section:



               LANDLORD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5321.01.



               RENTAL AGREEMENT. Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 5321.01.



               RESIDENTIAL PREMISES. Has the same meaning as
in R.C. § 5321.01, except the term does not include a dwelling unit that is
owned or operated by a college or university.



               TENANT. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5321.01.



      (4)   A person who holds a valid concealed handgun license
issued by another state that is recognized by the Attorney General pursuant
to a reciprocity agreement entered into pursuant to R.C. § 109.69 or a
person who holds a valid concealed handgun license under the circumstances
described in R.C. § 109.69(B) has the same right to carry a concealed
handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license
under R.C. § 2923.125 and is subject to the same restrictions that apply to
a person who carries a license issued under that section.



      (5)   (a)   A peace officer has the same right to carry a
concealed handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed
handgun license under R.C. § 2923.125. For purposes of reciprocity with
other states, a peace officer shall be considered to be a licensee in this
state.



         (b)   An active duty member of the armed forces of the
United States who is carrying a valid military identification card and
documentation of successful completion of firearms training that meets or
exceeds the training requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1) has the
same right to carry a concealed handgun in this state as a person who was
issued a concealed handgun license under R.C. § 2923.125 and is subject to
the same restrictions as specified in this division (B).



         (c)   A tactical medical professional who is qualified
to carry firearms while on duty under R.C. § 109.771 has the same right to
carry a concealed handgun in this state as a person who was issued a
concealed handgun license under R.C. § 2923.125.



      (6)   (a)   A qualified retired peace officer who possesses
a retired peace officer identification card issued pursuant to division
(B)(6)(b) of this section and a valid firearms requalification certification
issued pursuant to division (B)(6)(c) of this section has the same right to
carry a concealed handgun in this state as a person who was issued a
concealed handgun license under R.C. § 2923.125 and is subject to the same
restrictions that apply to a person who carries a license issued under that
section. For purposes of reciprocity with other states, a qualified retired
peace officer who possesses a retired peace officer identification card
issued pursuant to division (B)(6)(b) of this section and a valid firearms
requalification certification issued pursuant to division (B)(6)(c) of this
section shall be considered to be a licensee in this state.



         (b)   1.   Each public agency of this state or of a
political subdivision of this state that is served by one or more peace
officers shall issue a retired peace officer identification card to any
person who retired from service as a peace officer with that agency, if the
issuance is in accordance with the agency’s policies and procedures and if
the person, with respect to the person’s service with that agency,
satisfies all of the following:



               a.   The person retired in good standing
from service as a peace officer with the public agency, and the retirement
was not for reasons of mental instability.



               b.   Before retiring from service as a peace
officer with that agency, the person was authorized to engage in or supervise
the prevention, detection, investigation, or prosecution of, or the
incarceration of any person for, any violation of law and the person had
statutory powers of arrest.



               c.   At the time of the person’s
retirement as a peace officer with that agency, the person was trained and
qualified to carry firearms in the performance of the peace officer’s
duties.



               d.   Before retiring from service as a peace
officer with that agency, the person was regularly employed as a peace
officer for an aggregate of 15 years or more, or, in the alternative, the
person retired from service as a peace officer with that agency, after
completing any applicable probationary period of that service, due to a
service-connected disability, as determined by the agency.



            2.   A retired peace officer identification card
issued to a person under division (B)(6)(b)1. of this section shall identify
the person by name, contain a photograph of the person, identify the public
agency of this state or of the political subdivision of this state from which
the person retired as a peace officer and that is issuing the identification
card, and specify that the person retired in good standing from service as a
peace officer with the issuing public agency and satisfies the criteria set
forth in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(B)1.d. of this section. In
addition to the required content specified in this division, a retired peace
officer identification card issued to a person under division (B)(6)(b)1. of
this section may include the firearms requalification certification described
in division (B)(6)(c) of this section, and if the identification card
includes that certification, the identification card shall serve as the
firearms requalification certification for the retired peace officer. If the
issuing public agency issues credentials to active law enforcement officers
who serve the agency, the agency may comply with division (B)(6)(b)1. of this
section by issuing the same credentials to persons who retired from service
as a peace officer with the agency and who satisfy the criteria set forth in
divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(b)1.d. of this section, provided that the
credentials so issued to retired peace officers are stamped with the word
“RETIRED”.



            3.   A public agency of this state or of a
political subdivision of this state may charge persons who retired from
service as a peace officer with the agency a reasonable fee for issuing to
the person a retired peace officer identification card pursuant to division
(B)(6)(b)1. of this section.



         (c)   1.   If a person retired from service as a
peace officer with a public agency of this state or of a political
subdivision of this state and the person satisfies the criteria set forth in
divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(b)1.d. of this section, the public agency
may provide the retired peace officer with the opportunity to attend a
firearms requalification program that is approved for purposes of firearms
requalification required under R.C. § 109.801. The retired peace officer may
be required to pay the cost of the course.



            2.   If a retired peace officer who satisfies the
criteria set forth in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(b)1.d. of this
section attends a firearms requalification program that is approved for
purposes of firearms requalification required under R.C. § 109.801, the
retired peace officer’s successful completion of the firearms
requalification program requalifies the retired peace officer for purposes of
division (B)(6) of this section for five years from the date on which the
program was successfully completed, and the requalification is valid during
that five-year period. If a retired peace officer who satisfies the criteria
set forth in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(b)1.d. of this section
satisfactorily completes such a firearms requalification program, the retired
peace officer shall be issued a firearms requalification certification that
identifies the retired peace officer by name, identifies the entity that
taught the program, specifies that the retired peace officer successfully
completed the program, specifies the date on which the course was
successfully completed, and specifies that the requalification is valid for
five years from that date of successful completion. The firearms
requalification certification for a retired peace officer may be included in
the retired peace officer identification card issued to the retired peace
officer under division (B)(6)(b) of this section.



            3.   A retired peace officer who attends a
firearms requalification program that is approved for purposes of firearms
requalification required under R.C. § 109.801 may be required to pay the
cost of the program.



      (7)   As used in division (B) of this section:



         GOVERNING BODY.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 154.01.



         GOVERNMENT FACILITY OF THIS STATE OR A POLITICAL
SUBDIVISION OF THIS STATE. Means any of the following:



            1.   A building or part of a building that is
owned or leased by the government of this state or a political subdivision of
this state and where employees of the government of this state or the
political subdivision regularly are present for the purpose of performing
their official duties as employees of the state or political subdivision;



            2.   The office of a deputy registrar serving
pursuant to R.C. Chapter 4503 that is used to perform deputy registrar
functions.



         QUALIFIED RETIRED PEACE OFFICER. Means a person who
satisfies all of the following:



            1.   The person satisfies the criteria set forth
in divisions (B)(6)(b)1.a. to (B)(6)(b)1.d. of this section.



            2.   The person is not under the influence of
alcohol or another intoxicating or hallucinatory drug or substance.



            3.   The person is not prohibited by federal law
from receiving firearms.



         RETIRED PEACE OFFICER IDENTIFICATION CARD. Means an
identification card that is issued pursuant to division (B)(6)(b) of this
section to a person who is a retired peace officer.



         TACTICAL MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL.  Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 109.71.



(R.C. § 2923.126)



   (C)   Posting of signs prohibiting possession. Pursuant to R.C. §
2923.1212:



      (1)   The following persons, boards, and entities, or
designees, shall post in the following locations a sign that contains a
statement in substantially the following form: “Unless otherwise authorized
by law, pursuant to the Ohio Revised Code, no person shall knowingly possess,
have under the person's control, convey, or attempt to convey a deadly weapon
or dangerous ordnance onto these premises.”



         (a)   The Director of Public Safety or the person or
board charged with the erection, maintenance, or repair of police stations,
municipal jails, and the municipal courthouse and courtrooms in a conspicuous
location at all police stations, municipal jails, and municipal courthouses
and courtrooms;



         (b)   The Sheriff or Sheriff's designee who has charge
of the Sheriff's office in a conspicuous location in that office;



         (c)   The Superintendent of the State Highway Patrol or
the Superintendent's designee in a conspicuous location at all state highway
patrol stations;



         (d)   Each sheriff, chief of police, or person in charge
of every county, multi- county, municipal, municipal-county, or
multi-county/municipal jail or workhouse, community-based correctional
facility, halfway house, alternative residential facility, or other local or
state correctional institution or detention facility within the state, or
that person's designee, in a conspicuous location at that facility under that
person's charge;



         (e)   The board of trustees of a regional airport
authority, chief administrative officer of an airport facility, or other
person in charge of an airport facility in a conspicuous location at each
airport facility under that person's control;



         (f)   The officer or officer's designee who has charge
of a courthouse or the building or structure in which a courtroom is located
in a conspicuous location in that building or structure;



         (g)   The Superintendent of the Bureau of Criminal
Identification and Investigation or the Superintendent's designee in a
conspicuous location in all premises controlled by that Bureau;



         (h)   The owner, administrator, or operator of a child
day-care center, a type A family day-care home, or a type B family day-care
home;



         (i)   The officer of this state or of a political
subdivision of this state, or the officer’s designee, who has charge of a
building that is a government facility of this state or the political
subdivision of this state, as defined in R.C. § 2923.126, and that is not a
building that is used primarily as a shelter, restroom, parking facility for
motor vehicles, or rest facility and is not a courthouse or other building or
structure in which a courtroom is located that is subject to R.C. §
2923.126(B)(3).



      (2)   The following boards, bodies, and persons, or designees,
shall post in the following locations a sign that contains a statement in
substantially the following form: “Unless otherwise authorized by law,
pursuant to Ohio Revised Code section 2923.122, no person shall knowingly
possess, have under the person's control, convey, or attempt to convey a
deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance into a school safety zone.”



         (a)   A board of education of a city, local, exempted
village, or joint vocational school district or that board's designee in a
conspicuous location in each building and on each parcel of real property
owned or controlled by the board;



         (b)   A governing body of a school for which the State
Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under R.C. § 3301.07 or that
body's designee in a conspicuous location in each building and on each parcel
of real property owned or controlled by the school;



         (c)   The principal or chief administrative officer of a
nonpublic school in a conspicuous location on property owned or controlled by
that nonpublic school.



(R.C. § 2923.1212)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 137.10  DEFACED FIREARMS.



   (A)   No person shall do either of the following:



      (1)   Change, alter, remove, or obliterate the name of the
manufacturer, model, manufacturer's serial number, or other mark of
identification on a firearm.



      (2)   Possess a firearm knowing or having reasonable cause to
believe that the name of the manufacturer, model, manufacturer's serial
number, or other mark of identification on the firearm has been changed,
altered, removed, or obliterated.



   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) of this section is
guilty of defacing identification marks of a firearm. Except as otherwise
provided in this division, defacing identification marks of a firearm is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (A)(1) of this
section, defacing identification marks of a firearm is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section is
guilty of possessing a defaced firearm. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, possessing a defaced firearm is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
violation of division (A)(2) of this section, possessing a defaced firearm is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



   (C)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any firearm on
which no manufacturer's serial number was inscribed at the time of its
manufacture.



(R.C. § 2923.201)



CHAPTER 138: DRUG OFFENSES



Section



   138.01   Definitions



   138.02   Trafficking in controlled substances



   138.03   Drug possession offenses



   138.04   Possessing drug abuse instruments



   138.05   Permitting drug abuse



   138.06   (Reserved)



   138.07   Abusing harmful intoxicants



   138.08   Illegal dispensing of drug samples



   138.09   Federal prosecution bar to municipal prosecution



   138.10   Nitrous oxide: improper dispensing or distribution;
possession in a motor vehicle



   138.11   Laboratory report required



   138.12   Counterfeit controlled substances



   138.13   Use, possession, or sale of drug paraphernalia



   138.14   Pseudoephedrine sales



§ 138.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning. 
Words, terms and phrases and their derivatives used in this chapter which are
not defined in this section shall have the meaning given to them in the Ohio
Revised Code.



   ADMINISTER. The direct application of a drug, whether by injection,
inhalation, ingestion, or any other means to a person or an animal.



   ADULTERATE. To cause a drug to be adulterated as described in R.C. §
3715.63.



   BENZODIAZEPINE. A controlled substance that has United States Food and
Drug Administration approved labeling indicating that it is a benzodiazepine,
benzodiazepine derivative, triazolobenzodiazepine, or triazolobenzodiazepine
derivative, including the following drugs and their varying salt forms or
chemical congeners: alprazolam, chlordiazepoxide hydrochloride, clobazam,
clonazepam, clorazepate, diazepam, estazolam, flurazepam hydrochloride,
lorazepam, midazolam, oxazepam, quazepam, temazepam, and triazolam.



   BULK AMOUNT. Of a controlled substance means any of the following:



      (1)   For any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance
included in Schedule I, Schedule II, or Schedule III, with the exception of
any controlled substance analog, marihuana, cocaine, L.S.D., heroin, any
fentanyl-related compound, and hashish and except as provided in division
(2), (5), or (6) of this definition, whichever of the following is applicable:



         (a)   An amount equal to or exceeding 10 grams or 25
unit doses of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule I opiate or opium derivative;



         (b)   An amount equal to or exceeding 10 grams of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount
of raw or gum opium;



         (c)   An amount equal to or exceeding 30 grams or 10
unit doses of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule I hallucinogen other than
tetrahydrocannabinol or lysergic acid amide, or a Schedule I stimulant or
depressant;



         (d)   An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or 5
times the maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II opiate or opium
derivative;



         (e)   An amount equal to or exceeding 5 grams or 10 unit
doses of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains
any amount of phencyclidine;



         (f)   An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30
times the maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II stimulant that is
in a final dosage form manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended) and the
federal drug abuse control laws, as defined in this section, that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule II depressant substance or a Schedule II
hallucinogenic substance;



         (g)   An amount equal to or exceeding 3 grams of a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount
of a Schedule II stimulant, or any of its salts or isomers, that is not in a
final dosage form manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food,
Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended) and the
federal drug abuse control laws;



      (2)   An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30 times
the maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule III or IV substance
other than an anabolic steroid or a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative;



      (3)   An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or 5 times the
maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule III opiate or opium
derivative;



      (4)   An amount equal to or exceeding 250 milliliters or 250
grams of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains
any amount of a Schedule V substance;



      (5)   An amount equal to or exceeding 200 solid dosage units,
16 grams, or 16 milliliters of a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance
that is or contains any amount of a Schedule III anabolic steroid;



      (6)   For any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance
that is a combination of a fentanyl-related compound and any other compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule IV, or
Schedule V, if the defendant is charged with a violation of R.C. § 2925.11
and the sentencing provisions set forth in R.C. § 2925.11(C)(10)(b) and
(C)(11) will not apply regarding the defendant and the violation, the bulk
amount of the controlled substance for purposes of the violation is the
amount specified in division (1), (2), (3), (4), or (5) of this definition
for the other Schedule III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V controlled substance
that is combined with the fentanyl-related compound.



   CERTIFIED GRIEVANCE COMMITTEE. A duly constituted and organized
committee of the Ohio State Bar Association or of one or more local bar
associations of the state that complies with the criteria set forth in Rule
V, Section 6 of the Rules for the Government of the Bar of Ohio.



   COCAINE. Any of the following:



      (1)   A cocaine salt, isomer, or derivative, a salt of a
cocaine isomer or derivative, or the base form of cocaine.



      (2)   Coca leaves or a salt, compound, derivative, or
preparation of coca leaves, including ecgonine, a salt, isomer, or derivative
of ecgonine, or a salt of an isomer or derivative of ecgonine.



      (3)   A salt, compound, derivative, or preparation of a
substance identified in division (1) or (2) of this definition that is
chemically equivalent to or identical with any of those substances, except
that the substances shall not include decocainized coca leaves or extraction
of coca leaves if the extractions do not contain cocaine or ecgonine.



   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SCHOOL. An offense is COMMITTED IN THE
VICINITY OF A SCHOOL if the offender commits the offense on school premises,
in a school building, or within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of any school
premises, regardless of whether the offender knows the offense is being
committed on school premises, in a school building, or within 1,000 feet of
the boundaries of any school premises.



   COMMITTED IN THE VICINITY OF A SCHOOL. An offense is COMMITTED IN THE
VICINITY OF A SCHOOL if the offender commits the offense on school premises,
in a school building, or within 1,000 feet of the boundaries of any school
premises.



   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. A drug, compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance included in Schedule I, II, III, IV, or V of R.C. § 3719.41.



   CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE ANALOG.



      (1)   The phrase means, except as provided in division (2) of
this definition, a substance to which both of the following apply:



         (a)   The chemical structure of the substance is
substantially similar to the structure of a controlled substance in Schedule
I or II.



         (b)   One of the following applies regarding the
substance:



            1.   The substance has a stimulant, depressant, or
hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system that is substantially
similar to or greater than the stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic
effect on the central nervous system of a controlled substance in Schedule I
or II.



            2.   With respect to a particular person, that
person represents or intends the substance to have a stimulant, depressant,
or hallucinogenic effect on the central nervous system that is substantially
similar to or greater than the stimulant, depressant, or hallucinogenic
effect on the central nervous system of a controlled substance in Schedule I
or II.



      (2)   The phrase does not include any of the following:



         (a)   A controlled substance;



         (b)   Any substance for which there is an approved new
drug application;



         (c)   With respect to a particular person, any substance
if an exemption is in effect for investigational use for that person pursuant
to federal law to the extent that conduct with respect to that substance is
pursuant to that exemption;



         (d)   Any substance to the extent it is not intended for
human consumption before the exemption described in division (2)(c) of this
definition takes effect with respect to that substance.



      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in R.C. § 2925.03 or R.C.
§ 2925.11, a controlled substance analog, to the extent intended for human
consumption, shall be treated for purposes of any provision of this Code or
the Ohio Revised Code as a controlled substance in Schedule I.



   COUNTERFEIT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE. Any of the following:



      (1)   Any drug that bears, or whose container or label bears,
a trademark, trade name, or other identifying mark used without authorization
of the owner of rights to the trademark, trade name, or identifying mark.



      (2)   Any unmarked or unlabeled substance that is represented
to be a controlled substance manufactured, processed, packed, or distributed
by a person other than the person that manufactured, processed, packed, or
distributed it.



      (3)   Any substance that is represented to be a controlled
substance but is not a controlled substance or is a different controlled
substance.



      (4)   Any substance other than a controlled substance that a
reasonable person would believe to be a controlled substance because of its
similarity in shape, size, and color, or its markings, labeling, packaging,
distribution, or the price for which it is sold or offered for sale.



   CULTIVATE. Includes planting, watering, fertilizing or tilling.



   DANGEROUS DRUG. Any of the following:



      (1)   Any drug to which either of the following applies:



         (a)   Under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, is
required to bear a label containing the legend "Caution: Federal law
prohibits dispensing without a prescription" or "Caution: Federal law
restricts this drug to use by or on the order of a licensed veterinarian" or
any similar restrictive statement, or may be dispensed only upon a
prescription.



         (b)   Under R.C. Chapter 3715 or 3719, may be dispensed
only upon a prescription.



      (2)   Any drug that contains a Schedule V controlled substance
and that is exempt from R.C. Chapter 3719 or to which that chapter does not
apply.



      (3)   Any drug intended for administration by injection into
the human body other than through a natural orifice of the human body.



      (4)   Any drug that is a biological product, as defined in
R.C. § 3715.01.



   DECEPTION.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.



   DISCIPLINARY COUNSEL. The disciplinary counsel appointed by the Board
of Commissioners on Grievances and Discipline of the Ohio Supreme Court under
the Rules for the Government of the Bar of Ohio.



   DISPENSE. Means to sell, leave with, give away, dispose of, or deliver.



   DISTRIBUTE. Means to deal in, ship, transport or deliver, but does not
include administering or dispensing a drug.



   DRUG. Any of the following:



      (1)   Any article recognized in the official United States
pharmacopeia, national formulary, or any supplement intended for use in the
diagnosis, cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease in humans or
other animals.



      (2)   Any other article intended for use in the diagnosis,
cure, mitigation, treatment, or prevention of disease in humans or other
animals.



      (3)   Any article, other than food, intended to affect the
structure or any function of the body of humans or other animals.



      (4)   Any article intended for use as a component of any
article specified in division (1), (2), or (3) above; but does not include
devices or their components, parts, or accessories.



   DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Any of the following:



      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2913.02(A) that constitutes theft
of drugs, or any violation of R.C. §§ 2925.02, 2925.03, 2925.04, 2925.041,
2925.05, 2925.06, 2925.11, 2925.12, 2925.13, 2925.22, 2925.23, 2925.24,
2925.31, 2925.32, 2925.36, or 2925.37.



      (2)   A violation of an existing or former law of a
municipality, state or any other state or of the United States, that is
substantially equivalent to any section listed in division (1) of this
definition.



      (3)   An offense under an existing or former law of a
municipality, state or any other state, or of the United States, of which
planting, cultivating, harvesting, processing, making, manufacturing,
producing, shipping, transporting, delivering, acquiring, possessing,
storing, distributing, dispensing, selling, inducing another to use,
administering to another, using, or otherwise dealing with a controlled
substance is an element.



      (4)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity
in committing or attempting to commit, any offense under division (1), (2),
or (3) of this definition.



   DRUG DEPENDENT PERSON. Any person who, by reason of the use of any drug
of abuse, is physically and/or psychologically dependent upon the use of such
drug to the detriment of the person's health or welfare.



   DRUG OF ABUSE. Any controlled substance, any harmful intoxicant, and
any dangerous drug, as defined in this section.



   EMERGENCY FACILITY. A hospital emergency department or any other
facility that provides emergency care.



   FEDERAL DRUG ABUSE CONTROL LAWS. The "Comprehensive Drug Abuse
Prevention and Control Act of 1970," 21 U.S.C. §§ 801 et seq., as amended.



   FELONY DRUG ABUSE OFFENSE. Any drug abuse offense that would constitute
a felony under the laws of this state, any other state, or the United States.



   FENTANYL-RELATED COMPOUND. Any of the following:



      (1)   Fentanyl;



      (2)   Alpha-methylfentanyl (N-[1-
(alpha-methyl-beta-phenyl)ethyl-4-piperidyl] propionanilide;
1-(1-methyl-2-phenylethyl)-4-(N- propanilido) piperidine);



      (3)   Alpha-methylthiofentanyl (N-
[1-methyl-2-(2-thienyl)ethyl-4-piperidinyl]-N- phenylpropanamide);



      (4)   Beta-hydroxyfentanyl (N-[1-
(2-hydroxy-2-phenethyl-4-piperidinyl]-N- phenylpropanamide);



      (5)   Beta-hydroxy-3- methylfentanyl (other name:
N-[1-(2-hydroxy-2- phenethyl)-3-methyl-4-piperidinyl]-N- phenylpropanamide);



      (6)   3-methylfentanyl (N-[3-
methyl-1-(2-phenylethyl)-4-piperidyl]-N- phenylpropanamide);



      (7)   3-methylthiofentanyl (N-[3-
methyl-1-[2-(thienyl)ethyl]-4-piperidinyl]-– phenylpropanamide);



      (8)   Para-fluorofentanyl (N-(4-
fluorophenyl)-N-[1-(2-phenethyl)-4- piperidinyl]propanamide;



      (9)   Thiofentanyl (N-phenyl-N-[1-
(2-thienyl)ethyl-4-piperidinyl]-propanamide;



      (10)   Alfentanil;



      (11)   Carfentanil;



      (12)   Remifentanil;



      (13)   Sufentanil;



      (14)   Acetyl-alpha-methylfentanyl
(N-[1-(1-methyl-2-phenethyl)-4-piperidinyl]-N- phenylacetamide); and



      (15)   A Schedule I narcotic-opiate that meets the fentanyl
pharmacophore requirements specified in R.C. § 3719.41(A)(56), including
acetyl fentanyl, furanylfentanyl, valerylfentanyl, butyrylfentanyl,
isobutyrylfentanyl, 4- methoxybutyrylfentanyl, para-fluorobutyrylfentanyl,
acrylfentanyl, and ortho-fluorofentanyl.



   HARMFUL INTOXICANT. Does not include beer or intoxicating liquor, but
means any of the following:



      (1)   Any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance the
gas, fumes, or vapor of which when inhaled can induce intoxication,
excitement,giddiness, irrational behavior, depression, stupefaction,
paralysis, unconsciousness, asphyxiation, or other harmful physiological
effects, and includes but is not limited to any of the following:



         (a)   Any volatile organic solvent, plastic cement,
model cement, fingernail polish remover, lacquer thinner, cleaning fluid,
gasoline, or other preparation containing a volatile organic solvent.



         (b)   Any aerosol propellant.



         (c)   Any fluorocarbon refrigerant.



         (d)   Any anesthetic gas.



      (2)   Gamma Butyrolactone;



      (3)   1,4 Butanediol.



   HASHISH. The resin or a preparation of the resin contained in
marihuana, whether in solid form or in a liquid concentrate, liquid extract,
or liquid distillate form.



   HYPODERMIC. A hypodermic syringe or needle, or other instrument or
device for the injection of medication.



   JUVENILE. A person under 18 years of age.



   LABORATORY. A laboratory approved by the State Board of Pharmacy as
proper to be entrusted with the custody of controlled substances and the use
of controlled substances for scientific and clinical purposes and for
purposes of instruction.



   LAWFUL PRESCRIPTION. A prescription that is issued for a legitimate
medical purpose by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs, that is not altered or forged, and that was not obtained by means of
deception or by the commission of any theft offense.



   LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS or
PRESCRIBER. An individual who is authorized by law to prescribe drugs or
dangerous drugs or drug therapy related devices in the course of the
individual's professional practice, including only the following:



      (1)   A dentist licensed under R.C. Chapter 4715.



      (2)   A clinical nurse specialist, certified nurse-midwife, or
certified nurse practitioner who holds a current, valid license to practice
nursing as an advanced practice registered nurse issued under R.C. Chapter
4723.



      (3)   An optometrist licensed under R.C. Chapter 4725 to
practice optometry under a therapeutic pharmaceutical agent's certificate.



      (4)   A physician authorized under R.C. Chapter 4731 to
practice medicine and surgery, osteopathic medicine and surgery, or podiatric
medicine and surgery.



      (5)   A physician assistant who holds a license to practice as
a physician assistant issued under R.C. Chapter 4730, holds a valid
prescriber number issued by the Ohio Medical Board, and has been granted
physician-delegated prescriptive authority.



      (6)   A veterinarian licensed under R.C. Chapter 4741.



   L.S.D. Lysergic acid diethylamide.



   MAJOR DRUG OFFENDER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.



   MANDATORY PRISON TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.



   MANUFACTURE. To plant, cultivate, harvest, process, make, prepare, or
otherwise engage in any part of the production of a drug, by propagation,
extraction, chemical synthesis, or compounding, or any combination of the
same, and includes packaging, repackaging, labeling, and other activities
incident to production.



   MANUFACTURER. A person who manufactures a controlled substance, as
"manufacture" is defined by this section.



   MARIHUANA. All parts of a plant of the genus cannabis, whether growing
or not, the seeds of a plant of that type; the resin extracted from a part of
a plant of that type; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative,
mixture, or preparation of a plant of that type or of its seeds or resin.
MARIHUANA does not include the mature stalks of the plant, fiber produced
from the stalks, oils or cake made from the seeds of the plant, any other
compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of the
mature stalks, except the resin extracted from the mature stalks, fiber, oil,
or cake, or the sterilized seed of the plant that is incapable of
germination. MARIHUANA does not include HASHISH.



   METHAMPHETAMINE. Methamphetamine, any salt, isomer, or salt of an
isomer of methamphetamine, or any compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance containing methamphetamine or any salt, isomer, or salt of an
isomer of methamphetamine.



   MINOR DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSE. Either of the following:



      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2925.11 as it existed prior to
July 1, 1996, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.



      (2)   A violation of R.C. § 2925.11 as it exists on and after
July 1, 1996, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that is a
misdemeanor or a felony of the fifth degree.



   OFFICIAL WRITTEN ORDER. An order written on a form provided for that
purpose by the Director of the United States Drug Enforcement Administration,
under any laws of the United States making provision for the order, if the
order forms are authorized and required by federal law.



   OPIOID ANALGESIC. A controlled substance that has analgesic
pharmacologic activity at the opioid receptors of the central nervous system,
including the following drugs and their varying salt forms or chemical
congeners: buprenorphine, butorphanol, codeine (including acetaminophen and
other combination products), dihydrocodeine, fentanyl, hydrocodone (including
acetaminophen combination products), hydromorphone, meperidine, methadone,
morphine sulfate, oxycodone (including acetaminophen, aspirin, and other
combination products), oxymorphone, tapentadol, and tramadol.



   PERSON. Means any individual, corporation, government, governmental
subdivision or agency, business trust, estate, trust, partnership,
association or other legal entity.



   PHARMACIST. A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 to engage in the
practice of pharmacy.



   PHARMACY. Except when used in a context that refers to the practice of
pharmacy, means any area, room, rooms, place of business, department, or
portion of any of the foregoing, where the practice of pharmacy is conducted.



   POSSESS or POSSESSION. Having control over a thing or substance but may
not be inferred solely from mere access to the thing or substance through
ownership or occupation of the premises upon which the thing or substance is
found.



   PRESCRIPTION.  Means all of the following:



      (1)   A written, electronic or oral order for drugs or
combination or mixtures of drugs to be used by a particular individual or for
treating a particular animal, issued by a licensed health professional
authorized to prescribe drugs.



      (2)   For purposes of R.C. §§ 2925.61, 4723.488, 4729.44,
4730.431, and 4731.94, a written, electronic, or oral order for naloxone
issued to and in the name of a family member, friend, or other individual in
a position to assist an individual who there is reason to believe is at risk
of experiencing an opioid-related overdose.



      (3)   For purposes of R.C. §§ 4723.4810, 4729.282, 4730.432,
and 4731.93, a written, electronic, or oral order for a drug to treat
chlamydia, gonorrhea, or trichomoniasis issued to and in the name of a
patient who is not the intended user of the drug but is the sexual partner of
the intended user.



      (4)   For purposes of R.C. §§ 3313.7110, 3313.7111,
3314.143, 3326.28, 3328.29, 4723.483, 4729.88, 4730.433, 4731.96, and
5101.76, a written, electronic, or oral order for an epinephrine autoinjector
issued to and in the name of a school, school district, or camp.



      (5)   For purposes of R.C. Chapter 3728 and R.C. §§
4723.483, 4729.88, 4730.433, and 4731.96, a written, electronic, or oral
order for an epinephrine autoinjector issued to and in the name of a
qualified entity, as defined in R.C. § 3728.01.



   PRESUMPTION FOR A PRISON TERM or PRESUMPTION THAT A PRISON TERM SHALL
BE IMPOSED. A presumption as described in R.C. § 2929.13(D) that a prison
term is a necessary sanction for a felony in order to comply with the
purposes and principles of sentencing under R.C. § 2929.11.



   PROFESSIONAL LICENSE. Any license, permit, certificate, registration,
qualification, admission, temporary license, temporary permit, temporary
certificate, or temporary registration that is described in R.C. §
2925.01(W)(1) to (36) and that qualifies a person as a professionally
licensed person.



   PROFESSIONALLY LICENSED PERSON. Any of the following:



      (1)   A person who has obtained a license as a manufacturer of
controlled substances or a wholesaler of controlled substances under R.C.
Chapter 3719;



      (2)   A person who has received a certificate or temporary
certificate as a certified public accountant or who has registered as a
public accountant under R.C. Chapter 4701 and who holds an Ohio permit issued
under that chapter;



      (3)   A person who holds a certificate of qualification to
practice architecture issued or renewed and registered under R.C. Chapter
4703;



      (4)   A person who is registered as a landscape architect
under R.C. Chapter 4703 or who holds a permit as a landscape architect issued
under that chapter;



      (5)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4707;



      (6)   A person who has been issued a certificate of
registration as a registered barber under R.C. Chapter 4709;



      (7)   A person licensed and regulated to engage in the
business of a debt pooling company by a legislative authority, under
authority of R.C. Chapter 4710;



      (8)   A person who has been issued a cosmetologist's license,
hair designer's license, manicurist's license, esthetician's license, natural
hair stylist's license, advanced cosmetologist's license, advanced hair
designer's license, advanced manicurist's license, advanced esthetician's
license, advanced natural hair stylist's license, cosmetology instructor's
license, hair design instructor's license, manicurist instructor's license,
esthetics instructor's license, natural hair style instructor's license,
independent contractor's license, or tanning facility permit under R.C.
Chapter 4713;



      (9)   A person who has been issued a license to practice
dentistry, a general anesthesia permit, a conscious intravenous sedation
permit, a limited resident's license, a limited teaching license, a dental
hygienist's license, or a dental hygienist's teacher's certificate under R.C.
Chapter 4715;



      (10)   A person who has been issued an embalmer's license, a
funeral director's license, a funeral home license, or a crematory license,
or who has been registered for an embalmer's or funeral director's
apprenticeship under R.C. Chapter 4717;



      (11)   A person who has been licensed as a registered nurse or
practical nurse, or who has been issued a certificate for the practice of
nurse-midwifery under R.C. Chapter 4723;



      (12)   A person who has been licensed to practice optometry or
to engage in optical dispensing under R.C. Chapter 4725;



      (13)   A person licensed to act as a pawnbroker under R.C.
Chapter 4727;



      (14)   A person licensed to act as a precious metals dealer
under R.C. Chapter 4728;



      (15)   A person licensed as a pharmacist, a pharmacy intern, a
wholesale distributor of dangerous drugs, or a terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs under R.C. Chapter 4729;



      (16)   A person who is authorized to practice as a physician
assistant under R.C. Chapter 4730;



      (17)   A person who has been issued a license to practice
medicine and surgery, osteopathic medicine and surgery, or podiatric medicine
and surgery under R.C. Chapter 4731 or has been issued a certificate to
practice a limited branch of medicine under that chapter;



      (18)   A person licensed as a psychologist or school
psychologist under R.C. Chapter 4732;



      (19)   A person registered to practice the profession of
engineering or surveying under R.C. Chapter 4733;



      (20)   A person who has been issued a license to practice
chiropractic under R.C. Chapter 4734;



      (21)   A person licensed to act as a real estate broker or
real estate salesperson under R.C. Chapter 4735;



      (22)   A person registered as a registered sanitarian under
R.C. Chapter 4736;



      (23)   A person licensed to operate or maintain a junkyard
under R.C. Chapter 4737;



      (24)   A person who has been issued a motor vehicle salvage
dealer's license under R.C. Chapter 4738;



      (25)   A person who has been licensed to act as a steam
engineer under R.C. Chapter 4739;



      (26)   A person who has been issued a license or temporary
permit to practice veterinary medicine or any of its branches, or who is
registered as a graduate animal technician under R.C. Chapter 4741;



      (27)   A person who has been issued a hearing aid dealer's or
fitter's license or trainee permit under R.C. Chapter 4747;



      (28)   A person who has been issued a class A, class B, or
class C license or who has been registered as an investigator or security
guard employee under R.C. Chapter 4749;



      (29)   A person licensed and registered to practice as a
nursing home administrator under R.C. Chapter 4751;



      (30)   A person licensed to practice as a speech-language
pathologist or audiologist under R.C. Chapter 4753;



      (31)   A person issued a license as an occupational therapist
or physical therapist under R.C. Chapter 4755;



      (32)   A person who is licensed as a licensed professional
clinical counselor, licensed professional counselor, social worker,
independent social worker, independent marriage and family therapist, or
marriage and family therapist, or registered as a social work assistant under
R.C. Chapter 4757;



      (33)   A person issued a license to practice dietetics under
R.C. Chapter 4759;



      (34)   A person who has been issued a license or limited
permit to practice respiratory therapy under R.C. Chapter 4761;



      (35)   A person who has been issued a real estate appraiser
certificate under R.C. Chapter 4763;



      (36)   A person who has been admitted to the bar by order of
the Ohio Supreme Court in compliance with its prescribed and published rules.



   PUBLIC PREMISES. Any hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall, or
other place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort.



   SALE. Includes delivery, barter, exchange, transfer, or gift, or offer
thereof, and each transaction of those natures made by any person, whether as
principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee.



   SAMPLE DRUG. A drug or pharmaceutical preparation that would be
hazardous to health or safety if used without the supervision of a licensed
health professional authorized to prescribe drugs, or a drug of abuse, and
that, at one time, had been placed in a container plainly marked as a sample
by a manufacturer.



   SCHEDULE I, II, III, IV OR V. Controlled substance Schedules I, II,
III, IV, and V established pursuant to R.C. § 3719.41, as amended pursuant
to R.C. §§ 3719.43 or 3719.44.



   SCHOOL. Any school operated by a board of education, any community
school established under R.C. Chapter 3314, or any nonpublic school for which
the State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under R.C. §
3301.07, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or
training provided by the school is being conducted at the time a criminal
offense is committed.



   SCHOOL BUILDING. Any building in which any of the instruction,
extracurricular activities, or training provided by a school is conducted,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training
provided by the school is being conducted in the school building at the time
a criminal offense is committed.



   SCHOOL PREMISES. Either of the following:



      (1)   The parcel of real property on which any school is
situated, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or
training provided by the school is being conducted on the premises at the
time a criminal offense is committed.



      (2)   Any other parcel of real property that is owned or
leased by a board of education of a school, the governing authority of a
community school established under R.C. Chapter 3314, or the governing body
of a nonpublic school for which the State Board of Education prescribes
minimum standards under R.C. § 3301.07 and on which some of the instruction,
extracurricular activities, or training of the school is conducted, whether
or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training provided by
the school is being conducted on the parcel of real property at the time a
criminal offense is committed.



   STANDARD PHARMACEUTICAL REFERENCE MANUAL. The current edition, with
cumulative changes if any, of references that are approved by the State Board
of Pharmacy.



   THEFT OFFENSE.  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.



   UNIT DOSE. An amount or unit or a compound, mixture, or preparation
containing a controlled substance that is separately identifiable and in a
form that indicates that it is the amount or unit by which the controlled
substance is separately administered to or taken by an individual.



   WHOLESALER. A person who, on official written orders other than
prescriptions, supplies controlled substances that the person has not
manufactured, produced or prepared personally and includes WHOLESALE
DISTRIBUTOR OF DANGEROUS DRUGS, which means a person engaged in the sale of
dangerous drugs at wholesale and includes any agent or employee of that
person authorized by that person to engage in the sale of dangerous drugs at
wholesale.



(R.C. §§ 2925.01, 3719.01, 3719.011, 3719.013, 4729.01)



§ 138.02  TRAFFICKING IN CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:



      (1)   Sell or offer to sell a controlled substance or a
controlled substance analog;



      (2)   Prepare for shipment, ship, transport, deliver, prepare
for distribution, or distribute a controlled substance or a controlled
substance analog, when the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe
that the controlled substance or a controlled substance analog is intended
for sale or resale by the offender or another person.



   (B)   This section does not apply to any of the following:



      (1)   Manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized
to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, and other persons
whose conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729,
4730, 4731, and 4741.



      (2)   If the offense involves an anabolic steroid, any person
who is conducting or participating in a research project involving the use of
an anabolic steroid if the project has been approved by the United States
Food and Drug Administration.



      (3)   Any person who sells, offers for sale, prescribes,
dispenses, or administers for livestock or other nonhuman species an anabolic
steroid that is expressly intended for administration through implants to
livestock or other nonhuman species and approved for that purpose under the
Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (21 USC 301 et seq., as amended), and is
sold, offered for sale, prescribed, dispensed, or administered for that
purpose in accordance with that Act.



   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of the
following:



      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2) of this
section, trafficking in controlled substances is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.



      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the
offense involves a gift of 20 grams or less of marihuana, trafficking in
marihuana is a minor misdemeanor upon a first offense and a misdemeanor of
the third degree upon a subsequent offense. If the offense involves a gift of
20 grams or less of marihuana and if the offense was committed in the
vicinity of a school or in the vicinity of a juvenile, trafficking in
marihuana is a misdemeanor of the third degree.



      (3)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is a combination of a
fentanyl-related compound and marihuana, one of the following applies:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3)(b)
of this section, the offender is guilty of trafficking in marihuana and shall
be punished under division (C)(2) of this section. The offender is not guilty
of trafficking in a fentanyl- related compound and shall not be charged with,
convicted of, or punished under R.C. § 2925.03(C)(9) for trafficking in a
fentanyl-related compound.



         (b)   If the offender knows or has reason to know that
the compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is the drug involved
contains a fentanyl-related compound, the offender is guilty of trafficking
in a fentanyl-related compound and shall be punished under R.C. §
2925.03(C)(9).



(R.C. § 2925.03(A) - (C))  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Felony drug trafficking offenses, see R.C. § 2925.03(C)



§ 138.03  DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSES.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly obtain, possess, or use a controlled
substance or a controlled substance analog.



   (B)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:



         (a)   Manufacturers, licensed health professionals
authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, and other
persons whose conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723,
4729, 4730, 4731, and 4741.



         (b)   If the offense involves an anabolic steroid, any
person who is conducting or participating in a research project involving the
use of an anabolic steroid if the project has been approved by the United
States Food and Drug Administration.



         (c)   Any person who sells, offers for sale, prescribes,
dispenses, or administers for livestock or other nonhuman species an anabolic
steroid that is expressly intended for administration through implants to
livestock or other nonhuman species and approved for that purpose under the
Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, and is sold, offered for sale,
prescribed, dispensed, or administered for that purpose in accordance with
that Act.



         (d)   Any person who obtained the controlled substance
pursuant to a prescription issued by a licensed health professional
authorized to prescribe drugs.



      (2)   (a)   As used in division (B)(2) of this section:



            COMMUNITY ADDICTION SERVICES PROVIDER. Has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 5119.01.



            COMMUNITY CONTROL SANCTION. Has the same meanings as
in R.C. § 2929.01



            DRUG TREATMENT PROGRAM. Has the same meanings as in
R.C. § 2929.01.



            HEALTH CARE FACILITY. Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 2919.16.



            MINOR DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSE. A violation of this
section or R.C. § 2925.11 that is a misdemeanor or a felony of the fifth
degree.



            POST-RELEASE CONTROL SANCTION. Has the same meaning
as in R.C. § 2967.28.



            PEACE OFFICER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2935.01.



            PUBLIC AGENCY. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2930.01.



            QUALIFIED INDIVIDUAL. A person who is not on
community control or post-release control and is a person acting in good
faith who seeks or obtains medical assistance for another person who is
experiencing a drug overdose, a person who experiences a drug overdose and
who seeks medical assistance for that overdose, or a person who is the
subject of another person seeking or obtaining medical assistance for that
overdose as described in division (B)(2)(b) of this section.



            SEEK OR OBTAIN MEDICAL ASSISTANCE. Includes, but is
not limited to making a 9-1-1 call, contacting in person or by telephone call
an on-duty peace officer, or transporting or presenting a person to a health
care facility.



         (b)   Subject to division (B)(2)(f) of this section, a
qualified individual shall not be arrested, charged, prosecuted, convicted,
or penalized pursuant to this chapter for a minor drug possession offense if
all of the following apply:



            1.   The evidence of the obtaining, possession, or
use of the controlled substance or controlled substance analog that would be
the basis of the offense was obtained as a result of the qualified individual
seeking the medical assistance or experiencing an overdose and needing
medical assistance.



            2.   Subject to division (B)(2)(g) of this
section, within 30 days after seeking or obtaining the medical assistance,
the qualified individual seeks and obtains a screening and receives a
referral for treatment from a community addiction services provider or a
properly credentialed addiction treatment professional.



            3.   Subject to division (B)(2)(g) of this
section, the qualified individual who obtains a screening and receives a
referral for treatment under division (B)(2)(b)2. of this section, upon the
request of any prosecuting attorney, submits documentation to the prosecuting
attorney that verifies that the qualified individual satisfied the
requirements of that division. The documentation shall be limited to the date
and time of the screening obtained and referral received.



         (c)   If a person is found to be in violation of any
community control sanction and if the violation is a result of either of the
following, the court shall first consider ordering the person’s
participation or continued participation in a drug treatment program or
mitigating the penalty specified in R.C. § 2929.13, 2929.15, or 2929.25, or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, whichever is applicable,
after which the court has the discretion either to order the person’s
participation or continued participation in a drug treatment program or to
impose the penalty with the mitigating factor specified in any of those
applicable sections:



            1.   Seeking or obtaining medical assistance in
good faith for another person who is experiencing a drug overdose;



            2.   Experiencing a drug overdose and seeking
medical assistance for that overdose or being the subject of another person
seeking or obtaining medical assistance for that overdose as described in
division (B)(2)(b) of this section.



         (d)   If a person is found to be in violation of any
post-release control sanction and if the violation is a result of either of
the following, the court or the parole board shall first consider ordering
the person’s participation or continued participation in a drug treatment
program or mitigating the penalty specified in R.C. § 2929.141 or 2967.28,
whichever is applicable, after which the court or the parole board has the
discretion either to order the person’s participation or continued
participation in a drug treatment program or to impose the penalty with the
mitigating factor specified in either of those applicable sections:



            1.   Seeking or obtaining medical assistance in
good faith for another person who is experiencing a drug overdose;



            2.   Experiencing a drug overdose and seeking
medical assistance for that emergency or being the subject of another person
seeking or obtaining medical assistance for that overdose as described in
division (B)(2)(b) of this section.



         (e)   Nothing in division (B)(2)(b) of this section
shall be construed to do any of the following:



            1.   Limit the admissibility of any evidence in
connection with the investigation or prosecution of a crime with regards to a
defendant who does not qualify for the protections of division (B)(2)(b) of
this section or with regards to any crime other than a minor drug possession
offense committed by a person who qualifies for protection pursuant to
division (B)(2)(b) of this section for a minor drug possession offense;



            2.   Limit any seizure of evidence or contraband
otherwise permitted by law;



            3.   Limit or abridge the authority of a peace
officer to detain or take into custody a person in the course of an
investigation or to effectuate an arrest for any offense except as provided
in that division;



            4.   Limit, modify, or remove any immunity from
liability available pursuant to law in effect prior to September 13, 2016 to
any public agency or to an employee of any public agency.



         (f)   Division (B)(2)(b) of this section does not apply
to any person who twice previously has been granted an immunity under
division (B)(2)(b) of this section. No person shall be granted an immunity
under division (B)(2)(b) of this section more than two times.



         (g)   Nothing in this section shall compel any qualified
individual to disclose protected health information in a way that conflicts
with the requirements of the “Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act of 1996,” 104 Pub. L. No. 191, 110 Stat. 2021, 42 U.S.C.
§§ 1320d et seq., as amended, and regulations promulgated by the United
States Department of Health and Human Services to implement the act or the
requirements of 42 C.F.R. Part 2.



   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of one
of the following:



      (1)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule I or Schedule II,
with the exception of marihuana or hashish, whoever violates division (A) of
this section is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.



      (2)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule IV, or
Schedule V, whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
possession of drugs. The penalty for the offense shall be determined as
follows:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2)(b)
of this section, possession of drugs is a misdemeanor of the first degree or,
if the offender previously has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



         (b)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or
exceeds the bulk amount, possession of drugs is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.



      (3)   If the drug involved in the violation is marihuana or a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance containing marihuana other than
hashish, whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
possession of marihuana. The penalty for the offense shall be determined as
follows:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3)(b)
or (C)(3)(c) of this section, possession of marihuana is a minor misdemeanor.



         (b)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or
exceeds 100 grams but is less than 200 grams, possession of marihuana is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



         (c)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or
exceeds 200 grams, possession of marihuana is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.



      (4)   If the drug involved in the violation is hashish or a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance containing hashish, whoever
violates division (A) of this section is guilty of possession of hashish. The
penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(4)(b)
or (C)(4)(c) of this section, possession of hashish is a minor misdemeanor.



         (b)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or
exceeds five grams but is less than ten grams of hashish in a solid form or
equals or exceeds one gram but is less than two grams of hashish in a liquid
concentrate, liquid extract, or liquid distillate form, possession of hashish
is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



         (c)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or
exceeds ten grams of hashish in a solid form or equals or exceeds two grams
of hashish in a liquid concentrate, liquid extract, or liquid distillate
form, possession of hashish is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.



      (5)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is a combination of a
fentanyl-related compound and marihuana, one of the following applies:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(5)(b)
of this section, the offender is guilty of possession of marihuana and shall
be punished as



provided in division (C)(3) of this section. Except as otherwise provided in
division (C)(5)(b) of this section, the offender is not guilty of possession
of a fentanyl-related compound under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) and shall not be
charged with, convicted of, or punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) for
possession of a fentanyl-related compound.



         (b)   If the offender knows or has reason to know that
the compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is the drug involved
contains a fentanyl-related compound, the offender is guilty of possession of
a fentanyl-related compound and shall be punished under R.C. §
2925.11(C)(11).



      (6)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is a combination of a
fentanyl-related compound and any Schedule III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V
controlled substance that is not a fentanyl- related compound, one of the
following applies:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(6)(b)
of this section, the offender is guilty of possession of drugs and shall be
punished as provided in division (C)(2) of this section. Except as otherwise
provided in division (C)(6)(b) of this section, the offender is not guilty of
possession of a fentanyl-related compound under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) and
shall not be charged with, convicted of, or punished under R.C. §
2925.11(C)(11) for possession of a fentanyl-related compound.



         (b)   If the offender knows or has reason to know that
the compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is the drug involved
contains a fentanyl-related compound, the offender is guilty of possession of
a fentanyl-related compound and shall be punished under R.C. §
2925.11(C)(11).



   (D)   Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this
section does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the
person so arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the
person's criminal record, including any inquiries contained in any
application for employment, license, or other right or privilege, or made in
connection with the person's appearance as a witness.



   (E)   (1)   In addition to any prison term or jail term
authorized or required by division (C) of this section and R.C. §§ 2929.13,
2929.14, 2929.22, 2929.24, and 2929.25, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and in addition to any other sanction that is imposed
for the offense under this section, R.C. §§ 2929.11 through 2929.18, or
R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the court that sentences an offender who is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a violation of division (A) of this section may suspend the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit for not
more than five years. However, if the offender pleaded guilty to or was
convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially similar
municipal ordinance or the law of another state or the United States arising
out of the same set of circumstances as the violation, the court shall
suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit for not more than five years.



      (2)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in
addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the
court immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.



   (F)   (1)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of
the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under
this section prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the
sentencing court requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an
offender who pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. §
4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or law of another
state or the United States that arose out of the same set of circumstances as
the violation for which the offender’s license or permit was suspended
under this section shall not file such a motion.



      (2)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (F) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the
suspension.



(R.C. § 2925.11)  ('69 Code, § 133.18)  (Ord. C-467, passed 9-11-78; Am.
Ord. C-490, passed 11-12-79)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Felony drug possession offenses, see R.C. § 2925.11(C)



§ 138.04  POSSESSING DRUG ABUSE INSTRUMENTS.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly make, obtain, possess, or use any
instrument, article, or thing the customary and primary purpose of which is
for the administration or use of a dangerous drug, other than marihuana, when
the instrument involved is a hypodermic or syringe, whether or not of crude
or extemporized manufacture or assembly, and the instrument, article, or
thing involved has been used by the offender to unlawfully administer or use
a dangerous drug, other than marihuana, or to prepare a dangerous drug, other
than marihuana, for unlawful administration or use.



   (B)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health
professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of
pharmacies, and other persons whose conduct was in accordance with R.C.
Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, and 4741.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing drug
abuse instruments, a misdemeanor of the second degree.  If the offender
previously has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, violation of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



   (D)   (1)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an
offender for a violation of this section, the court may suspend for not more
than five years the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or permit. However, if the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a
violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance
or the law of another state or the United States arising out of the same set
of circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit for not more than five
years. If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to
any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.



      (2)   (a)   Any offender who received a mandatory
suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit under this section prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with
the sentencing court requesting the termination of the suspension. However,
an offender who pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. §
4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or law of another
state or the United States that arose out of the same set of circumstances as
the violation for which the offender’s license or permit was suspended
under this section shall not file such a motion.



         (b)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (D)(2)
of this section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the
suspension.



(R.C. § 2925.12)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 138.05  PERMITTING DRUG ABUSE.



   (A)   No person who is the owner, operator, or person in charge of a
locomotive, watercraft, aircraft, or other vehicle, as defined in R.C. §
4501.01, shall knowingly permit the vehicle to be used for the commission of
a felony drug abuse offense.



   (B)   No person, who is the owner, lessee, or occupant, or who has
custody, control, or supervision of premises, or real estate, including
vacant land, shall knowingly permit his or her premises, or real estate,
including vacant land, to be used for the commission of a felony drug abuse
offense by another person.



   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting drug
abuse.



      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this section,
permitting drug abuse is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (2)   Permitting drug abuse is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if the felony drug abuse offense in question is a
violation of R.C. § 2925.02, 2925.03, or 2925.04, or if the felony drug
abuse offense in question is a violation of R.C. § 2925.041 and the offender
had actual knowledge, at the time the offender permitted the vehicle,
premises, or real estate to be used as described in division (A) or (B) of
this section, that the person who assembled or possessed the chemicals in
question in violation of R.C. § 2925.041 had assembled or possessed them
with the intent to manufacture a controlled substance in Schedule I or
Schedule II in violation of R.C. § 2925.04.



   (D)   Any premises or real estate that is permitted to be used in
violation of division (B) of this section constitutes a nuisance subject to
abatement pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3767.



(R.C. § 2925.13(A) - (C), (F))  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Felony if committed in the vicinity of a school or in the vicinity of a
juvenile, see R.C. § 2925.13(C)(3)



§ 138.06  (RESERVED).



§ 138.07  ABUSING HARMFUL INTOXICANTS.



   (A)   Except for lawful research, clinical, medical, dental, or
veterinary purposes, no person, with purpose to induce intoxication or
similar physiological effects, shall obtain, possess, or use a harmful
intoxicant.



   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of abusing harmful
intoxicants, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the offender previously
has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, abusing harmful intoxicants is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



   (C)   (1)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an
offender for a violation of this section, the court may suspend for not more
than five years the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or permit. However, if the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a
violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance
or the law of another state or the United States arising out of the same set
of circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit for not more than five
years. If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to
any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.



      (2)   (a)   Any offender who received a mandatory
suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit under this section prior to the September 13, 2016 may file a motion
with the sentencing court requesting the termination of the suspension.
However, an offender who pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of
R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or law of
another state or the United States that arose out of the same set of
circumstances as the violation for which the offender’s license or permit
was suspended under this section shall not file such a motion.



         (b)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (C)(2)
of this section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the
suspension.



(R.C. § 2925.31)  Penalty, see § 130.99



§ 138.08  ILLEGAL DISPENSING OF DRUG SAMPLES.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly furnish a sample drug to another
person.



   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to manufacturers,
wholesalers, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, licensed health professionals
authorized to prescribe drugs, and other persons whose conduct is in
accordance with R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4725, 4729, 4730, 4731, and
4741.



   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal
dispensing of drug samples.



      (2)   If the drug involved in the offense is a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule I or Schedule II,
with the exception of marihuana, illegal dispensing of drug samples is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.



      (3)   If the drug involved in the offense is a dangerous drug
or a compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule III,
Schedule IV or Schedule V, or is marihuana, the penalty for the offense shall
be determined as follows:



         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in the following
division, illegal dispensing of drug samples is a misdemeanor of the second
degree.



         (b)   If the offense was committed in the vicinity of a
school or in the vicinity of a juvenile, illegal dispensing of drug samples
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.



(R.C. § 2925.36(A) - (C))  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Disbursement of fine monies and bail forfeitures, see R.C. §
2925.36(D)(3) and (4)



   Felony offenses, see R.C. § 2925.36(C)(2)



§ 138.09  FEDERAL PROSECUTION BAR TO MUNICIPAL PROSECUTION.



   If a violation of this chapter is a violation of the federal drug abuse
control laws, as defined in R.C. § 3719.01, a conviction or acquittal under
the federal drug abuse control laws for the same act is a bar to prosecution
in this state.



(R.C. § 2925.50)



§ 138.10  NITROUS OXIDE: IMPROPER DISPENSING OR DISTRIBUTION; POSSESSION IN
A MOTOR VEHICLE.



   (A)   Improper dispensing or distribution.



      (1)   No person who dispenses or distributes nitrous oxide in
cartridges shall fail to comply with either of the following:



         (a)   The record-keeping requirements established under
division (A)(3) of this section.



         (b)   The labeling and transaction identification
requirements established under division (A)(4) of this section.



      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(1)(a) or (A)(1)(b) of this
section is guilty of improperly dispensing or distributing nitrous oxide, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



      (3)   Beginning July 1, 2001, a person who dispenses or
distributes nitrous oxide shall record each transaction involving the
dispensing or distribution of the nitrous oxide on a separate card.  The
person shall require the purchaser to sign the card and provide a complete
residence address.  The person dispensing or distributing the nitrous oxide
shall sign and date the card.  The person shall retain the card recording a
transaction for one year from the date of the transaction.  The person shall
maintain the cards at the person's business address and make them available
during normal business hours for inspection and copying by officers or
employees of the State Board of Pharmacy or of other law enforcement agencies
that are authorized to investigate violations of this code, R.C. Chapters
2925, 3719, or 4729, or federal drug abuse control laws.  The cards used to
record each transaction shall inform the purchaser of the following:



         (a)   That nitrous oxide cartridges are to be used only
for purposes of preparing food;



         (b)   That inhalation of nitrous oxide can have
dangerous health effects; and



         (c)   That it is a violation of state law to distribute
or dispense cartridges of nitrous oxide to any person under age 21,
punishable as a felony of the fifth degree.



      (4)   (a)   Each cartridge of nitrous oxide dispensed or
distributed in this municipality shall bear the following printed warning: 
"Nitrous oxide cartridges are to be used only for purposes of preparing
food.  Nitrous oxide cartridges may not be sold to persons under age 21. 
Do not inhale contents.  Misuse can be dangerous to your health."



         (b)   Each time a person dispenses or distributes one or
more cartridges of nitrous oxide, the person shall mark the packaging
containing the cartridges with a label or other device that identifies the
person who dispensed or distributed the nitrous oxide and the person's
business address.



(R.C. § 2925.32(B)(4), (D)(2), (F), (G))



   (B)   Possession in a motor vehicle.



      (1)   As used in this section, MOTOR VEHICLE, STREET, and
HIGHWAY have the same meaning as in R.C. § 4511.01.



      (2)   Unless authorized by this code or by state law, no
person shall possess an open cartridge of nitrous oxide in either of the
following circumstances:



         (a)   While operating or being a passenger in or on a
motor vehicle on a street, highway, or other public or private property open
to the public for purposes of vehicular traffic or parking.



         (b)   While being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on
a street, highway, or other public or private property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular traffic or parking.



      (3)   Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of
possessing nitrous oxide in a motor vehicle, a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree.



      (4)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an
offender for possessing nitrous oxide in a motor vehicle, the court may
suspend for not more than five years the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit.



(R.C. § 2925.33)  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Trafficking in harmful intoxicants, see R.C. § 2925.32



§ 138.11  LABORATORY REPORT REQUIRED.



   (A)   (1)   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of this
chapter or R.C. Chapters 2925 or 3719, a laboratory report from the Bureau of
Criminal Identification and Investigation or a laboratory operated by another
law enforcement agency, or a laboratory established by or under the authority
of an institution of higher education that has its main campus in this state
and that is accredited by the Association of American Universities or the
North Central Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools, primarily for
the purpose of providing scientific service to law enforcement agencies, and
signed by the person performing the analysis, stating that the substance that
is the basis of the alleged offense has been weighed and analyzed and stating
the findings as to the content, weight, and identity of the substance and
that it contains any amount of a controlled substance and the number and
description of unit dosages, is prima facie evidence of the content,
identity, and weight or the existence and number of unit dosages of the
substance. In any criminal prosecution for a violation of R.C. § 2925.041 or
a violation of this chapter, R.C. Chapter 2925 or R.C. Chapter 3719 that is
based on the possession of chemicals sufficient to produce a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule I, II, III, IV, or V,
a laboratory report from the Bureau or from any laboratory that is operated
or established as described in this division that is signed by the person
performing the analysis, stating that the substances that are the basis of
the alleged offense have been weighed and analyzed and stating the findings
as to the content, weight, and identity of each of the substances, is prima
facie evidence of the content, identity, and weight of the substances.



      (2)   Attached to that report shall be a copy of a notarized
statement by the signer of the report giving the name of the signer and
stating that the signer is an employee of the laboratory issuing the report
and that performing the analysis is a part of the signer's regular duties,
and giving an outline of the signer's education, training, and experience for
performing an analysis of materials included under this section.  The signer
shall attest that scientifically accepted tests were performed with due
caution, and that the evidence was handled in accordance with established and
accepted procedures while in the custody of the laboratory.



   (B)   The prosecuting attorney shall serve a copy of the report on
the attorney of record for the accused, or on the accused if the accused has
no attorney, prior to any proceeding in which the report is to be used
against the accused other than at a preliminary hearing or grand jury
proceeding where the report may be used without having been previously served
upon the accused.



   (C)   The report shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents,
identity, and weight or the existence and number of unit dosages of the
substance if the accused or the accused's attorney demands the testimony of
the person signing the report, by serving the demand upon the prosecuting
attorney, within seven days from the accused or the accused's attorney's
receipt of the report.  The time may be extended by a trial judge in the
interests of justice.



   (D)   Any report issued for use under this section shall contain
notice of the right of the accused to demand, and the manner in which the
accused shall demand, the testimony of the person signing the report.



   (E)   Any person who is accused of a violation of this chapter or
R.C. Chapters 2925 or 3719 is entitled, upon written request made to the
prosecuting attorney, to have a portion of the substance that is, or of each
of the substances that are, the basis of the alleged violation preserved for
the benefit of independent analysis performed by a laboratory  analyst
employed by the accused person, or, if the accused is indigent, by a
qualified laboratory analyst appointed by the court.  Such portion shall be
a representative sample of the entire substance that is, or of each of the
substances that are, the basis of the alleged violation and shall be of
sufficient size, in the opinion of the court, to permit the accused's analyst
to make a thorough scientific analysis concerning the identity of the
substance or substances.  The prosecuting attorney shall provide the
accused's analyst with the sample portion at least 14 days prior to trial,
unless the trial is to be held in a court not of record or unless the accused
person is charged with a minor misdemeanor, in which case the prosecuting
attorney shall provide the accused's analyst with the sample portion at least
three days prior to trial.  If the prosecuting attorney determines that such
a sample portion cannot be preserved and given to the accused's analyst, the
prosecuting attorney shall so inform the accused person, or the accused's
attorney.  In such a circumstance, the accused person is entitled, upon
written request made to the prosecuting attorney, to have the accused's
privately employed or court appointed analyst present at an analysis of the
substance that is, or the substances that are, the basis of the alleged
violation, and, upon further written request, to receive copies of all
recorded scientific data that result from the analysis and that can be used
by an analyst in arriving at conclusions, findings, or opinions concerning
the identity of the substance or substances subject to the analysis.



   (F)   In addition to the rights provided under division (E) of this
section, any person who is accused of a violation of this chapter or R.C.
Chapters 2925 or 3719 that involves a bulk amount of a controlled substance,
or any multiple thereof, or who is accused of a violation of R.C. § 2925.11
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, other than a minor
misdemeanor violation, that involves marihuana, is entitled, upon written
request made to the prosecuting attorney, to have a laboratory analyst of the
accused's choice, or, if the accused is indigent, a qualified laboratory
analyst appointed by the court, present at a measurement or weighing of the
substance that is the basis of the alleged violation.  Also, the accused
person is entitled, upon further written request, to receive copies of all
recorded scientific data that result from the measurement or weighing and
that can be used by an analyst in arriving at conclusions, findings, or
opinions concerning the weight, volume, or number of unit doses of the
substance subject to the measurement or weighing.



(R.C. § 2925.51)



   (G)   In addition to the financial sanctions authorized or required
under R.C. §§ 2929.18 and 2929.28 and to any costs otherwise authorized or
required under any provision of law, the court imposing sentence upon an
offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a drug abuse offense may
order the offender to pay to the state, municipal, or county law enforcement
agencies that handled the investigation and prosecution all of the costs that
the state, municipal corporation, or county reasonably incurred in having
tests performed under this section or R.C. § 2925.51 or in any other manner
on any substance that was the basis of, or involved in, the offense to
determine whether the substance contained any amount of a controlled
substance if the results of the tests indicate that the substance tested
contained any controlled substance. No court shall order an offender under
this section to pay the costs of tests performed on a substance if the
results of the tests do not indicate that the substance tested contained any
controlled substance. The court shall hold a hearing to determine the amount
of costs to be imposed under this section. The court may hold the hearing as
part of the sentencing hearing for the offender.



(R.C. § 2925.511) 



§ 138.12  COUNTERFEIT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.



   (A)   No person shall knowingly possess any counterfeit controlled
substance.



   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section shall be guilty
of possession of counterfeit controlled substances, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.



(R.C. § 2925.37(A), (G))  Penalty, see § 130.99



Statutory reference:



   Trafficking and other felony counterfeit controlled substance offenses,
see R.C. § 2925.37(H) - (K)



§ 138.13  USE, POSSESSION, OR SALE OF DRUG PARAPHERNALIA.



   (A)   As used in this section, DRUG PARAPHERNALIA means any
equipment, product, or material of any kind that is used by the offender,
intended by the offender for use, or designed for use, in propagating,
cultivating, growing, harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging,
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introduced into the human body, a controlled substance in violation of this
chapter.  DRUG PARAPHERNALIA includes, but is not limited to, any of the
following equipment, products, or materials that are used by the offender,
intended by the offender for use, or designed by the offender for use, in any
of the following manners:



      (1)   A kit for propagating, cultivating, growing, or
harvesting any species of a plant that is a controlled substance or from
which a controlled substance can be derived.



      (2)   A kit for manufacturing, compounding, converting,
producing, processing, or preparing a controlled substance.



      (3)   Any object, instrument, or device for manufacturing,
compounding, converting, producing, processing, or preparing methamphetamine.



      (4)   An isomerization device for increasing the potency of
any species of a plant that is a controlled substance.



      (5)   Testing equipment for identifying, or analyzing the
strength, effectiveness, or purity of, a controlled substance.



      (6)   A scale or balance for weighing or measuring a
controlled substance.



      (7)   A diluent or adulterant, such as quinine hydrochloride,
mannitol, mannite, dextrose, or lactose, for cutting a controlled substance.



      (8)   A separation gin or sifter for removing twigs and seeds
from, or otherwise cleaning or refining, marihuana.



      (9)   A blender, bowl, container, spoon, or mixing device for
compounding a controlled substance.



      (10)   A capsule, balloon, envelope, or container for
packaging small quantities of a controlled substance.



      (11)   A container or device for storing or concealing a
controlled substance.



      (12)   A hypodermic syringe, needle, or instrument for
parenterally injecting a controlled substance into the human body.



      (13)   An object, instrument, or device for ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body, marihuana, cocaine,
hashish, or hashish oil, such as a metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone,
plastic, or ceramic pipe, with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish
head, or punctured metal bowl; water pipe; carburetion tube or device;
smoking or carburetion mask; roach clip or similar object used to hold
burning material, such as a marihuana cigarette, that has become too small or
too short to be held in the hand; miniature cocaine spoon, or cocaine vial;
chamber pipe; carburetor pipe; electric pipe; air driver pipe; chillum; bong;
or ice pipe or chiller.



   (B)   In determining if any equipment, product, or material is drug
paraphernalia, a court or law  enforcement officer shall consider, in
addition to other relevant factors, the following:



      (1)   Any statement by the owner or by anyone in control of
the equipment, product, or material, concerning its use.



      (2)   The proximity in time or space of the equipment,
product, or material, or of the act relating to the equipment, product, or
material, to a violation of any provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter
2925.



      (3)   The proximity of the equipment, product, or material to
any controlled substance.



      (4)   The existence of any residue of a controlled substance
on the equipment, product, or material.



      (5)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of the
owner, or of anyone in control, of the equipment, product, or material, to
deliver it to any person whom he or she knows intends to use the equipment,
product, or material to facilitate a violation of any provision of this
chapter or R.C. Chapter 2925.  A finding that the owner or anyone in control
of the equipment, product, or material is not guilty of a violation of any
other provision of this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2925 does not prevent a
finding that the equipment, product, or material was intended or designed by
the offender for use as drug paraphernalia.



      (6)   Any oral or written instruction provided with the
equipment, product, or material concerning its use.



      (7)   Any descriptive material accompanying the equipment,
product, or material and explaining or depicting its use.



      (8)   National or local advertising concerning the use of the
equipment, product, or material.



      (9)   The manner and circumstances in which the equipment,
product, or material is displayed for sale.



      (10)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of the
sales of the equipment, product, or material to the total sales of the
business enterprise.



      (11)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses of the
equipment, product, or material in the community.



      (12)   Expert testimony concerning the use of the equipment,
product, or material.



   (C)   (1)   Subject to division (D)(2) of this section, no person
shall knowingly use, or possess with purpose to use, drug paraphernalia.



      (2)   No person shall knowingly sell, or possess or
manufacture with purpose to sell, drug paraphernalia, if he or she knows or
reasonably should know that the equipment, product, or material will be used
as drug paraphernalia.



      (3)   No person shall place an advertisement in any newspaper,
magazine, handbill, or other publication that is published and printed and
circulates primarily within this state, if he or she knows that the purpose
of the advertisement is to promote the illegal sale in this municipality or
in this state of the equipment, product, or material that the offender
intended or designed for use as drug paraphernalia.



   (D)   (1)   This section does not apply to manufacturers,
licensed health professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists,
owners of pharmacies, and other persons whose conduct is in accordance with
R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, and 4741.  This section
shall not be construed to prohibit the possession or use of a hypodermic as
authorized by R.C. § 3719.172.



      (2)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to a
person’s use, or possession with purpose to use, any drug paraphernalia
that is equipment, a product, or material of any kind that is used by the
person, intended by the person for use, or designed for use in storing,
containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing into the human body marihuana.



   (E)   Notwithstanding R.C. Chapter 2981, any drug paraphernalia that
was used, possessed, sold, or manufactured in violation of this section shall
be seized, after a conviction for that violation, shall be forfeited, and
upon forfeiture shall be disposed of pursuant to R.C. 2981.12(B).



   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (C)(1) of this section is
guilty of illegal use or possession of drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.



      (2)   Except as provided in division (F)(3) of this section,
whoever violates division (C)(2) of this section is guilty of dealing in drug
paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the second degree.



      (3)   Whoever violates division (C)(2) of this section by
selling drug paraphernalia to a juvenile is guilty of selling drug
paraphernalia to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (4)   Whoever violates division (C)(3) of this section is
guilty of illegal advertising of drug paraphernalia, a misdemeanor of the
second degree.



   (G)   (1)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an
offender for a violation of this section, the court may suspend for not more
than five years the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or permit. However, if the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a
violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance
or the law of another state or the United States arising out of the same set
of circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit for not more than five
years. If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to
any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with R.C. § 2925.38.



      (2)   (a)   Any offender who received a mandatory
suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit under this section prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with
the sentencing court requesting the termination of the suspension. However,
an offender who pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. §
4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance or law of another
state or the United States that arose out of the same set of circumstances as
the violation for which the offender’s license or permit was suspended
under this section shall not file such a motion.



         (b)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (G)(2)
of this section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the
suspension.



(R.C. § 2925.14)



   (H)   Illegal use or possession of marihuana drug paraphernalia.



      (1)   As used in this division (H), DRUG PARAPHERNALIA has the
same meaning as in section division (A) of this section.



      (2)   In determining if any equipment, product, or material is
drug paraphernalia, a court or law enforcement officer shall consider, in
addition to other relevant factors, all factors identified in division (B) of
this section.



      (3)   No person shall knowingly use, or possess with purpose
to use, any drug paraphernalia that is equipment, a product, or material of
any kind that is used by the person, intended by the person for use, or
designed for use in storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting,
inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body marihuana.



      (4)   This division (H) does not apply to any person
identified in division (D)(1) of this section, and it shall not be construed
to prohibit the possession or use of a hypodermic as authorized by R.C. §
3719.172.



      (5)   Division (E) of this section applies with respect to any
drug paraphernalia that was used or possessed in violation of this section.



      (6)   Whoever violates division (H)(3) of this section is
guilty of illegal use or possession of marihuana drug paraphernalia, a minor
misdemeanor.



      (7)   (a)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon
an offender for a violation division (H) of this section, the court may
suspend for not more than five years the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit. However, if the offender pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a
substantially similar municipal ordinance or the law of another state or the
United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the violation,
the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit for not more than five years. If the offender is a
professionally licensed person, in addition to any other sanction imposed for
a violation of division (H) of this section, the court immediately shall
comply with R.C. § 2925.38.



         (b)   1.   Any offender who received a mandatory
suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit under division (H) of this section prior to September 13, 2016 may
file a motion with the sentencing court requesting the termination of the
suspension. However, an offender who pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a
violation of R.C. § 4511.19 or a substantially similar municipal ordinance
or law of another state or the United States that arose out of the same set
of circumstances as the violation for which the offender’s license or
permit was suspended under division (H) of this section shall not file such a
motion.



            2.   Upon the filing of a motion under division
(H)(7)(b) of this section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may
terminate the suspension.



(R.C. § 2925.141)



§ 138.14  PSEUDOEPHEDRINE SALES.



   (A)   Unlawful purchases.



      (1)   As used in divisions (A), (B), (C) and (D) of this
section:



         CONSUMER PRODUCT. Any food or drink that is consumed or
used by humans and any drug, including a drug that may be provided legally
only pursuant to a prescription, that is intended to be consumed or used by
humans.



         EPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation
that contains any quantity of ephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers,
or salts of optical isomers.



         EPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains
ephedrine.



         PSEUDOEPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or
preparation that contains any quantity of pseudoephedrine, any of its salts,
optical isomers, or salts of optical isomers.



         PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product consisting that
contains pseudoephedrine.



         RETAILER. A place of business that offers consumer products
for sale to the general public.



         SINGLE-INGREDIENT PREPARATION. A compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that contains a single active ingredient.



         TERMINAL DISTRIBUTOR OF DANGEROUS DRUGS. Has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.



      (2)   (a)   1.   No individual shall knowingly purchase,
receive, or otherwise acquire an amount of pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product that is greater than either of the following unless the
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product is dispensed by a pharmacist
pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a licensed health professional
authorized to prescribe drugs and the conduct of the pharmacist and the
licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs is in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, or 4741:



               a,   Three and six tenths grams within a
period of a single day;



               b.   Nine grams within a period of 30
consecutive days.



            2.   The limits specified in divisions
(A)(2)(a)1.a. and (A)(2)(a)1.b. of this section apply to the total amount of
base pseudoephedrine or base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product, respectively. The limits do not apply to the product’s
overall weight.



         (b)   It is not a violation of division (B)(1) of this
section for an individual to receive or accept more than an amount of
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product specified in division
(A)(2)(a)1.a. or (A)(2)(a)1.b. of this section if the individual is an
employee of a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, and the
employee receives or accepts from the retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product in a sealed
container in connection with manufacturing, warehousing, placement, stocking,
bagging, loading, or unloading of the product.



      (3)   (a)   No individual under 18 years of age shall
knowingly purchase, receive, or otherwise acquire a pseudoephedrine product,
or ephedrine product unless the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
is dispensed by a pharmacist pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a
licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs and the conduct of
the pharmacist and the licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731,
or 4741.



         (b)   Division (A)(3)(a) of this section does not apply
to an individual under 18 years of age who purchases, receives, or otherwise
acquires a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product from any of the
following:



            1.   A licensed health professional authorized to
prescribe drugs or pharmacist who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides the
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to that individual and whose
conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730,
4731, or 4741;



            2.   A parent or guardian of that individual who
provides the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the individual;



            3.   A person, as authorized by that
individual’s parent or guardian, who dispenses, sells, or otherwise
provides the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the individual;



            4.   A retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs who provides the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
to that individual if the individual is an employee of the retailer or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs and the individual receives or
accepts from the retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs the
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product in a sealed container in
connection with manufacturing, warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging,
loading, or unloading of the product.



      (4)   No individual under 18 years of age shall knowingly show
or give false information concerning the individual’s name, age, or other
identification for the purpose of purchasing, receiving, or otherwise
acquiring a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product.



      (5)   No individual shall knowingly fail to comply with the
requirements of R.C. § 3715.051(B).



      (6)   Whoever violates division (A)(2)(a) of this section is
guilty of unlawful purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product, a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (7)   Whoever violates division (A)(3)(a) of this section is
guilty of underage purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product, a delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if
it could be committed by an adult.



      (8)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) of this section is
guilty of using false information to purchase a pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product, a delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the first
degree if it could be committed by an adult.



      (9)   Whoever violates division (A)(5) of this section is
guilty of improper purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



(R.C. § 2925.55)



   (B)   Unlawful retail sales.



      (1)   (a)   1.   Except as provided in division
(B)(1)(b) of this section, no retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs or an employee of a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs
shall knowingly sell, offer to sell, hold for sale, deliver, or otherwise
provide to any individual an amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product that is greater than either of the following:



               a.   Three and six tenths grams within a
period of a single day;



               b.   Nine grams within a period of 30
consecutive days.



            2.   The maximum amounts specified in divisions
(B)(1)(a)1.a. and (B)(1)(a)1.b. of this section apply to the total amount of
base pseudoephedrine or base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product, respectively. The maximum amounts do not apply to the
product’s overall weight.



         (b)   1.   Division (B)(1)(a) of this section does
not apply to any quantity of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
dispensed by a pharmacist pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a
licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs if the conduct of
the pharmacist and the licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731,
or 4741.



            2.   It is not a violation of division (B)(1)(a)
of this section for a retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, or
employee of either to provide to an individual more than an amount of
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product specified in division
(B)(1)(a)1.a. or (B)(1)(a)1.b. of this section under either of the following
circumstances:



               a.   The individual is an employee of the
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, and the employee
receives or accepts from the retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs, or employee the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product in a
sealed container in connection with manufacturing, warehousing, placement,
stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the product;



               b.   A stop-sale alert is generated after
the submission of information to the national precursor log exchange under
the conditions described in R.C. § 3715.052(A)(2).



      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (B)(2)(b) of
this section, no retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs or an
employee of a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall sell,
offer to sell, hold for sale, deliver, or otherwise provide a pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to an individual who is under 18 years of age.



         (b)   Division (B)(2)(a) of this section does not apply
to any of the following:



            1.   A licensed health professional authorized to
prescribe drugs or pharmacist who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to an individual under 18 years
of age and whose conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723,
4729, 4730, 4731, or 4741;



            2.   A parent or guardian of an individual under
18 years of age who provides a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
to the individual;



            3.   A person who, as authorized by the
individual’s parent or guardian, dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to an individual under 18 years
of age;



            4.   The provision by a retailer, terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs, or employee of either of a pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product in a sealed container to an employee of the
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs who is under 18 years of
age in connection with manufacturing, warehousing, placement, stocking,
bagging, loading, or unloading of the product.



      (3)   No retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs
shall fail to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 3715.051(A) or R.C. §
3715.052(A)(2).



      (4)   No retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs
shall fail to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 3715.052(A)(1).



      (5)   Whoever violates division (B)(1)(a) of this section is
guilty of unlawfully selling a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product,
a misdemeanor of the first degree.



      (6)   Whoever violates division (B)(2)(a) of this section is
guilty of unlawfully selling a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
to a minor, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.



      (7)   Whoever violates division (B)(3) of this section is
guilty of improper sale of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
misdemeanor of the second degree.



      (8)   Whoever violates division (B)(4) of this section is
guilty of failing to submit information to the national precursor log
exchange, a misdemeanor for which the offender shall be fined not more than
$1,000 per violation.



(R.C. § 2925.56)



   (C)   Transaction scans.



      (1)   As used in this division and division (D) of this
section:



         CARD HOLDER. Means any person who presents a driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or an identification card to a seller, or an
agent or employee of a seller, to purchase or receive any pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product from the seller, agent, or employee.



         IDENTIFICATION CARD. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2927.021.



         SELLER. Means a retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs.



         TRANSACTION SCAN. Means the process by which a seller or an
agent or employee of a seller checks by means of a transaction scan device
the validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an
identification card that is presented as a condition for purchasing or
receiving any pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product.



         TRANSACTION SCAN DEVICE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
2927.021.



      (2)   (a)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller
may perform a transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device to check
the validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
identification card presented by a card holder as a condition for selling,
giving away, or otherwise distributing to the card holder a pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product.



         (b)   If the information deciphered by the transaction
scan performed under division (C)(2)(a) of this section fails to match the
information printed on the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
identification card presented by the card holder, or if the transaction scan
indicates that the information so printed is false or fraudulent, neither the
seller nor any agent or employee of the seller shall sell, give away, or
otherwise distribute any pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the
card holder.



         (c)   Division (C)(2)(a) of this section does not
preclude a seller or an agent or employee of a seller as a condition for
selling, giving away, or otherwise distributing a pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product to the person presenting the document from using a
transaction scan device to check the validity of a document other than a
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card if the
document includes a bar code or magnetic strip that may be scanned by the
device.



      (3)   Rules adopted by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under
R.C. § 4301.61(C) apply to the use of transaction scan devices for purposes
of this division (C)  and division (D) of this section.



      (4)   (a)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller
shall electronically or mechanically record or maintain any information
derived from a transaction scan, except the following:



            1.   The name, address, and date of birth of the
person listed on the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
identification card presented by a card holder;



            2.   The expiration date, identification number,
and issuing agency of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
identification card presented by a card holder.



         (b)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
use the information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is
permitted to be recorded and maintained under division (C)(4)(a) of this
section except for purposes of division (D) of this section, R.C. § 2925.58,
or R.C. § 3715.052(A)(1).



         (c)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
use a transaction scan device for a purpose other than the purpose specified
in division (C)(2)(a) of this section.



         (d)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
sell or otherwise disseminate the information derived from a transaction scan
to any third party, including, but not limited to, selling or otherwise
disseminating that information for any marketing, advertising, or promotional
activities, but a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that
information pursuant to a court order or as specifically authorized by
division (D) of this section or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code.



      (5)   Nothing in this division (C) or division (D) of this
section relieves a seller or an agent or employee of a seller of any
responsibility to comply with any other applicable state or federal laws or
rules governing the sale, giving away, or other distribution of
pseudoephedrine products or ephedrine products.



      (6)   Whoever violates division (C)(2)(b) or (C)(4) of this
section is guilty of engaging in an illegal pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product transaction scan, and the court may impose upon the
offender a civil penalty of up to $1,000 for each violation. The Clerk of the
Court shall pay each collected civil penalty to the County Treasurer for
deposit into the County Treasury.



(R.C. § 2925.57)



   (D)   Affirmative defenses.



      (1)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may not be
found guilty of a charge of a violation of division (B) of this section in
which the age of the purchaser or other recipient of a pseudoephedrine
product is an element of the alleged violation if the seller, agent, or
employee raises and proves as an affirmative defense that all of the
following occurred:



         (a)   A card holder attempting to purchase or receive a
pseudoephedrine product presented a driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or an identification card.



         (b)   A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or identification card that the card holder presented
indicated that the license or card was valid.



         (c)   The pseudoephedrine product was sold, given away,
or otherwise distributed to the card holder in reasonable reliance upon the
identification presented and the completed transaction scan.



      (2)   In determining whether a seller or an agent or employee
of a seller has proven the affirmative defense provided by division (D)(1) of
this section, the trier of fact in the action for the alleged violation of
division (B) of this section shall consider any written policy that the
seller has adopted and implemented and that is intended to prevent violations
of division (B) of this section. For purposes of division (D)(1)(c) of this
section, the trier of fact shall consider that reasonable reliance upon the
identification presented and the completed transaction scan may require a
seller or an agent or employee of a seller to exercise reasonable diligence
to determine, and that the use of a transaction scan device does not excuse a
seller or an agent or employee of a seller from exercising reasonable
diligence to determine, the following:



         (a)   Whether a person to whom the seller or agent or
employee of a seller sells, gives away, or otherwise distributes a
pseudoephedrine product is 18 years of age or older;



         (b)   Whether the description and picture appearing on
the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card
presented by a card holder is that of the card holder.



      (3)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense
provided by division (D)(1) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles or a deputy registrar who issued an identification card under R.C.
§§ 4507.50 through 4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of
the records of that issuance in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or
contractors with the Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the action.



(R.C. § 2925.58)



   (E)   Retailer’s duties.



      (1)   As used in divisions (E) and (F) of this section:



         CONSUMER PRODUCT. Any food or drink that is consumed or
used by humans and any drug, including a drug that may be provided legally
only pursuant to a prescription, that is intended to be consumed or used by
humans.



         DRUG. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.



         EPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation
that contains any quantity of ephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers,
or salts of optical isomers.



         EPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains
ephedrine.



         LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICIAL. An officer or employee of any
agency or authority of the United States, a state, a territory, a political
subdivision of a state or territory, or an Indian tribe, who is empowered by
the law to investigate or conduct an official inquiry into a potential
violation of law or prosecute or otherwise conduct a criminal, civil, or
administrative proceeding arising from an alleged violation of law.



         LICENSED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL AUTHORIZED TO PRESCRIBE DRUGS.
Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.



         NATIONAL PRECURSOR LOG EXCHANGE or EXCHANGE. The electronic
system for tracking sales of pseudoephedrine products and ephedrine products
on a national basis that is administered by the National Association of Drug
Diversion Investigators or a successor organization.



         PHARMACIST. A person licensed under Chapter 4729. of the
Revised Code to engage in the practice of pharmacy.



         PHARMACY. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.



         PRESCRIBER. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.



         PRESCRIPTION. Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.



         PROOF OF AGE. A driver’s license, a commercial driver’s
license, a military identification card, a passport, or an identification
card issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52 that shows a person is 18
years of age or older.



         PSEUDOEPHEDRINE. Any material, compound, mixture, or
preparation that contains any quantity of pseudoephedrine, any of its salts,
optical isomers, or salts of optical isomers.



         PSEUDOEPHEDRINE PRODUCT. A consumer product that contains
pseudoephedrine.



         RETAILER. A place of business that offers consumer products
for sale to the general public.



         SINGLE-INGREDIENT PREPARATION. A compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that contains a single active ingredient.



         STOP-SALE ALERT. A notification sent from the national
precursor log exchange to a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs indicating that the completion of a sale of a pseudoephedrine product
or ephedrine product would result in a violation of R.C. § 2925.56(A)(1) or
federal law.



         TERMINAL DISTRIBUTOR OF DANGEROUS DRUGS. Has the same
meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.



         WHOLESALER. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.



      (2)   A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs
that sells, offers to sell, holds for sale, delivers, or otherwise provides a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the public shall do all of
the following:



         (a)   Segregate pseudoephedrine products or ephedrine
products from other merchandise so that no member of the public may procure
or purchase such products without the direct assistance of a pharmacist or
other authorized employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs;



         (b)   With regard to each time a pseudoephedrine product
or ephedrine product is sold or otherwise provided without a valid
prescription:



            1.   Determine, by examination of a valid proof of
age, that the purchaser or recipient is at least 18 years of age;



            2.   a.   Using any information available,
including information from the national precursor log exchange if the
information is accessible, make a reasonable attempt to ensure that no
individual purchases or receives an amount of pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product that is greater than either of the following:



                  i.    Three and six tenths grams
within a period of a single day;



                  ii.    Nine grams within a period of
30 consecutive days.



               b.   The maximum amounts specified in
divisions (E)(2)(b)2.a.i. and (E)(2)(b)2.a.ii. of this section apply to the
total amount of base pseudoephedrine or base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product, respectively. The maximum amounts do not apply
to the product’s overall weight.



         (c)   Maintain a log book of pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product purchases, in accordance with R.C. § 3715.051;



         (d)   If required to comply with section R.C. §
3715.052, submit the information specified in divisions (A)(1)(a) to
(A)(1)(d) of that section to the national precursor log exchange.



      (3)   Prescriptions, orders, and records maintained pursuant
to this section and stocks of pseudoephedrine products and ephedrine products
shall be open for inspection to federal, state, county, and municipal
officers, and employees of the State Board of Pharmacy whose duty it is to
enforce the laws of this state or of the United States relating to controlled
substances. Such prescriptions, orders, records, and stocks shall be open for
inspection by the State Medical Board and its employees for purposes of
enforcing R.C. Chapter 4731.



(R.C. § 3715.05)



   (F)   Theft or loss; reporting requirements.



      (1)   Each retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs,
pharmacy, prescriber, or wholesaler that sells, offers to sell, holds for
sale, delivers, or otherwise provides any pseudoephedrine product and that
discovers the theft or loss of any pseudoephedrine product in an amount of
more than nine grams per incident of theft or loss shall notify all of the
following upon discovery of the theft or loss:



         (a)   The State Board of Pharmacy, by telephone
immediately upon discovery of the theft or loss;



         (b)   Law enforcement authorities. If the incident is a
theft and the theft constitutes a felony, the retailer, terminal distributor
of dangerous drugs, pharmacy, prescriber, or wholesaler shall report the
theft to the law enforcement authorities in accordance with R.C. §  2921.22.



      (2)   Within 30 days after making a report by telephone to the
State Board of Pharmacy pursuant to division (F)(1)(a) of this section, a
retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, pharmacy, prescriber, or
wholesaler shall send a written report to the State Board of Pharmacy.



      (3)   The reports required under this section shall identify
the product that was stolen or lost, the amount of the product stolen or
lost, and the date and time of discovery of the theft or loss.



(R.C. § 3715.06) 



TITLE XV: LAND USAGE



      Chapter



         150.   BUILDING CODE; MOVING BUILDINGS



         151.   CUT AND FILL REGULATIONS



         152.   FLOOD DAMAGE REDUCTION



         153.   SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL



         154.   ZONING CODE



         155.   SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



            APPENDIX:  SUBDIVISION EXHIBITS



         156.   STORM WATER UTILITY



         157.   CELLULAR OR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND
SYSTEMS



         158.   ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEMS



         159.   PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE



CHAPTER 150: BUILDING CODE; MOVING BUILDINGS



Section



Building Code



   150.01   Codes adopted



   150.02   Interpretation



   150.03   Enforcement



Moving Buildings



   150.20   Moving building to another lot



   150.21   Moving building on same lot



   150.22   Application; bond or insurance



Cross-reference:



   Property Maintenance Code, see Chapter 159



BUILDING CODE



§ 150.01  CODES ADOPTED.



   (A)   Hamilton County Building Code.



      (1)   The Hamilton County, Ohio, Building Code, including its
Schedule of Fees, together with all amendments and modifications thereto as
adopted from time to time by the Hamilton County Board of County
Commissioners, is adopted, save and except such portions of the Code as may
be modified in this chapter, and shall be known as the Amberley Village
Building Code.



      (2)   The Hamilton County, Ohio, Building Code, as adopted and
amended herein, applies to all buildings in the village now or hereafter
constructed, altered, remodeled, or renovated.



('69 Code, § 150.01)  (Ord. C-293, passed 2-10-69; Am. Ord. C-531, passed
2-8-82)



   (B)   Ohio Building Code.



      (1)   There is adopted for the purpose of regulating the
construction, alteration, removal, demolition, equipment, use and occupancy,
location, and maintenance of buildings and structures, the Ohio Building
Code, November 1, 2011 edition, together with all amendments thereto as
adopted by the Board of Building Standards, State of Ohio, and said Code is
hereby incorporated as fully as if set out in length herein.



      (2)   The Ohio Building Code, as adopted herein, applies to
all buildings in the village now or hereafter constructed, altered,
remodeled, or renovated, except single-family, two-family, and three-family
dwelling houses which are not constructed of industrialized units.



(Ord. C-532, passed 2-8-82)



   (C)   Residential Building Code.  The Residential Building Code of
Ohio, January 1, 2013 edition, together with all amendments thereto adopted
by the State of Ohio, or the most recent version of said Code as may be
adopted from time to time by the Hamilton County Board of County
Commissioners, whichever is later, is adopted, save and except such portions
of the Code as may be modified in this chapter.



   (D)   If any of the above referenced codes are updated with new
editions from time to time, said editions, and any amendments thereto, shall
be automatically adopted and enforced in Amberley Village with or without
further action of the Village Council immediately upon approval of said code
by the Hamilton County Board of County Commissioners.



(Ord. 2017-06, passed 4-13-17; Am. Ord. 2017-08, passed 6-12-17)



§ 150.02  INTERPRETATION.



   The words BOARD OF BUILDING STANDARDS and BOARD OF BUILDING APPEALS
shall be interpreted so as to include and intend the Planning Commission of
the village, to whom all powers as such boards, in accordance with said code,
are hereby delegated.



('69 Code, § 150.02)  (Ord. C-293, passed 2-10-69; Am. Ord. C-531, passed
2-8-82)



§ 150.03  ENFORCEMENT.



   The provisions of this chapter, including all building codes adopted
herein, shall be enforced by the Hamilton County Building Inspector.



('69 Code, § 150.03)  (Ord. C-293, passed 2-10-69; Am. Ord. C-530, passed
2-8-82; Am. Ord. 2017-06, passed 4-13-17; Am. Ord. 2017-08, passed 6-12-17)



MOVING BUILDINGS



§ 150.20  MOVING BUILDING TO ANOTHER LOT.



   No person, firm, or corporation shall move any previously constructed
dwelling house or outbuilding onto any improved or unimproved lot within the
corporate limits of the village.



('69 Code, § 153.01)  (Ord. C-137, passed 3-9-59)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.21  MOVING BUILDING ON SAME LOT.



   No person, firm, or corporation shall move any previously constructed
outbuilding or dwelling house from one location to another location on the
same lot, unless the moving and the new location have been approved, upon
application of the owner, by the Zoning Board of Appeals of the village.



('69 Code, § 153.02)  (Ord. C-137, passed 3-9-59)  Penalty, see § 10.99



§ 150.22  APPLICATION; BOND OR INSURANCE.



   (A)   Any person, firm, or corporation seeking to move a previously
constructed dwelling house, outbuilding, or manufactory over any village
streets shall first file application for a permit to move the same with the
Village Manager.



   (B)   Such application shall be accompanied by the permit fee set
out in the Building Code, together with a bond or policy of insurance in an
amount to be fixed by the Village Manager to cover the estimate of the
potential damage to be done along the route sought to be taken.



   (C)   A copy of any permit, issued in accordance with the provisions
of this subchapter, shall be forwarded to the Chief of Police.



('69 Code, § 153.03)  (Ord. C-137, passed 3-9-59)  Penalty, see § 10.99



Cross-reference:



   Permit fee, see § 150.05



CHAPTER 151: CUT AND FILL REGULATIONS



Section



   151.01   Purpose



   151.02   Definitions



   151.03   Issuance of permits and exemptions



   151.04   Correction of hazardous conditions



   151.05   Plans and specifications



   151.06   Supervision by registered professional engineer or architect



   151.07   Waiver or modification of submission of plans and
specifications



   151.08   Prohibition of certain excavations, fills, or grades



   151.09   Setbacks of tops and toes



   151.10   Protection against erosion



   151.11   Protection and relocation of sewers



   151.12   Bond requirement



   151.13   Fee schedule



   151.14   Permit expiration



   151.15   Notification by permit holder



   151.16   Suspension of operations



   151.17   Village liability



   151.18   Building permit issuance



   151.19   Appeal to Planning Commission



 



   151.99   Penalty



§ 151.01  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this chapter is to safeguard life, limb, property, and
the public welfare, and the preservation of the natural environment and the
stability of hillsides by regulating excavating and filling of land.



('69 Code, § 154.01)  (Ord. C-474, passed 1-8-79)



§ 151.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ARCHITECT.  An architect registered in the State of Ohio to practice
in the field of architecture.



   BORROW.  Earth material acquired from an off-site location for the use
in grading on a site.



   BUILDING COMMISSIONER.  The person employed by the village in the
capacity of Building Commissioner or his authorized agents or employees, to
perform specific duties in the review and enforcement of this chapter.



   EARTH MATERIAL.  Any rock, fill, or natural soil and/or combination
thereof.



   ENGINEERING GEOLOGIST.  A full member in good standing of the
Association of Engineering Geologists or the American Institute of
Professional Geologists.



   EROSION.  The wearing away of the land surface by the action of wind,
water, gravity, or other natural process.



   EXCAVATION.  Any artificial or mechanical act by which earth, sand,
rock, or other similar material is dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered,
removed, displaced, relocated, or bulldozed and shall include the conditions
resulting therefrom.



   FILL.  Any artificial or mechanical act by which earth, sand, gravel,
rock, or any other material is placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported,
or moved to a new location above the natural surface of the ground or on top
of the stripped or excavated surface and shall include the conditions
resulting therefrom.  The difference in elevation between a point on the
original ground and a designated point of higher elevation on the final
grade.  The material used to make a fill.



   NATURAL TERRAIN.  Existing ground as shown on the most recent
published editions of the City of Cincinnati and Hamilton County Metropolitan
Topographic Survey sheets prior to the date of this chapter.



   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER.  A civil engineer registered in the
State of Ohio to practice in the field of civil engineering.



   SEDIMENT.  Solid material both mineral and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported or has been moved from its original site or
origin by air, water, or gravity as a product of erosion.



   SITE.  Any lot or parcel of land or contiguous combination thereof,
upon which excavation or filling is, has been, or will be performed.



   SLOPE.  An inclined ground surface, the inclination of which is
expressed as the arc tangent of vertical distance y to horizontal distance x,
where x and y are in the same linear units.



   SOIL SCIENTIST.  A full member in good standing of the Soil Science
Society of America and who has special knowledge and training in the
physical, chemical, and biological sciences applicable to soil.



   SOIL ENGINEERING.  The application of the principles of soil mechanics
in the investigation, evaluation, and design of civil works involving the use
of earth materials and the inspection and testing of the construction thereof.



   SOIL ENGINEER.  A civil engineer experienced and knowledgeable in the
practice of soil engineering.



   VILLAGE ENGINEER.  The persons, firms, or corporations, or their
authorized agents or employees, employed or designated by the village to
perform engineering services for the village.



('69 Code, § 154.02)   (Ord. C-474, passed 1-8-79)



§ 151.03  ISSUANCE OF PERMITS AND EXEMPTIONS.



   (A)   No person, the owner of any property or in possession or
control of any property, shall cause, permit or allow any excavation or
filling to be done on such property unless a permit has been issued by the
Building Commissioner for such excavating or filling except that no permit
shall be required for:



      (1)   Normal cemetery operations of opening or closing graves;



      (2)   Public work performed by or under control of the
Building Commissioner, except for excavating or filling performed outside the
project work limits;



      (3)   Exploratory excavations under the direction of a
registered professional engineer, soil engineer, engineering geologist, soil
scientist, or architect where incidental to the practice of architecture and
exploratory excavations by a contractor or builder provided they are not made
in a slope steeper than one vertical to five horizontal and are promptly and
properly filled.



      (4)   Temporary excavations for wells, tanks, vaults, tunnels,
sign foundations, and trenches for sewers, water lines, gas lines, electric
lines, and other underground utilities;



      (5)   Subject to the provisions of § 151.11, any excavation
that does not exceed five feet in vertical depth at its deepest point or 100
cubic yards per each 5,000 square feet of site area, whichever is the more
restrictive;



      (6)   Subject to the provisions of § 151.11, any fill that
does not exceed five feet in vertical depth at its deepest point or 100 cubic
yards per each 5,000 square feet of site area, whichever is the most
restrictive, and is placed on natural terrain with a slope flatter than one
vertical to five horizontal and does not result in a finished slope steeper
than one vertical to three horizontal;



      (7)   Subject to the provisions of § 151.11, any excavation
for a basement and footings of a building authorized by a valid building
permit, provided the excavation does not exceed eight feet in vertical depth
at its deepest point or 350 cubic yards per each 5,000 square feet of site
area, whichever is the more restrictive, and is made in existing terrain with
a slope flatter than one vertical to ten horizontal and the subsequent
filling with this excavated material on the same site, provided the fill does
not exceed five feet in vertical depth at its deepest point or 350 cubic
yards per each 5,000 square feet of site area, whichever is the more
restrictive, and is placed on existing terrain with a slope flatter than one
vertical to ten horizontal and does not result in a finished slope steeper
than one vertical to three horizontal.



   (B)   Where a succession of small excavations or fills individually
not requiring a permit constitutes a continuing operation on a property and
the accumulation of such excavations or fills on that property will exceed
five feet in depth or 100 cubic yards per each 5,000 square feet of site
area, a permit shall be required.



   (C)   No excavating or filling pursuant to divisions (A) (1) through
(A) (7) hereof shall cause any slope to become unstable, impose loads which
may effect the safety of structures or slopes, interfere with adequate
drainage for the site area and the drainage area of land tributary to the
site, obstruct, damage, or adversely affect lawfully existing sewerage or
drainage, public or private, cause a stagnant pond of water to form, or cause
erosion or sedimentation.



   (D)   The exemptions contained in division (A) do not apply to any
operations pursuant to § 151.04.



('69 Code, § 154.03)  (Ord. C-474, passed 1-8-79) Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.04  CORRECTION OF HAZARDOUS CONDITIONS.



   Whenever the Building Commissioner, with the concurrence of the Village
Engineer, determines that any existing excavation, fill, slope, or other
condition has become a hazard, or endangers the public health and safety or
any public or private property or adversely affects the safety, usability, or
stability of any public way or drainage channel or has caused detrimental
erosion or sedimentation, he shall order the owner or person in control of
the property on which such condition exists to correct the condition.  The
owner or person in control of the property, upon receipt of the order of the
Building Commissioner shall, within ten days, apply for and obtain a permit
and promptly proceed to correct the condition creating such hazard in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter.



('69 Code, § 154.04)  (Ord. C-474, passed 1-8-79) Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.05  PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.



   (A)   The Building Commissioner shall issue a permit for excavating
or filling only on the basis of plans and specifications submitted to and
approved by him and approved by the Village Engineer.  A separate permit
shall be required for each site.  Unless waived or modified pursuant to the
provisions of § 151.07, the plans and specifications submitted with the
permit application shall:



      (1)   Include the owner's name and address;



      (2)   Include a plot plan, drawn to scale, showing the
location of the proposed work;



      (3)   Include a contour map of the affected area showing the
existing and proposed contours at five foot intervals;



      (4)   Show the proposed amount of excavation or fill in cubic
yards;



      (5)   Show the location of any existing and proposed streets;



      (6)   Show the location of any existing and proposed buildings
or structures on the subject property and within 15 feet of subject property;



      (7)   Show the location of any existing watercourses,
drainage, and sewer systems serving the property;



      (8)   Show existing and proposed drainage structures, walls,
cribbing, and surface protection, and any necessary temporary earth
restraining installations;



      (9)   Show a plan for temporary and permanent drainage of the
soils from erosion;



      (10)   Describe the proposed method for the protection of the
soils from erosion;



      (11)   Show how surplus excavated fill will be disposed of;



      (12)   Show additional information as may reasonably be
required by the Building Commissioner.



   (B)   Unless waived pursuant to the provisions of § 151.07, the
plans and specifications shall be prepared by a registered professional
engineer or an architect where the work contemplated by the plans and
specifications is incidental to the practice of architecture and shall in
addition to the requirements of division (A) herein:



      (1)   Include a report showing the results of surface and
subsurface exploration, conditions of the land, and procedures for performing
the operation;



      (2)   Show plans of all drainage provisions which shall be of
such design to adequately handle the surface runoff, together with a map
showing the drainage area of all land tributary to the site, and estimated
cubic foot per second runoff of the area served by any drain computed in
accordance with current acceptable standards;



      (3)   Include a specification for the borrow material or fill
material and the method to be used for and the degree of its proposed
compaction;



      (4)   Show proposed preparation of existing ground surface to
receive fill;



      (5)   Show proposed terraces and ditches where necessary to
control surface drainage and debris;



      (6)   Show proposed subsurface drainage if necessary for
stability;



      (7)   Show plans for all retaining walls, cribbing, vegetative
provisions, erosions and sediment control measures, together with location of
temporary or permanent fencing and other protective devices to be constructed
in connection with, or as a part of the proposed plan.



      (8)   Show a timing schedule and sequence indicating the
anticipated starting and completion dates of the development
sequence-stripping or clearing, rough grading and construction, final
grading, and vegetative establishment and maintenance and the time of
exposure of each area prior to the completion of effective erosion and
sediment control measures.



   (C)   If the Building Commissioner and Village Engineer shall be
satisfied that the proposed excavation or fill will not cause any of the
hazards described in § 151.07(A) through (F) hereof, then in such event the
Building Commissioner shall issue a permit authorizing the excavation or fill.



('69 Code, § 154.05)  (Ord. C-474, passed 1-8-79)



§ 151.06  SUPERVISION BY REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER OR ARCHITECT.



   Unless waived pursuant to the provisions of § 151.07, excavation and
fill in the field shall be supervised by a registered professional engineer
or architect representing the owner or developer.  The registered
professional engineer or architect shall submit a summary report to the
Building Commissioner upon the completion of operations. The Building
Commissioner may require interim reports from the Engineer or Architect when
the operations extend beyond a month.  Cost of supervision is to be borne by
the owner or developer.



('69 Code, § 154.06)  (Ord. C-474, passed 1-8-79)



§ 151.07  WAIVER OR MODIFICATION OF SUBMISSION OF PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.



   The Village Engineer may waive or modify the requirements of this
chapter for plans and specifications and field supervision and summary report
if the application for a permit or a certification in writing of a registered
professional engineer or architect where incidental to the practice of
architecture states to the satisfaction of the Village Engineer that the
proposed excavation or fill will not:



   (A)   Interfere with adequate drainage for the site area and the
drainage area of land tributary to the site;



   (B)   Obstruct, damage, or adversely affect existing sewerage or
drainage, public or private;



   (C)   Cause a stagnant pond of water to form;



   (D)   Create slope stability problems on subject and adjacent
property;



   (E)   Cause detrimental erosion or sedimentation; or



   (F)   That the proposed excavation or fill is in an isolated
self-contained area and that there is no apparent danger to adjacent public
or private property.



('69 Code, § 154.07)  (Ord. C-474, passed 1-8-79)



§ 151.08  PROHIBITION OF CERTAIN EXCAVATIONS, FILLS, OR GRADES.



   No permit shall be issued for an excavation or fill to be made with a
face steeper in slope than one vertical to three horizontal except that the
Building Commissioner, with the written approval of the Village Engineer, may
permit an excavation or fill to be made with steeper face if an applicant
demonstrates satisfactorily by means of appropriate soil exploration and
analysis and the written opinion of a registered professional engineer or
architect where incidental to the practice of architecture that the materials
are capable of standing on a steeper slope without creating any of the
hazards described in §§ 151.03 and 151.04.



('69 Code, § 154.08)  (Ord. C-474, passed 1-8-79)



§ 151.09  SETBACKS OF TOPS AND TOES.



   The tops and toes of excavation and the slopes shall be set back from
property boundaries and structures as far as necessary for the safety of
adjacent properties and adequacy of foundation support and to prevent damage
as a result of water runoff.



('69 Code, § 154.09)  (Ord. C-474, passed 1-8-79) Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.10  PROTECTION AGAINST EROSION.



   All excavations and fills shall be performed so as to minimize soil
erosion and sedimentation.



('69 Code, § 154.10)  (Ord. C-474, passed 1-8-79)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.11  PROTECTION AND RELOCATION OF SEWERS.



   (A)   If it is necessary to adjust, relocate, add to, or otherwise
modify the existing sewer system serving the area affected by an excavation
or fill operation, for the purposes of providing drainage of the affected
area or protecting the existing sewer system from damage, the Building
Commissioner shall issue a permit in accordance with this chapter only if the
applicant for the permit obtains a permit to provide, relocate, or modify the
sewer system for the affected area at the expense of the applicant and grant
such easements as may be necessary.



   (B)   In places where existing sewerage is adequate, but in the
opinion of the Village Engineer is of doubtful strength to carry additional
loading, the Building Commissioner shall issue a permit in accordance with
this chapter only if the applicant for the permit provides a bond of
corporate surety authorized to do business in the State of Ohio naming the
village as obligee thereof, covering replacement cost of the sewer and
guaranteeing that the proposed fill will not damage the sewer for a period of
one year after the fill is completed.



('69 Code, § 154.11)  (Ord. C-474, passed 1-8-79)



§ 151.12  BOND REQUIREMENT.



   When in the opinion of the Building Commissioner and the Village
Engineer, the termination before completion of a proposed excavation or fill
operation would create an actual or potential hazard to the public, the
Building Commissioner, prior to issuing the permit, shall require a bond in
an amount as determined by the Commissioner and Engineer sufficient to cover
the estimated cost of restoration of any affected land or to cover the cost
of performance of the operations under such permit, whichever is greater.



('69 Code, § 154.12)  (Ord. C-474, passed 1-8-79)



§ 151.13  FEE SCHEDULE.



   (A)   Before issuing a permit, the Building Commissioner or his
designee shall collect a fee, the amount of which shall be $20 for the first
100 cubic yards (or fraction thereof) plus $10 for each 1,000 cubic yards (or
fraction thereof) in excess of 100 cubic yards of earth or other materials
moved, except that no fee shall be collected for work performed by any public
agency.



   (B)   Before accepting a request for a waiver or modification, or
application for a permit, pursuant to § 151.07 or § 151.08, the Building
Commissioner or his designee shall collect from the person making such
request or application a deposit of $100 to be applied to the charges of the
Village Engineer for the engineering services provided pursuant to such
sections; and no waiver or modification shall be given, or permit issued,
until all charges of the Village Engineer have been paid by the person making
the request or application.  Should the charges of the Village Engineer be
less than $100, the unused portion of the deposit shall be returned to the
person who made such deposit.



('69 Code, § 154.13)  (Ord. C-474, passed 1-8-79)



§ 151.14  PERMIT EXPIRATION.



   Excavation and fill permits shall be valid for one year. However, any
permit may be renewed without cost for two additional one year periods by the
Building Commissioner with the approval of the Village Engineer.



('69 Code, § 154.14)  (Ord. C-474, passed 1-8-79)



§ 151.15  NOTIFICATION BY PERMIT HOLDER.



   The person to whom a permit is issued shall notify the Building
Commissioner:



   (A)   Of the time of commencement of operations under such permit,
48 hours in advance of such time where excavation will enter a public
right-of-way, and in all other instances 24 hours in advance of such time;



   (B)   Immediately of any delay in the time of commencement of which
notification has been given as provided in division (A);



   (C)   When the operation is completed;



   (D)   Prior to commencement of operations, of the locations of any
borrow sites or any disposal sites for excess materials.



('69 Code, § 154.15)  (Ord. C-474, passed 1-8-79)  Penalty, see § 151.99



§ 151.16  SUSPENSION OF OPERATIONS.



   The Building Commissioner shall order operations under a permit for
excavation or fill suspended whenever he determines, with the concurrence of
the Village Engineer, that such operations are endangering the public health
or safety.



Such suspensions shall remain in effect until the condition or conditions
causing same are successfully remedied to the satisfaction of the
Commissioner and Engineer.  The Building Commissioner, with the concurrence
of the Village Engineer, shall also have the authority to order stopped any
operations contrary to the terms and conditions of a permit issued under this
chapter.  Such stoppage shall remain in effect until the operations are
remedied to be in conformance with this chapter.



('69 Code, § 154.16)  (Ord. C-474, passed 1-8-79)



§ 151.17  VILLAGE LIABILITY.



   Issuance of a permit or any action by the Building Commissioner under
this chapter shall not create in the village, its officers, agents, or
employees any liability or responsibility for injury to persons or property
caused by operations or conditions created pursuant to such permits. 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to relieve the owner or person in
control of property from liability for injury to persons or property.



('69 Code, § 154.17)  (Ord. C-474, passed 1-8-79)



§ 151.18  BUILDING PERMIT ISSUANCE.



   The Building Commissioner shall withhold the issuance of any permit
under his authority for operations on property subject to an excavation or
fill operation until the owner or the persons in control have complied with
the provisions of this chapter.



('69 Code, § 154.18)  (Ord. C-474, passed 1-8-79)



§ 151.19  APPEAL TO PLANNING COMMISSION.



   (A)   Any person who has a bona fide controversy with the Building
Commissioner and whose rights have been materially affected by any decision
of the Building Commissioner in the issuance or denial of a permit as
provided herein or in the administration of the provisions of this chapter,
shall within 30 days from the issuance or denial of such permit, be permitted
to file with the Building Commissioner such person's appeal to the Planning
Commission as hereafter provided.



   (B)   The appeal shall be based upon one or both of the following
grounds, to wit:



      (1)   That the action of the Building Commissioner was
erroneous or constituted an erroneous application of the provisions of this
chapter, related laws and ordinances, or was otherwise contrary to law;



      (2)   That the action of the Building Commissioner imposes an
undue hardship on the complainant and a modified application or an
alternative arrangement is available and feasible, whereby the hardship can
be relieved without defeating the purpose and intent of the provisions of
this chapter.



   (C)   The complainant shall set forth in his petition on appeal the
interpretation, ruling, or order appealed from, and the provisions of this
chapter and related laws and ordinances involved, and shall state wherein the
interpretation, ruling, or order is erroneous.  If the appeal is based on
the ground of hardship, the petition shall show the nature of the hardship,
and shall point out what kind of modified application or alternative
arrangement can be put into effect which will relieve the hardship without
defeating the purposes and intent of the provisions of this chapter.



   (D)   No appeal petition shall be accepted for filing unless the
complainant shall, at the time of filing, deposit with the Building
Commissioner the sum of $100 to partially compensate the village in the event
the Building Commissioner is sustained in whole or in part, for the direct
and indirect expenditures, costs, and extra work occasioned by the filing and
prosecution of the appeal.



   (E)   The Planning Commission shall have full authority to affirm,
modify, reverse, or set aside the interpretation, ruling, or order appealed
from, and its decision shall be final.  If the interpretation, ruling, or
order of the Building Commissioner is reversed or set aside, the Planning
Commission shall direct that the appeal deposit be returned to the
complainant.  If the order of the Building Commissioner is modified in
substantial part, the Planning Commission may direct the return of part or
all of the deposit to the complainant.  If the order of the Building
Commissioner is sustained, the deposit shall be retained by the village.



('69 Code, § 154.19)  (Ord. C-474, passed 1-8-79)



§ 151.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person being the owner, agent of the owner, or having
control of any property, who violates any of the provisions of this chapter
or fails to conform to any of the provisions thereof, or fails to obey any
order of the Building Commissioner or his duly authorized agent shall be
guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to a
penalty of a fine of not less than $50 nor more than $1,000.  Each and every
day on which such person continues to violate any of the provisions of this
chapter after having been once notified of such violation shall constitute a
separate offense.



   (B)   Any person who shall violate or assist in the violation of
this chapter, or of any order or permit issued thereunder, shall be guilty of
a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof be subject to a penalty of a fine
of not less than $50 nor more than $1,000.



('69 Code, § 154.20)  (Ord. C-474, passed 1-8-79)



CHAPTER 152: FLOOD DAMAGE REDUCTION



Section



General Provisions



   152.001   Statutory authorization



   152.002   Findings of fact



   152.003   Purpose



   152.004   Methods of reducing flood loss



   152.005   Definitions



   152.006   Area of application



   152.007   Basis for establishing special flood hazard areas



   152.008   Abrogation and greater restrictions



   152.009   Interpretation



   152.010   Warning and disclaimer of liability



Administration



   152.020   Designation of Floodplain Administrator



   152.021   Duties of Floodplain Administrator



   152.022   Floodplain development permits



   152.023   Application required



   152.024   Review and approval of application



   152.025   Inspections



   152.026   Post-construction certifications required



   152.027   Revoking permit



   152.028   Exemption from filing



   152.029   Map maintenance activities



   152.030   Data use and flood map interpretation



   152.031   Substantial damage determinations



Use and Development Standards for Flood Hazard Reduction



   152.045   Application



   152.046   Use regulations



   152.047   Water and wastewater systems



   152.048   Subdivisions and large developments



   152.049   Residential structures



   152.050   Nonresidential structures



   152.051   Accessory structures



   152.052   Recreational vehicles



   152.053   Above ground gas or liquid storage tanks



   152.054   Assurance of flood carrying capacity



Appeals and Variances



   152.065   Appeals Board established



   152.066   Powers and duties



   152.067   Appeals



   152.068   Variances



   152.069   Procedure at hearings



   152.070   Appeal to court



Enforcement



   152.080   Compliance required



   152.081   Notice of violation



 



   152.999   Penalty



Cross-reference:



   Storm water management, see Ch. 156



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 152.001  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.



   Article XVIII, Section 3, of the Ohio Constitution grants
municipalities the legal authority to adopt land use and control measures for
promoting the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizens. 
Therefore, the village adopts the flood damage prevention provisions outlined
in this chapter.



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-12-04)



§ 152.002  FINDINGS OF FACT.



   Amberley Village has special flood hazard areas that are subject to
periodic inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and
safety hazards, disruption of governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base.
Additionally, structures that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or
otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. In
order to minimize the threat of these damages and to achieve the purposes
hereinafter set forth, this chapter is adopted.



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-12-04)



§ 152.003  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety,
and general welfare, and to:



   (A)   Protect human life and health;



   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;



   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated
with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;



   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;



   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as
water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges
located in areas of special flood hazards;



   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the proper
use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future
flood blight areas;



   (G)   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard
assume responsibility for their actions;



   (H)   Minimize the impact of development on adjacent properties
within and near flood prone areas;



   (I)   Ensure that the flood storage and conveyance functions of the
floodplain are maintained;



   (J)   Minimize the impact of development on the natural, beneficial
values of the floodplain;



   (K)   Prevent floodplain uses that are either hazardous or
environmentally incompatible; and



   (L)   Meet community participation requirements of the National
Flood Insurance Program.



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-12-04)



§ 152.004  METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSS.



   In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and
provisions for:



   (A)   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to public
health, safety, and property due to water hazards, or which result in
damaging increases in flood heights or velocities;



   (B)   Requiring that uses vulnerable to flood, including facilities
which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of
initial construction;



   (C)   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream
channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel
flood waters;



   (D)   Controlling, filling, grading, dredging, excavating and other
development which may increase flood damage; and



   (E)   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers
which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood
hazards in other areas.



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-12-04)



§ 152.005  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE.  A structure on the same lot with, and of a
nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal structure.



   APPEAL.  A request for review of the Floodplain Administrator's
interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance.



   BASE FLOOD  The flood having a l% chance of being equalled or exceeded
in any given year. The BASE FLOOD may also be referred to as the 1% CHANCE
ANNUAL FLOOD or ONE HUNDRED- YEAR FLOOD.



   BASE (100-YEAR) FLOOD ELEVATION (BFE).  The water surface elevation of
the base flood in relation to a specified datum, usually the National Geodtic
Vertical Datum of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum of 1988, and
usually expressed in feet mean sea level (MSL). In Zone AO areas, the base
flood elevation is the natural grade elevation plus the depth number (from 1
to 3 feet).



   BASEMENT.  Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.



   DEVELOPMENT. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.



   ENCLOSURE BELOW THE LOWEST FLOOR. See LOWEST FLOOR.



   EXECUTIVE ORDER 11988 (FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT). Issued by President
Carter in 1977, this order requires that no federally assisted activities be
conducted in or have the potential to affect identified special flood hazard
areas, unless there is no practicable alternative.



   FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY (FEMA). The agency with the overall
responsibility for administering the National Flood Insurance Program.



   FILL. A deposit of earth material by artificial means.



   FLOOD or FLOODING.  A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:



      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters, or



      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface
waters from any source.



   FLOOD HAZARD BOUNDARY MAP (FHBM).Usually the initial map, produced by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, or U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development, for a community depicting approximate special flood hazard
areas.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM).  An official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency has delineated the areas of special flood hazard.



   FLOOD INSURANCE RISK ZONES. Zone designations on FHBMs or FIRMs that
indicate the magnitude of the flood hazard in specific areas of a community.
Following are the zone definitions:



      (1)   ZONE A. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the
100-year flood; base flood elevations are not determined.



      (2)   ZONES A1-30 and ZONE AE. Special flood hazard areas
inundated by the 100-year flood; base flood elevations are determined.



      (3)   ZONE AO. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the
100-year flood; with flood depths of one to three feet (usually sheet flow on
sloping terrain); average depths are determined.



      (4)   ZONE A99. Special flood hazard areas inundated by the
100-year flood to be protected from the 100-year flood by a federal flood
protection system under construction; no base flood elevations are determined.



      (5)   ZONE B and ZONE X (SHADED). Areas of 500-year flood;
areas subject to the 100-year flood with average depths of less than one foot
or with contributing drainage area less than one square mile; and areas
protected by levees from the base flood.



      (6)   ZONE C and ZONE X (UNSHADED). Areas determined to be
outside the 500-year floodplain.



   FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY (FIS). The official report in which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development has provided flood profiles, floodway boundaries (sometimes shown
on flood boundary and floodway map), and the water surface elevations of the
base flood.



   FLOOD PROTECTION ELEVATION (FPE). The base flood elevation plus one
foot of freeboard. In areas where no base flood elevations exist from any
authoritative source, the flood protection elevation can be historical flood
elevations, or base flood elevations determined and/or approved by the
Floodplain Administrator, plus one foot of freeboard.



   FLOODWAY.



      (1)   The channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that have been reserved in order to pass the base flood
discharge. A FLOODWAYS is typically determined through a hydraulic and
hydrologic engineering analysis such that the cumulative increase in the
water surface elevation of the base flood discharge is no more than a
designated height. In no case shall the designated height be more than one
foot at any point within the community.



      (2)   The FLOODWAY is an extremely hazardous area, and is
usually characterized by any of the following: moderate to high velocity
flood waters, high potential for debris and projectile impacts, and moderate
to high erosion forces.



   FREEBOARD. A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for the purposes of floodplain management. FREEBOARD tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood
heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and
floodway conditions, such as wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris
and ice jams, and the hydrologic effect of urbanization in a watershed.



   HISTORIC STRUCTURE. Any structure that is:



      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic
Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or
preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listings on the National Register;



      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary
of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a
registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; or



      (3)   Individually listed on the State of Ohio's inventory of
historic places maintained by the Ohio Historic Preservation Office.



   HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC ENGINEERING ANALYSIS. An analysis performed by
a professional engineer, registered in the State of Ohio, in accordance with
standard engineering practices as accepted by FEMA, used to determine flood
elevations and/or floodway boundaries.



   LETTER OF MAP CHANGE (LOMC). A letter of map change is an official FEMA
determination, by letter, to amend or revise effective flood insurance rate
maps, flood boundary and floodway maps, and flood insurance studies. LOMCs
are broken down into the following categories:



      (1)   LETTER OF MAP AMENDMENT (LOMA). A revision based on
technical data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a
designated special flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective
flood insurance rate map and established that a specific property is not
located in a special flood hazard area.



      (2)   LETTER OF MAP REVISION (LOMR). A revision based on
technical data that, usually due to manmade changes, shows changes to flood
zones, flood elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and
planimetric features. One common type of LOMR, a LOMR-F, is a determination
concerning whether a structure or parcel has been elevated by fill above the
base flood elevation and is, therefore, excluded from the special flood
hazard area.



      (3)   CONDITIONAL LETTER OF MAP REVISION (CLOMR). A formal
review and comment by FEMA as to whether a proposed project complies with the
minimum National Flood Insurance Program floodplain management criteria. A
CLOMR does not amend or revised effective flood insurance rate maps, flood
boundary and floodway maps, or flood insurance studies.



   LOWEST FLOOR. The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including
basement. This definition excludes an enclosure below the lowest floor, which
is an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of
vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area,
provided that such enclosure is built in accordance with the applicable
design requirements specified in this chapter for enclosures below the lowest
floor.



   MANUFACTURED HOME. A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without
a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. MANUFACTURED
HOME does not include a recreational vehicle. For the purposes of this
chapter, MANUFACTURED HOME includes manufactured homes and mobile homes as
defined in Chapter 3733 of the Ohio Revised Code.



   MANUFACTURED HOME PARK. As specified in the Ohio Administrative Code
3701-27-01, a MANUFACTURED HOME PARK means any tract of land upon which three
or more manufactured homes, used for habitation, are parked, either free of
charge or for revenue purposes, and includes any roadway, building,
structure, vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for use as part of the
facilities of the park. A tract of land that is subdivided and the individual
lots are not for rent or rented, but are for sale or sold for the purpose of
installation of manufactured homes on the lots, is not a manufactured home
park, even though three or more manufactured homes are parked thereon, if the
roadways are dedicated to the local government authority.



   NATIONAL FLOOD INSURANCE PROGRAM (NFIP). A federal program enabling
property owners in participating communities to purchase insurance protection
against losses from flooding. This insurance is designed to provide an
insurance alternative to disaster assistance to meet the escalating costs of
repairing damage to buildings and their contents caused by floods.
Participation in the NFIP is based on an agreement between local communities
and the federal government that states if a community will adopt and enforce
floodplain management regulations to reduce future flood risks to all
development in special flood hazard areas, the federal government will make
food insurance available within the community as a financial protection
against flood loss.



   NEW CONSTRUCTION.  Structures for which the start of construction
commenced on or after the initial effective date of Amberley Village Flood
Insurance Rate Maps, May 17, 2004, and includes any subsequent improvements
to such structures.



   PERSON. Any individual or group of individuals, corporation,
partnership, association, or other entity, including state and local
governments and agencies. An AGENCY is further defined in R.C. § 111.15 as
any governmental entity of the state and includes, but is not limited to, any
board, department, division, commission, bureau, society, council,
institution, state college or university, community college district,
technical college district, or state community college. AGENCY does not
include the general assembly, the controlling board, the adjutant general's
department, or any court.



   RECREATIONAL VEHICLE. A vehicle which is (1) built on a single chassis,
(2) 49 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal
projection, (3) designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a
light duty truck, and (4) designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel
or seasonal use.



   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ARCHITECT. A person registered to engage in the
practice of architecture under the provisions of R.C. §§ 4703.01 to 4703.19.



   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL ENGINEER. A person registered as a professional
engineer under Chapter 4733 of the Revised Code.



   REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL SURVEYOR. A person registered as a professional
surveyor under Chapter 4733 of the Revised Code.



   SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREA or AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD. The land in
the floodplain subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding in any given
year. SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS are designated by the Federal Emergency
Management Agency on flood insurance rate maps, flood insurance studies,
flood boundary and floodway maps and flood hazard boundary maps as Zones A,
AE, AH, AO, A1-30, and A99. SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS may also refer to
areas that are flood prone and designated from other federal, state or local
sources of data including but not limited to historical flood information
reflecting high water marks, previous flood inundation area, and flood prone
soils associated with a watercourse.



   START OF CONSTRUCTION.  The date the building permit was issued,
provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days
of the permit date. The ACTUAL START means either the first placement of
permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab
or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any
work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home
on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation,
such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation
of streets and walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement,
footings, piers, or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does
it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as
garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main
structure. For a substantial improvement, the ACTUAL START OF CONSTRUCTION
means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural
part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of a building.



   STRUCTURE.  A walled and roofed building, or gas or liquid storage
tank that is principally above ground.



   SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE.  Damage of any origin sustained by a structure
whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition
would equal or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.



   SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT.  Any reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or
exceeds 50% of the market value of the structure before the start of
construction of the improvement. SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT includes structures
which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work
performed. SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT does not, however, include:



      (1)   Any improvement to a structure which is considered new
construction;



      (2)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct
existing violations of sate or local health, sanitary, or safety code
specifications which have been identified prior to the application for a
development permit by the local code enforcement official and which are the
minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions; or



      (3)   Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that
the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a
historic structure.



   VARIANCE. A grant of relief from the standards of this chapter
consistent with the variance conditions herein.



   VIOLATION. The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with this chapter.



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-12-04)



§ 152.006  AREA OF APPLICATION.



   This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within
the jurisdiction of the village as identified in § 152.007, including any
additional areas of special flood hazard annexed by the village.



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-12-04)



§ 152.007  BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD AREAS.



   For the purposes of this chapter, the following studies and/or maps are
adopted:



   (A)   (1)   Flood Insurance Study for Hamilton County, Ohio and
Incorporated Areas, effective date of May 17, 2004.



      (2)   Flood Insurance Rate Maps for Hamilton County, Ohio and
Incorporated Area; Map Numbers 39061C0204 D, 39061C0206 D, 39061C0208 D;
effective date of May 17, 2004.



   (B)   Other studies and/or maps which may be relied upon for
establishment of the flood protection elevation, delineation of the 100-year
floodplain, floodways or delineation of other areas of special flood hazard.



   (C)   Any hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis authored by
a registered professional engineer in the State of Ohio which has been
approved by the village as required by § 152.048.



   (D)   Any revisions to the aforementioned maps and/or studies are
hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. Such
maps and/or studies are on file at the Amberley Village Municipal Building,
7149 Ridge Road, Cincinnati, Ohio 45237.



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-12-04)



§ 152.008  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.



   This chapter is not intended to repeal any existing ordinances
including subdivision regulations, zoning or building codes. In the event of
a conflict between any provision of this chapter and any other ordinance, the
more restrictive shall be followed. This chapter shall not intend to impair
any deed restriction covenant or easement but the land subject to such
interest shall also be governed by the regulations.



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-12-04)



§ 152.009  INTERPRETATION.



   In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions
shall be:



   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;



   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and



   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted
under state statutes. Where a provision of this chapter may be in conflict
with a state or federal law, such state or federal law shall take precedence
over this chapter.



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-12-04)



§ 152.010  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.



   The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not
imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. This chapter
shall not create liability on the part of the village, any officer or
employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood
damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative
decision lawfully made thereunder.



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-12-04)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 152.020  DESIGNATION OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.



   The Village Manager is hereby appointed to administer and implement
this chapter and is referred to herein as the Floodplain Administrator.



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-12-04)



§ 152.021  DUTIES OF FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.



   The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include but are not limited to:



   (A)   Evaluate applications for permits to develop in special flood
hazard areas.



   (B)   Interpret floodplain boundaries and provide flood hazard and
flood protection elevation information.



   (C)   Issue permits to develop in special flood hazard areas when
the provisions of this chapter has been met, or refuse to issue the same in
the event of noncompliance.



   (D)   Inspect buildings and lands to determine whether any
violations of this chapter have been committed.



   (E)   Make and permanently keep all records for public inspection
necessary for the administration of this chapter including flood insurance
rate maps, letters of map amendment and revision, records of issuance and
denial of permits to develop in special flood hazard areas, determinations of
whether development is in or out of special flood hazard areas for the
purpose of issuing floodplain development permits, elevation certificates,
variances, and records of enforcement actions taken for violations of this
chapter.



   (F)   Enforce the provisions of this chapter.



   (G)   Provide information, testimony, or other evidence as needed
during variance hearings.



   (H)   Coordinate map maintenance activities and FEMA follow-up.



   (I)   Conduct substantial damage determinations to determine whether
existing structures, damaged from any source and in special flood hazard
areas identified by FEMA, must meet the development standards of this chapter.



(Ord 2004-03, passed 4-12-04)



§ 152.022  FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.



   It shall be unlawful for any person to begin construction or other
development activity including but not limited to filling; grading;
construction; alteration, remodeling, or expanding any structure; or
alteration of any watercourse wholly within, partially within or in contact
with any identified special flood hazard area, as established in § 152.007,
until a floodplain development permit is obtained from the Floodplain
Administrator.  Such floodplain development permit shall show that the
proposed development activity is in conformity with the provisions of this
chapter. No such permit shall be issued by the Floodplain Administrator until
the requirements of this chapter have been met.



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-12-04)



§ 152.023  APPLICATION REQUIRED.



   An application for a floodplain development permit shall be required
for all development activities located wholly within, partially within, or in
contact with an identified special flood hazard area. Such application shall
be made by the owner of the property or his or her authorized agent, herein
referred to as the applicant, prior to the actual commencement of such
construction on a form furnished for that purpose. Where it is unclear
whether a development site is in a special flood hazard area, the Floodplain
Administrator may require an application for a floodplain development permit
to determine the development's location. Such applications shall include, but
not be limited to:



   (A)   Site plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location,
dimensions, and topography of the area in question; the location of existing
or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and
the location of the foregoing.



   (B)   Elevation of the existing, natural ground where structures are
proposed.



   (C)   Elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, of all
proposed structures.



   (D)   Such other material and information as may be requested by the
Floodplain Administrator to determine conformance with, and provide
enforcement of this chapter.



   (E)   Technical analyses conducted by the appropriate design
professional registered in the State of Ohio and submitted with an
application for a floodplain development permit when applicable:



      (1)   Floodproofing certification for non-residential
floodproofed structure as required in § 152.049.



      (2)   Certification that fully enclosed areas below the lowest
floor of a structure not meeting the design requirements of § 152.048(E) are
designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces.



      (3)   Description of any watercourse alteration or relocation
that the flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be diminished,
and maintenance assurances as required in § 152.053(C).



      (4)   A hydrologic and hydraulic analysis demonstrating that
the cumulative effect of proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood by more than one foot in special flood hazard
areas where the Federal Emergency Management Agency has provided base flood
elevations but no floodway as required by § 152.053(B).



      (5)   A hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis showing
impact of any development on flood heights in an identified floodway as
required by § 152.053(A).



      (6)   Generation of base flood elevation(s) for subdivision
and large scale developments as required by § 152.048.



   (F)   Any floodplain development permit application fee set out in a
schedule of fees adopted by Amberley Village.



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-12-04)



§ 152.024  REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF APPLICATION.



      (A)   Review.



      (1)   After receipt of a complete application, the Floodplain
Administrator shall review the application to ensure that the standards of
this chapter have been met. No floodplain development permit application
shall be reviewed until all information required in § 152.023 has been
received by the Floodplain Administrator.



      (2)   The Floodplain Administrator shall review all floodplain
development permit applications to assure that all necessary permits have
been received from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from
which prior approval is required. The applicant shall be responsible for
obtaining such permits as required including permits issued by the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act and Section
404 of the Clean Water Act, and the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency
under Section 401 of the Clean Water Act.



   (B)   Approval. Within 30 days after the receipt of a complete
application, the Floodplain Administrator shall either approve or disapprove
the application. If an application is approved, a floodplain development
permit shall be issued. All floodplain development permits shall be
conditional upon the commencement of work within one year. A floodplain
development permit shall expire one year after issuance unless the permitted
activity has been substantially begun and is thereafter pursued to completion.



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-12-04)



§ 152.025  INSPECTIONS.



   The Floodplain Administrator shall make periodic inspections at
appropriate times throughout the period of construction in order to monitor
compliance with permit conditions.



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-12-04)



§ 152.026  POST-CONSTRUCTION CERTIFICATIONS REQUIRED.



   The following as-built certifications are required after a floodplain
development permit has been issued:



   (A)   For new or substantially improved residential structures, or
nonresidential structures that have been elevated, the applicant shall have a
Federal Emergency Management Agency Elevation Certificate completed by a
registered surveyor to record as-built elevation data. For elevated
structures in Zone A and Zone AO areas without a base flood elevation, the
elevation certificate may be completed by the property owner or owner's
representative.



   (B)   For all development activities subject to the standards of §
152.029(A), a letter of map revision.



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-12-04)



§ 152.027  REVOKING PERMIT.



   A floodplain development permit shall be revocable, if among other
things, the actual development activity does not conform to the terms of the
application and permit granted thereon. In the event of the revocation of a
permit, an appeal may be taken to the Appeals Board in accordance with §
152.065.



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-12-04)



§ 152.028  EXEMPTION FROM FILING.



   (A)   An application for a floodplain development permit shall not
be required for:



      (1)   Maintenance work such as roofing, painting, and basement
sealing, or for small nonstructural development activities (except for
filling and grading) valued at less than $5,000.



      (2)   Development activities in an existing or proposed
manufactured home park. Such activities are under the authority of the Ohio
Department of Health and subject to the flood damage reduction provisions of
the Ohio Administrative Code Section 3701.



      (3)   Major utility facilities permitted by the Ohio Power
Siting Board under R.C. § 4906.



      (4)   Hazardous waste disposal facilities permitted by the
Hazardous Waste Siting Board under R.C. § 3734.



      (5)   Development activities undertaken by a federal agency
and which are subject to Federal Executive Order 11988 - Floodplain
Management.



   (B)   Any proposed action exempt from filing for a floodplain
development permit is also exempt from the standards of this chapter.



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-12-04)



§ 152.029  MAP MAINTENANCE ACTIVITIES.



   To meet National Flood Insurance Program minimum requirements to have
flood data reviewed and approved by FEMA, and to ensure that the village
flood maps, studies and other data identified in § 152.007 accurately
represent flooding conditions so appropriate floodplain management criteria
are based on current data, the following map maintenance activities are
required:



   (A)   Requirement to submit new technical data.



      (1)   For all development proposals that impact floodway
delineations or base flood elevations, the community shall ensure that
technical data reflecting such changes be submitted to FEMA within six months
of the date such information becomes available. These development proposals
include:



         (a)   Floodway encroachments that increase or decrease
base flood elevations or alter floodway boundaries;



         (b)   Fill sites to be used for the placement of
proposed structures where the applicant desires to remove the site from the
special flood hazard area;



         (c)   Alteration of watercourses that result in a
relocation or elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the
placement of culverts; and



         (d)   Subdivision or large scale development proposals
requiring the establishment of base flood elevations in accordance with §
152.048.



      (2)   It is the responsibility of the applicant to have
technical data, required in accordance with this division (A), prepared in a
format required for a conditional letter of map revision or letter of map
revision, and submitted to FEMA. Submittal and processing fees for these map
revisions shall be the responsibility of the applicant.



      (3)   The Floodplain Administrator shall require a conditional
letter of map revision prior to the issuance of a floodplain development
permit for:



         (a)   Proposed floodway encroachments that increase the
base flood elevation; and



         (b)   Proposed development which increases the base
flood elevation by more than one foot in areas where FEMA has provided base
flood elevations but no floodway.



      (4)   Floodplain development permits issued by the Floodplain
Administrator shall be conditioned upon the applicant obtaining a letter of
map revision from FEMA for any development proposal subject to division
(A)(1) above.



   (B)   Right to submit new technical data. The Floodplain
Administrator may request changes to any of the information shown on an
effective map that does not impact floodplain or floodway delineations or
base flood elevations, such as labeling or planimetric details. Such a
submission shall include appropriate supporting documentation made in writing
by the Mayor of Amberley Village and may be submitted at any time.



   (C)   Annexation/detachment. Upon occurrence, the Floodplain
Administrator shall notify FEMA in writing whenever the boundaries of
Amberley Village have been modified by annexation or the community has
assumed authority over an area, or no longer has authority to adopt and
enforce floodplain management regulations for a particular area. In order
that Amberley Village flood insurance rate maps accurately represent the
village's boundaries, include within such notification a copy of a map of
Amberley Village suitable for reproduction, clearly showing the new corporate
limits or the new area for which Amberley Village has assumed or relinquished
floodplain management regulatory authority.



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-12-04)



§ 152.030  DATA USE AND FLOOD MAP INTERPRETATION.



      The following guidelines shall apply to the use and
interpretation of maps and other data showing areas of special flood hazard:



   (A)   In areas where FEMA has not identified special flood hazard
areas, or in FEMA identified special flood hazard areas where base flood
elevation and floodway data have not been identified, the Floodplain
Administrator shall review and reasonably utilize any other flood hazard data
available from a federal, state, or other source.



   (B)   Base flood elevations and floodway boundaries produced on FEMA
flood maps and studies shall take precedence over base flood elevations and
floodway boundaries by any other source that reflect a reduced floodway width
and/or lower base flood elevations. Other sources of data, showing increased
base flood elevations and/or larger floodway areas than are shown on FEMA
flood maps and studies, shall be reasonably used by the Floodplain
Administrator.



   (C)   When preliminary flood insurance rate maps and/or flood
insurance study have been provided by FEMA:



      (1)   Upon the issuance of a letter of final determination by
the FEMA, the preliminary flood hazard data shall be used and replace all
previously existing flood hazard data provided from FEMA for the purposes of
administering this chapter.



      (2)   Prior to the issuance of a letter of final determination
by FEMA, the use of preliminary flood hazard data shall only be required
where no base flood elevations and/or floodway areas exist or where the
preliminary base flood elevations or floodway area exceed the base flood
elevations and/or floodway widths in existing flood hazard data provided from
FEMA. Such preliminary data may be subject to change and/or appeal to FEMA.



   (D)   The Floodplain Administrator shall make interpretations, where
needed, as to the exact location of the flood boundaries and areas of special
flood hazard. A person contesting the determination of the location of the
boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation
as provided in §§ 152.065et seq.



   (E)   Where a map boundary showing an area of special flood hazard
and field elevations disagree, the base flood elevations or flood protection
elevations (as found on an elevation profile, floodway data table,
established high water marks, and the like) shall prevail.



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-12-04)



§ 152.031  SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE DETERMINATIONS.



   (A)   Damages to structures may result from a variety of causes
including tornado, wind, heavy snow, flood, fire, and the like. After such a
damage event, the Floodplain Administrator shall:



      (1)   Determine whether damaged structures are located in
special flood hazard areas;



      (2)   Conduct substantial damage determinations for damaged
structures located in special flood hazard areas; and



      (3)   Make reasonable attempt to notify owners of
substantially damaged structures of the need to obtain a floodplain
development permit prior to repair, rehabilitation, or reconstruction.



   (B)   Additionally, the Floodplain Administrator may implement other
measures to assist with the substantial damage determination and subsequent
repair process. These measures include issuing press releases, public service
announcements, and other public information materials related to the
floodplain development permits and repair of damaged structures; coordinating
with other federal, state, and local agencies to assist with substantial
damage determinations; providing owners of damaged structures materials and
other information related to the proper repair of damaged structures in
special flood hazard areas; and assist owners of substantially damaged
structures with increased cost of compliance insurance claims.



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-21-04)



USE AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION



§ 152.045  APPLICATION.



   The following use and development standards in this subchapter apply to
development wholly within, partially within, or in contact with any special
flood hazard area as established in §§ 152.007 or 152.030(A).



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-12-04)



§ 152.046  USE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Permitted uses. All uses not otherwise prohibited in this
section or any other applicable land use regulation adopted by Amberley
Village are allowed provided they meet the provisions of this chapter.



   (B)   Prohibited uses.



      (1)   Private water supply systems in all special flood hazard
areas identified by FEMA, permitted under R.C. § 3701.



      (2)   Infectious waste treatment facilities in all special
flood hazard areas, permitted under R.C. § 3734.



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-12-04)



§ 152.047  WATER AND WASTEWATER SYSTEMS.



   The following standards apply to all water supply, sanitary sewerage
and waste disposal systems not otherwise regulated by the Ohio Revised Code:



   (A)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed
to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems;



   (B)   New and replacement sanitary sewerage systems shall be
designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the
systems and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and



   (C)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid
impairment to or contamination from them during flooding.



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-12-04)



§ 152.048  SUBDIVISIONS AND LARGE DEVELOPMENTS.



      (A)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the
need to minimize flood damage and are subject to all applicable standards in
these regulations;



   (B)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and
constructed to minimize flood damage;



   (C)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage
provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and



   (D)   In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood
elevation data are not available, the applicant shall provide a hydrologic
and hydraulic engineering analysis that generates base flood elevations for
all subdivision proposals and other proposed developments containing at least
50 lots or five acres, whichever is less.



   (E)   The applicant shall meet the requirement to submit technical
data to FEMA in § 152.029(A)(1)(d) when a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis
is completed that generates base flood elevations as required by division (D)
of this section.



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-12-04)



§ 152.049  RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES.



   (A)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy. Where a structure, including its foundation members, is elevated on
fill to or above the base flood elevation, the requirements for anchoring
(this division) and construction materials resistant to flood damage
(division (B)) are satisfied.



   (B)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with methods and materials resistant to flood damage.



   (C)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be
constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air
conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or
elevated so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the
components during conditions of flooding.



   (D)   New construction and substantial improvement of any
residential structure, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to or above the flood protection
elevation. In Zone AO areas with no elevations specified, the structure shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least two feet above
the highest adjacent natural grade.



   (E)   New construction and substantial improvements, including
manufactured homes, that do not have basements and that are elevated to the
flood protection elevation using pilings, columns, posts, or solid foundation
perimeter walls with openings sufficient to allow unimpeded movement of flood
waters may have an enclosure below the lowest floor provided the enclosure
meets the following standards:



      (1)   Be used only for the parking of vehicles, building
access, or storage; and



      (2)   Be designed and certified by a registered professional
engineer or architect to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on
exterior walls by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters; or



      (3)   Have a minimum of two openings on different walls having
a total net area not less than one square inch for every square foot of
enclosed area, and the bottom of all such openings being no higher than one
foot above grade. The openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or
other coverings or devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and
exit of floodwaters.



   (F)   Manufactured homes shall be affixed to a permanent foundation
and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the
structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the
effects of buoyancy. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited
to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.



   (G)   Repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a
determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude
the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and is the
minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the
structure, shall be exempt from the development standards of this section.



   (H)   In AO Zones, new construction and substantial improvement
shall have adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide
floodwaters around and away from the structure.



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-12-04)



§ 152.050  NONRESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES.



   (A)   New construction and substantial improvement of any
commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall meet the
requirements of divisions (A) through (C) and (E) through (G) of § 152.048.



   (B)   New construction and substantial improvement of any
commercial, industrial or other non-residential structure shall either have
the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the level of the
flood protection elevation, which is the base flood elevation plus one foot
of freeboard; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities,
shall meet all of the following standards:



      (1)   Be dry floodproofed so that the structure is watertight
with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water to the level of
the flood protection elevation;



      (2)   Have structural components capable of resisting
hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and



      (3)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect, through the use of a Federal Emergency Management Floodproofing
Certificate, that the design and methods of construction are in accordance
with divisions (B)(1) and (2) of this section.



   (C)   In Zone AO areas with no elevations specified, the structure
shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least two feet
above the highest adjacent natural grade.



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-12-04)



§ 152.051  ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.



   Relief to the elevation or dry floodproofing standards may be granted
for accessory structures containing no more than 600 square feet. Such
structures must meet the following standards:



   (A)   They shall not be used for human habitation;



   (B)   They shall be constructed of flood resistant materials;



   (C)   They shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the
minimum resistance to the flow of flood waters;



   (D)   They shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation;



   (E)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment
shall be elevated or floodproofed to or above the level of the flood
protection elevation; and



   (F)   They shall meet the opening requirements of § 152.049(E)(3).



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-12-04)



§ 152.052  RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.



   Recreational vehicles must meet at least one of the following standards:



   (A)   They shall not be located on sites in special flood hazard
areas for more than 180 days, or



   (B)   They must be fully licensed and ready for highway use, or



   (C)   They must meet all standards of § 152.048.



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-12-04)



§ 152.053  ABOVE GROUND GAS OR LIQUID STORAGE TANKS.



      All above ground gas or liquid storage tanks shall be anchored to
prevent flotation or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and
hydrostatic loads.



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-12-04)



§ 152.054  ASSURANCE OF FLOOD CARRYING CAPACITY.



   Pursuant to the purpose and methods of reducing flood damage stated in
this chapter, the following additional standards are adopted to assure that
the reduction of the flood carrying capacity of watercourses is minimized:



   (A)   Development in floodways.



      (1)   In floodway areas, development shall cause no increase
in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. Prior to
issuance of a floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a
hydrologic and hydraulic analysis, conducted by a registered professional
engineer, demonstrating that the proposed development would not result in any
increase in the base flood elevation; or



      (2)   Development in floodway areas causing increases in the
base flood elevation may be permitted provided all of the following are
completed by the applicant:



         (a)   Meet the requirements to submit technical data in
§ 152.029(A);



         (b)   An evaluation of alternatives which would not
result in increased base flood elevations and an explanation why these
alternatives are not feasible;



         (c)   Certification that no structures are located in
areas which would be impacted by the increased base flood elevation;



         (d)   Documentation of individual legal notices to all
impacted property owners within and outside the community, explaining the
impact of the proposed action on their property; and



         (e)   Concurrence of the Mayor of Amberley Village and
the chief executive officer of any other communities impacted by the proposed
actions.



   (B)   Development in riverine areas with base flood elevations but
no floodways.



      (1)   In riverine special flood hazard areas identified by
FEMA where base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have been
designated, the cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined
with all other existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the
base flood elevation more than one foot at any point. Prior to issuance of a
floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a hydrologic and
hydraulic analysis, conducted by a registered professional engineer,
demonstrating that this standard has been met; or



      (2)   Development in riverine special flood hazard areas
identified by FEMA where base flood elevation data are provided but no
floodways have been designated causing more than one foot increase in the
base flood elevation may be permitted provided all of the following are
completed by the applicant:



         (a)   An evaluation of alternatives which would result
in an increase of one foot or less of the base flood elevation and an
explanation why these alternatives are not feasible;



         (b)   Items enumerated in (a) and (c) through (e) of
division (A)(2) above.



   (C)   Alterations of a watercourse. For the purpose of these
regulations, a watercourse is altered when any change occurs within its
banks. The extent of the banks shall be established by a field determination
of the bankfull stage. The field determination of bankfull stage shall be
based on methods presented in Chapter 7 of the USDA Forest Service General
Technical Report RM-245, Stream Channel Reference Sites: An Illustrated Guide
to Field Technique or other applicable publication available from a federal,
state, or other authoritative source. For all proposed developments that
alter a watercourse, the following standards apply:



      (1)   The bankfull flood carrying capacity of the altered or
relocated portion of the watercourse shall not be diminished. Prior to the
issuance of a floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a
description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or
relocated as a result of the proposed development, and certification by a
registered professional engineer that the bankfull flood carrying capacity of
the watercourse will not be diminished.



      (2)   Adjacent communities, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers,
and the Ohio Department of Natural Resources, Division of Water, must be
notified prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. Evidence of
such notification must be submitted to the Federal Emergency Management
Agency.



      (3)   The applicant shall be responsible for providing the
necessary maintenance for the altered or relocated portion of said
watercourse so that the flood carrying capacity will not be diminished. The
Floodplain Administrator may require the permit holder to enter into an
agreement with Amberley Village specifying the maintenance responsibilities.
If an agreement is required, it shall be made a condition of the floodplain
development permit.



      (4)   The applicant shall meet the requirements to submit
technical data in § 152.029(A)(1)(c) when an alteration of a watercourse
results in the relocation or elimination of the special flood hazard area,
including the placement of culverts.



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-12-04)



APPEALS AND VARIANCES



§ 152.065  APPEALS BOARD ESTABLISHED.



   (A)   The Village Council, pursuant to Section 2 of Article VI of
the Village Charter, hereby designates the Village Planning Commission as an
Appeals Board for any appeals arising under this chapter of the village code.



   (B)   The chairperson of the Planning Commission shall be
chairperson of the Appeals Board. Meetings of the Appeals Board shall be held
as needed and shall be held at the call of the chairperson, or in his or her
absence, the acting chairperson. All meetings of the Appeals Board shall be
open to the public except that the Board may deliberate in executive sessions
as part of quasi-judicial hearings in accordance with law. The Appeals Board
shall keep minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of each member upon
each question and shall keep records of all official actions. Records of the
Appeals Board shall be kept and filed at Village Hall in the regular Amberley
Village records.



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-12-04)



§ 152.066  POWERS AND DUTIES.



   (A)   The Appeals Board shall hear and decide appeals where it is
alleged there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or
determination made by the Floodplain Administrator in the administration or
enforcement of this chapter.



   (B)   Authorize variances in accordance with § 152.068.



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-12-04)



§ 152.067  APPEALS.



   (A)   Any person affected by any notice and order, or other official
action of the Floodplain Administrator may request and shall be granted a
hearing on the matter before the Appeals Board provided that such person
shall file, within 45 days of the date of such notice and order, or other
official action, a brief statement of the grounds for such hearing or for the
mitigation of any item appearing on any order of the Floodplain
Administrator's decision. Such appeal shall be in writing, signed by the
applicant, and be filed with the Floodplain Administrator. Upon receipt of
the appeal, the Floodplain Administrator shall transmit the notice and all
pertinent information on which the Floodplain Administrator's decision was
made to the Appeals Board.



   (B)   Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the Appeals Board shall
fix a reasonable time for the appeal, give notice in writing to parties in
interest, and decide the appeal within a reasonable time after it is
submitted.



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-12-04)



§ 152.068  VARIANCES.



   Any person believing that the use and development standards of this
chapter would result in unnecessary hardship may file an application for a
variance. The Appeals Board shall have the power to authorize, in specific
cases, such variances from the standards of these regulations, not
inconsistent with federal regulations, as will not be contrary to the public
interest where, due to special conditions of the lot or parcel, a literal
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter would result in unnecessary
hardship.



   (A)   Application for a variance.



      (1)   Any owner, or agent thereof, of property for which a
variance is sought shall make an application for a variance by filing it with
the Floodplain Administrator, who upon receipt of the variance shall transmit
it to the Appeals Board.



      (2)   The application at a minimum shall contain the following
information: name, address, and telephone number of the applicant; legal
description of the property; parcel map; description of the existing use;
description of the proposed use; location of the floodplain; description of
the variance sought; and reason for the variance request.



      (3)   All applications for a variance shall be accompanied by
any variance application fee set out in a schedule of fees adopted by
Amberley Village.



   (B)   Notice for public hearing. The Appeals Board shall schedule
and hold a public hearing within 30 days after the receipt of an application
for a variance from the Floodplain Administrator. Prior to the hearing, a
notice of such hearing shall be given in one or more newspapers of general
circulation in the community at least ten days before the date of the hearing.



   (C)   Public hearing.



      (1)   At the hearing the applicant shall present such
statements and evidence as the Appeals Board requires. In considering such
variance applications, the Appeals Board shall consider and make findings of
fact on all evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other
sections of these regulations and the following factors:



         (a)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other
lands to the injury of others.



         (b)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or
erosion damage.



         (c)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and
its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual
owner.



         (d)   The importance of the services provided by the
proposed facility to the community.



         (e)   The availability of alternative locations for the
proposed use which are not subject to flooding or erosion damage.



         (f)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront
location, where applicable.



         (g)   The compatibility of the proposed use with
existing and anticipated development.



         (h)   The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area.



         (i)   The safety of access to the property in times of
flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles.



         (j)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of
rise, and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave
action, if applicable, expected at the site.



         (k)   The costs of providing governmental services
during and after flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public
utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems,
and streets and bridges.



      (2)   Variances shall only be issued upon:



         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause.



         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance
would result in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of
the property. Increased cost or inconvenience of meeting the requirements of
these regulations does not constitute an exceptional hardship to the
applicant.



         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance
will not result in increased flood heights beyond that which is allowed in
these regulations; additional threats to public safety; extraordinary public
expense, nuisances, fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with
existing local laws.



         (d)   A determination that the structure or other
development is protected by methods to minimize flood damages.



         (e)   A determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.



         (f)   Upon consideration of the above factors and the
purposes of these regulations, the Appeals Board may attach such conditions
to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of
these regulations.



   (D)   Other conditions for variances.



      (1)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated
floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge
would result.



      (2)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction
and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less
in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, providing items in division (C) of
this section have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond
one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance
increases.



      (3)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be
given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a
lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation and the cost of flood
insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the
reduced lowest floor elevation.



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-12-04)



§ 152.069  PROCEDURE AT HEARINGS.



   (A)   All testimony shall be given under oath.



   (B)   A complete record of the proceedings shall be kept, except
confidential deliberations of the Board, but including all documents
presented and a verbatim record of the testimony of all witnesses.



   (C)   The applicant shall proceed first to present evidence and
testimony in support of the appeal or variance.



   (D)   The administrator may present evidence or testimony in
opposition to the appeal or variance.



   (E)   All witnesses shall be subject to cross-examination by the
adverse party or their counsel.



   (F)   Evidence that is not admitted may be proffered and shall
become part of the record for appeal.



   (G)   The Board shall issue subpoenas upon written request for the
attendance of witnesses. A reasonable deposit to cover the cost of issuance
and service shall be collected in advance.



   (H)   The Board shall prepare conclusions of fact supporting its
decision. The decision may be announced at the conclusion of the hearing and
thereafter issued in writing or the decision may be issued in writing within
a reasonable time after the hearing.



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-12-04)



§ 152.070  APPEAL TO COURT.



   Those aggrieved by the decision of the Appeals Board may appeal such
decision to the Hamilton County Court of Common Pleas, as provided in Chapter
2506 of the Ohio Revised Code.



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-12-04)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 152.080  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.



   (A)   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, erected,
constructed, reconstructed, repaired, extended, converted, enlarged or
altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and all other
applicable regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of these
regulations, unless specifically exempted from filing for a development
permit as stated in § 152.028.



   (B)   Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit shall be a
violation of this chapter and shall be punishable in accordance with §
152.999.



   (C)   Floodplain development permits issued on the basis of plans
and applications approved by the Floodplain Administrator authorize only the
use, and arrangement, set forth in such approved plans and applications or
amendments thereto. Use, arrangement, or construction contrary to that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of this chapter and punishable in
accordance with § 152.999.



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-12-04)



§ 152.081  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   Whenever the Floodplain Administrator determines that there has been a
violation of any provision of this chapter, he or she shall give notice of
such violation to the person responsible therefor and order compliance with
this chapter as hereinafter provided. Such notice and order shall:



   (A)   Be put in writing on an appropriate form;



   (B)   Include a list of violations, referring to the section or
sections of this chapter that have been violated, and order remedial action
which, if taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of this chapter;



   (C)   Specify a reasonable time for performance;



   (D)   Advise the owner, operator, or occupant of the right to appeal;



   (E)   Be served on the owner, occupant, or agent in person. However,
this notice and order shall be deemed to be properly served upon the owner,
occupant, or agent if a copy thereof is sent by registered or certified mail
to the person's last known mailing address, residence, or place of business,
and/or a copy is posted in a conspicuous place in or on the dwelling affected.



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-12-04) Penalty, see § 152.999



§ 152.999  PENALTY.



   (A)   Violation of the provisions of this chapter or failure to
comply with any of its requirements shall be deemed to be a strict liability
offense, and shall constitute a minor misdemeanor.



   (B)   Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or fails
to comply with any of its requirements shall upon conviction thereof be fined
or imprisoned as provided by the laws of Amberley Village. Each day the
violation continues shall be considered a separate offense.



   (C)   Nothing herein shall prevent the village from taking such
other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.



   (D)   Amberley Village shall prosecute any violation of this chapter
in accordance with the penalties stated herein.



(Ord. 2004-03, passed 4-12-04)



CHAPTER 153: SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENT CONTROL



Section



   153.01   Definitions



   153.02   Plan required



   153.03   Performance principles and standards



   153.04   Approval procedures



 



   153.99   Penalty



§ 153.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   CUT.  An excavation, or the difference between a point on the original
ground and a designated point of lower elevation on the final grade, or the
material removed in excavation.



   EROSION.  The wearing away of the land surface by the action of wind,
water, and gravity.



   EXCAVATION.  Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other
similar material is dug into, cut, quarried, uncovered, removed, displaced,
relocated, or bulldozed and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom.



   FILL.  Any act by which earth, sand, gravel, rock, or any other
material is placed, pushed, dumped, pulled, transported, or moved to a new
location above the natural surface of the ground or on top of the stripped
surface and shall include the conditions resulting therefrom; or the
difference in elevation between a point on the original ground and a
designated point of higher elevation on the final grade; or the material used
to make a fill.



   GRADING.  Any stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling, or any
combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition.



   MULCHING.  The application of suitable materials on the soil surface
to conserve moisture, hold soil in place, and aid in establishing plant cover.



   NATURAL VEGETATION.  The ground cover in its original state before any
grading, excavation, or filling.



   PERMANENT VEGETATION.  Producing long-term vegetative cover such as
blue grass, tall fescue, crown vetch, or similar cover.



   PLAN.  The Water Management and Sediment Control Plan.



   SEDIMENT.  Solid material both mineral and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its original site or
origin by air, water, or gravity as a product of erosion.



   SEDIMENT BASIN.  A barrier or dam built across a waterway or at other
suitable locations to retain rock, sand, gravel, or silt or other materials.



   SLOPE.  The face of an embankment or cut section:  any ground whose
surface makes an angle with the plane of the horizon.  Slopes are usually
expressed in a percentage based upon vertical difference in feet per 100 feet
of horizontal distance.



   SUBDIVISION.  The division or redivision of a lot, tract, or parcel of
land by any means into two or more lots, tracts, parcels, or other divisions
of land including changes in existing lot lines for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of lease, transfer of ownership, or building or lot
development.



   SWALE.  A low-lying stretch of land which gathers or carries surface
water runoff.



   TEMPORARY VEGETATION.  Short-term vegetative cover used to stabilize
the soil surface until final grading and installation of permanent
vegetation, such as oats, rye or wheat.



   TOPSOIL.  Surface soils and subsurface soils which presumably are
fertile soils and soil material, ordinarily rich in organic matter or humus
debris.  Topsoil is usually found in the uppermost soil layer.



   WATERCOURSE.  A permanent stream, intermittent stream, river, brook,
creek, channel, or ditch for water whether natural or manmade.



(Ord. C-447, passed 10-10-77)



§ 153.02  PLAN REQUIRED.



   (A)   No changes shall be made in the contour of the land; no
grading, excavating, removal or destruction of the topsoil, trees, or other
vegetative cover of the land shall be commenced until such time that a plan
for minimizing erosion and sedimentation has been processed with and reviewed
by the Planning Commission or its duly authorized representative, or there
has been a determination by the Planning Commission or its duly authorized
representative that such plans are not required.



   (B)   No subdivision or land development plan shall be approved
unless:



      (1)   There has been a plan approved by the Planning
Commission or its duly authorized representative that provides for minimizing
erosion and sediment as consistent with the intent of this chapter, and an
improvement bond or other acceptable securities are deposited with the
village in the form of escrow guarantee which will ensure installation and
completion of the required improvements; or



      (2)   There has been a determination by the Planning
Commission or its duly authorized representative that such plans are not
required.



   (C)   No plan shall be required under this chapter of the following:



      (1)   An excavation below finished grade for basements and
footings of a building, retaining walls, for swimming pools or structures
attendant to the principal building authorized by a valid building permit.



      (2)   An excavation or fill which:



         (a)   Is less than four feet in vertical depth at its
deepest point as measured from the natural ground surface;



         (b)   Does not result in a total quantity of more than
100 cubic yards of material on any lot, parcel, or subdivision thereof;



         (c)   Does not impair existing surface drainage,
constitute a potential erosion hazard, or act as a source of sedimentation of
any adjacent land or watercourse;



         (d)   Has no final slopes steeper than one foot vertical
and three feet horizontal; or          (e)   Is a fill placed on
a surface having a slope not steeper than five feet horizontal to one foot
vertical.



      (3)   Accepted agricultural and management practices such as:
plowing, and construction of agricultural structures, and nursery operations
such as the removal or transplanting of cultivated sod, shrubs, and trees and
tree cutting at or above existing ground.



      (4)   Grading, as a maintenance measure, or for landscaping
purposes on existing developed lots or parcels, provided:



         (a)   The aggregate of area affected, or stripped at any
one time does not exceed 5,000 square feet, and there is no damaging or
erosive drainage coming on to the subject area;



         (b)   The grade change does not exceed 12 inches at any
point and does not alter the drainage pattern;



         (c)   All bare earth is promptly seeded, sodded, or
otherwise effectively protected from erosive actions; and



         (d)   The grading does not involve a quantity of
material in excess of 100 cubic yards.



(Ord. C-447, passed 10-10-77)  Penalty, see § 153.99



§ 153.03  PERFORMANCE PRINCIPLES AND STANDARDS.



   (A)   The following principles are effective in minimizing erosion
and sedimentation and shall be included where applicable in the control plan:



      (1)   Stripping of vegetation, regrading or other development
shall be done in such a way that will minimize erosion.  Whenever feasible,
natural vegetation shall be retained, protected, and supplemented;



      (2)   Development plans shall preserve salient natural
features, keep cut-fill operations to a minimum, and ensure conformity with
topography so as to create the least erosion potential;



      (3)   The smallest practical area of land shall be exposed at
any one time and the duration of exposure shall be kept to a practical
minimum; the topsoil shall be revegetated;



      (4)   Disturbed soils shall be stabilized as quickly as
practicable with temporary vegetation or mulching to protect exposed critical
areas during development;



      (5)   The permanent final vegetation and structural erosion
control and drainage measures shall be installed as soon as practical in the
development;



      (6)   Provisions shall be made to effectively accommodate the
increased runoff caused by changed soil and surface conditions during and
after development.  Where necessary, surface water runoff shall be
structurally retarded;



      (7)   Sediment in the runoff water shall be trapped until the
disturbed area is stabilized by the use of debris basins, sediment basins,
silt traps, or similar measures.



   (B)   The following standards shall be followed in all soil erosion
and sediment control plans:



      (1)   All lots, tracts, or parcels shall be graded to provide
proper drainage away from buildings and dispose of it without ponding, and
all land within a development shall be graded to drain and dispose of surface
water without ponding, except where approved by the Planning Commission or
its duly authorized representative;



      (2)   All drainage provisions shall be of such design to
adequately handle the surface runoff and carry it to the nearest suitable
outlet such as a curbed street, storm drain, or natural watercourse.  Where
drainage swales are used to divert surface waters away from buildings, they
shall be sodded, planted, or paved as required and shall be of such slope,
shape, and size as to conform with the requirement of the village;



      (3)   Concentration of surface water runoff shall only be
permitted in swales or watercourses;



      (4)   The installation of the specified soil erosion and
sediment control measures shall be accomplished in accordance with the
standards and specifications contained in "Water Management and Sediment
Control for Urbanizing Areas" on file with the Planning Commission or its
duly authorized representative;



      (5)   During the construction phase, further consultive
technical assistance will be furnished, if necessary, by the Planning
Commission or its duly authorized representative, or by the Hamilton County
Soil and Water Conservation District.  The Planning Commission or its duly
authorized representative, shall enforce compliance with the approved plans.



   (C)   As finally approved, the plan for soil erosion and
sedimentation control required of the landowner or his agent under § 153.02,
shall include but not be restricted to the following requirements:



      (1)   A vicinity sketch and boundary line survey of the site
for which the permit is sought and on which the work is to be performed;



      (2)   Location of any buildings, structures, utilities,
sewers, water and storm drains on the site where the work is to be performed;



      (3)   Location of any building or structure on land of
adjacent property owners within 100 feet of the site;



      (4)   Elevations, contours, dimensions, location, and extent
of all work proposed to be done, and the existing elevations or contours of
the land in one foot intervals for slopes zero to six degrees, two-foot
intervals for slopes six to 18 degrees, and five-foot intervals for slopes 18
degrees or more.



      (5)   A certification of the quantity of excavation and fill
involved;



      (6)   Detailed plans of all drainage provisions, retaining
walls, cribbing, vegetative practices, erosion and sediment control measures,
location of approved fences around sediment basins, steep excavations, or
ponding areas, and other protective devices to be constructed in connection
with, or as a part of the proposed work, together with a map showing the
drainage area of land tributary to the site, and estimated cubic foot per
second runoff of the area served by any drain, computed in accordance with
the current village storm drainage criteria;



      (7)   A timing schedule and sequence indicating the
anticipated starting and completion dates of the development sequence:
stripping or clearing, rough grading and construction, final grading and
vegetative establishment, and maintenance, and the time of exposure of each
area prior to the completion of effective erosion and sediment control
measures;



      (8)   The estimated cost of the grading or filling and the
cost of the required erosion controls.



(Ord. C-447, passed 10-10-77)  Penalty, see § 153.99



§ 153.04  APPROVAL PROCEDURES.



   (A)   (1)   Plans shall be filed at the village city hall at
least 30 days prior to the meeting of the Planning Commission.  The Planning
Commission or its duly authorized representative shall review these plans as
submitted.  The Planning Commission or its duly authorized representative
shall take the necessary steps to ensure compliance by the applicant with
these plans as finally approved.



      (2)   A copy of preliminary plans or extension of previously
approved plans requiring complex soil erosion and sediment control measures
may be referred to the Hamilton County Soil and Water Conservation District
for review and recommendation as to adequate soil erosion and sediment
control measures to prevent damage to other properties.



   (B)   (1)   In order to ensure that emergency measures could be
taken by the village if the soil erosion and sediment control measures were
not implemented according to the agreed upon plan and schedule, a performance
bond in the amount of the cost of the soil erosion and sediment control
measures shall be required.



      (2)   In this regard, the plan shall be accompanied by written
instructions to the escrow holder which shall authorize the escrow holder to
convey to the village the cash guarantee upon recommendation of the Planning
Commission that emergency action by the village is required to complete the
provisions of the plan, or convey to the applicant upon approval, by
recommendation of the Planning Commission the satisfactory completion of the
plan.



   (C)   The Planning Commission or its duly authorized representative
shall make a continuing review and evaluation of the methods used and overall
effectiveness of the soil erosion and sediment control program.



(Ord. C-447, passed 10-10-77)



§ 153.99  PENALTY.



   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined not more than $100 for each offense or
violation.  Each day such violation is committed or permitted to continue
shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder.



(Ord. C-447, passed 10-10-77)



CHAPTER 154: ZONING CODE



Section



General Provisions



   154.01   Purpose; Planning Commission



   154.02   Definitions



Districts; Zoning Map



   154.05   Establishment and purposes of districts



   154.06   Official zoning map



   154.07   Replacement of official zoning map



   154.08   Rules for interpretation of district boundaries



General Provisions



   154.10   Effect of establishment of districts



   154.11   Restoring unsafe building



   154.12   Accessory structures



   154.13   Visibility at intersections in residential districts



   154.14   Fences, walls, and hedges



   154.15   Access to public or private street



   154.16   Parking, storage, or use of major recreational vehicles



   154.17   Parking and storage of vehicles deemed nuisances



   154.18   Irregularly shaped lots



   154.19   Prohibited use of private land.



Nonconformities: Lots, Structure Set-Backs, and Uses



   154.20   Intent regarding existing and future nonconforming uses



   154.21   Nonconforming lots of record



   154.22   Nonconforming uses of structures or of structures and
premises in combination



Residence A District Regulations



   154.25   Use regulations



   154.26   Height regulations



   154.27   Size regulations



   154.28   Required minimum lot area, lot width, yards, distances from
lot lines and dwellings



Residence B District Regulations



   154.30   Use regulations



   154.31   Height regulations



   154.32   Size regulations



   154.33   Required minimum lot area, lot width, yards, distances from
lot lines and dwellings



Industrial A District Regulations



   154.35   Use regulations



   154.36   Height regulations



   154.37   Size regulations



   154.38   Required minimum area and distances from lot lines



Industrial B District Regulations



   154.40   Use regulations



   154.41   Height regulations



   154.42   Size regulations



   154.43   Required minimum area and distances from lot lines



Park P District Regulations



   154.45   Use regulations



   154.46   Height regulations



   154.47   Area requirements



   154.48   Distances from lot lines



Exceptions and Modifications



   154.50   Use exceptions; special permits



   154.51   Height exceptions



   154.52   Yard exceptions



   154.53   Area exceptions



   154.54   Chickens



Enforcement



   154.55   Building Commissioner to enforce provisions



   154.56   Building permit required



   154.57   Approval of plans and issuance of building permit



   154.58   Certificate of occupancy required



   154.59   Issuance of certificate of occupancy; inspection by
Building Commissioner



   154.60   Solicitor authorized to prevent violation; remedies



Zoning Board of Appeals



   154.62   Appointment



   154.63   General procedure of Board; meetings



   154.64   Applications and appeals to Board; hearings; stay of
proceedings



   154.65   General powers and duties of Board



   154.66   Special exceptions



   154.661   Conditional use permits



   154.662   Site plan review



   154.67   Variances



   154.68   Interpretation of zoning map



   154.69   Administrative review



   154.70   Action of Board



District Changes; Zoning Amendments



   154.72   Changes by Council; review by Planning Commission



   154.73   Petitions for zoning map or Zoning Code amendments



   154.74   Public hearings



North Site NS District Regulations



   154.75   Purpose



   154.76   Use regulations



   154.77   Height regulations



   154.78   Required minimum area and distances from lot lines
regulations



   154.79   Site development regulations



   154.80   Landscaping regulations



   154.81   Architectural regulations



   154.82   Signage regulations



   154.83   Site plan review requirement



Interim Development Control District



   154.85   Purpose



   154.86   Applicability and zoning map designator



   154.87   Establishment of IDC Overlay District



   154.88   Land uses during pendency of an IDC Overlay District



   154.89   Three-month IDC Overlay Districts



   154.90   One-year IDC Overlay Districts



   154.91   Extension of IDC Overlay Districts



 



   154.99   Penalty



   Appendix:   Official zoning map



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 154.01  PURPOSE; PLANNING COMMISSION.



   (A)   The Council deems it necessary, for the purpose of promoting
the health, safety, morals, convenience, comfort, prosperity, and general
welfare of the village, to establish a zoning plan which will promote and
protect home ownership, conserve property values, prevent congestion, reduce
fire hazards, and direct the development of the village in accordance with an
orderly plan.



   (B)   The Mayor and Council, pursuant to the provisions of the Home
Rule Charter of the village, appointed a Planning Commission to:



      (1)   Recommend the boundaries of the various districts.



      (2)   Recommend appropriate regulations for the development of
the village in accordance with an orderly plan.



      (3)   Review all proposals to amend or modify the Zoning Code
to give reasonable consideration to the character of each district on the
Zoning Map and the peculiar suitability for particular uses, to conserve the
value of the buildings, to encourage the most appropriate use of land
throughout the municipality and to advise Council on the best ways to promote
the goals listed in division (A).



   (C)   The Mayor and Council, pursuant to the provisions of the Home
Rule Charter of the village, appointed a Board of Appeals and conveyed to it
the authority to grant relief from undue hardship or practical difficulty
which would result from the strict application of the Zoning Code to
particular cases.



('69 Code, § 151.01)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90; Am. Ord. C-782, passed 7-11-94)



Cross-reference:



   Planning Commission, see Charter Art. VI



§ 154.02  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ACCESSORY STRUCTURE.  A permanent or portable structure on the same
lot with, and of a nature incidental and subordinate to, the use of the
principal structure.



   BASEMENT.  That portion of a building, the floor of which is wholly or
partly below the adjoining grade.



   BUILDABLE AREA.  The portion of a lot remaining after required yards
and setbacks have been provided.



   BUILDING.  Any structure for the shelter, support, or enclosure of
persons, animals, or property of any kind.  BUILDING includes the term
STRUCTURE.



   BUILDING, HEIGHT OF.   The vertical distance from grade to the highest
point of the coping of a flat roof, or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or
to the top of the highest gable of pitched or hip roof.



   CARPORT.   A structure with floor and roof and one or more open sides
to provide shelter for a motor vehicle.



   CONDITIONAL USE. A use of land which may be permitted provided that the
Board of Zoning Appeals determines that it is in the interest of the public
health, safety and general welfare in accordance with the provisions of §
154.661.



   DISTRICT.   Any section of the village for which there are uniform
regulations governing the height, area, and use of buildings and of land.



   DRIVE or DRIVEWAY.   A paved pathway extending from the frontage of
the lot that provides vehicular and pedestrian access to the lot, as well as
provides parking or storage of vehicles or other property as authorized by
this code.



   DWELLING.  Any building or portion thereof, designed or used
exclusively for residential purposes.



   DWELLING, ONE-FAMILY.  A building designed for or occupied exclusively
by one family.



   FAMILY.  One or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit,
provided that all members are related by blood, adoption or marriage, and
further provided that domestic servants employed on the premises may be
housed on the premises.



   FAMILY PETS.  Small animals kept in or around a family home and are
customarily animals such as dogs, cats and small furry animals and does not
include any animal except a dog which when grown to maturity weighs more than
30 pounds.



   FARM.  An undivided parcel of land used primarily for agricultural and
livestock purposes containing one or more dwellings and such accessory
structures as may be required by use of the property.  Only products
produced on the premises may be sold thereon.



   FARM ANIMAL.  A farm animal is any type of animal customarily raised
for profit except riding horses which are not maintained for commercial
purposes.



   FENCE.  A barrier intended to enclose or restrict access to an area or
mark a boundary constructed of wood, wire, or other material supported on
posts.



   FRONTAGE.   The portion of a lot which abuts a public or private
street, right-of-way, easement, or driveway.



   GARAGE, PRIVATE.  An accessory structure or building, or a structure
or building that is a part of or attached to a dwelling, located in a
residence district, and which is designed or used for storage of automobiles,
other motor driven vehicles or trailers.



   GRADE.  The average level of the finished surface of the ground
adjoining a building.



   HOME OCCUPATION.  A professional or business activity conducted in a
dwelling unit.



   LOT.   Includes the words PLOT , PARCEL , and PREMISES , and is a
parcel of land of at least sufficient size to meet minimum zoning set back
requirements for use, coverage, and area, and to provide such yards, and
other open spaces as are herein required, and intended for buildings.  The
total area to be occupied by such buildings and accessory structures shall
not exceed 50% of the total area of such lot.  Such lot shall have frontage
or contact (private drive or panhandle lot) on a dedicated public street, and
may consist of:



      (1)   A single lot of record;



      (2)   A portion of a lot of record;



      (3)   A combination of complete lots of record, of complete
lots of record and portions of lots of record, or of portions of lots of
record;



      (4)   A parcel of land described by metes and bounds; provided
that in no case of division or combination shall any residual lot or parcel
be created which does not meet the requirements of this Zoning Code.



   LOT, CORNER.  A lot abutting on two or more streets at their
intersection, provided the interior angle formed thereby is 135 degrees or
less.



   LOT, DOUBLE-FRONTAGE or THROUGH LOT.  A lot other than a corner lot
abutting on two streets.



   LOT, INTERIOR.  A lot other than a corner lot with only one frontage
on a street.



   LOT FRONTAGE.  That portion of a lot adjacent to a street or private
drive.  For the purpose of determining yard requirements on corner lots and
through lots, all sides of a lot adjacent to streets or private drives shall
be considered frontage.



   LOT LINES.  Lines bounding a lot.



   LOT MEASUREMENTS.  Shall include the following:



      (1)   The DEPTH of a lot shall be considered to be the
distance between the midpoints of straight lines connecting the foremost
points of the side lot lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lot
lines in the rear.



      (2)   The WIDTH of a lot shall be considered to be the
distance between straight lines connecting front and rear lot lines at each
side of the lot, measured across the rear of the required front yard. 
However, width between side lot lines at their foremost point (where they
intersect with the right-of-way) shall not be less than 80% of the required
lot width, except in the case of lots on the turning circle of cul-de-sacs,
where the 80% requirement shall not apply.



   LOT, PANHANDLE.   A lot being otherwise landlocked extending in a
narrow strip of land, narrower than the required frontage of the lot, to a
frontage on a street or drive for the purpose of providing access to the
lot.  A panhandle lot is also known as a FLAG LOT or a REAR LOT.   The
narrow access strip is referred to as the “panhandle,” and the remaining
part of the lot is referred to as the “body.”



   LOT OF RECORD.   A lot which is part of a subdivision recorded in the
office of the Hamilton County Recorder, or a lot or parcel described by metes
and bounds, the description of which has been so recorded.



   NONCONFORMING USE.   A non-permitted activity in a structure on a lot
or in a district.



   NONCONFORMITY.   A non-permitted land area or structure setback.



   PARCEL, PREMISES.   See LOT.



   PARKING SPACE, OFF-STREET.   A space adequate for parking an
automobile with room for opening doors on both sides, together with properly
related access to a public or private street and maneuvering room.  Required
off-street parking areas for three or more automobiles shall have individual
spaces marked, and shall be designed, maintained, and regulated so that no
parking or maneuvering incidental to parking shall be on any public or
private street, or walkway, and so that any automobile may be parked and
unparked without moving another.  For purposes of rough computation, an
off-street parking space and necessary access and maneuvering room may be
estimated at 300 square feet, but off-street parking requirements will be
considered to be met only when actual spaces meeting the requirements above
are provided and maintained, improved in a manner appropriate to the
circumstances of the case and in accordance with all ordinances and
regulations of the village.



   PETITION.   A proposal to amend or modify the Zoning Code that has
been filed with the Clerk of Council, accompanied by a proposed ordinance
effecting the change desired and by such other information and data as the
Planning Commission shall designate.  PETITION as used in this chapter shall
not mean or pertain to a proposed change to the Zoning Code initiated by
Council or the Planning Commission.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.   A publicly owned strip of land 50 feet or more in
width between property lines which provides or is intended to provide public
vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic.



   SET-BACK.  The distances from structures to right-of-way and/or lot
lines.



   SIGN.  Any device designed to inform or attract the attention of
persons not on the premises on which the sign is located.  However, the
following shall not be included in the application of the regulations herein:



      (1)   Signs not exceeding one square foot in area and bearing
only property numbers, name of occupants of premises, or other identification
of premises not having commercial connotations;



      (2)   Flags and insignia of any government, except when
displayed in connection with commercial promotion;



      (3)   Legal notices; identification, informational, or
directional signs erected or required by governmental bodies;



      (4)   Integral decorative or architectural features of
buildings;



      (5)   Signs directing and guiding traffic and parking on
private property, but bearing no advertising matter.



   STORY.  That portion of a building included between the surface of any
floor and the surface of the floor next above it; or if there is no floor
above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it.



   STORY, HALF.  A story with at least two opposite exterior sides
meeting a sloping roof not more than two feet above the floor of such story.



   STREET.  A paved or improved area which provides for public vehicular
traffic.



   STREET LINE.  The right-of-way line (lot front line: on either side of
a street.)



   STRUCTURE.  Anything constructed or erected with a fixed location on
the ground or attached to something having a fixed location on the ground,
including buildings, walls, fences, swimming pools, radio towers, patios, and
porches, but not including driveways, sidewalks, or other facilities, the
sole purpose of which is to provide customary access to any structures.



   STRUCTURAL ALTERATIONS.  Any change in the supporting members of a
building, such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or
any substantial change in the roof or exterior walls.



   TRAVEL TRAILER.   A vehicular, portable structure built on a chassis,
designed to be used as a temporary dwelling for travel and recreational
purposes, having a body width not exceeding eight feet.



   USED or OCCUPIED.  Includes the words "intended," "designed" or
"arranged to be used or occupied."



   VARIANCE.  A relaxation of the terms of the Zoning Code where such
variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to
conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the
applicant, a literal enforcement of the Zoning Code would result in
unnecessary and undue hardships or practical difficulties.  A variance is
authorized only for height, area, and size of structure or size of yards and
open spaces.  Establishment or expansion of a use otherwise prohibited shall
not be allowed by variance, nor shall a variance be granted because of the
presence of nonconformities in the zoning district which are not on the
applicant's property or uses in an adjoining zoning district.



   YARD.  A required open space between the principal building and the
adjoining lot lines unoccupied and unobstructed by any structure or portion
of a structure.  However, fences, walls, poles, posts, and other customary
yard accessories, ornaments, and furniture may be permitted in any yard,
subject to height limitations and requirements limiting obstructions of
visibility.



   YARD, FRONT.  A yard extending between side lot lines across the front
of a lot adjoining a public street. 



      (1)   In any required front yard, no fence or wall shall be
permitted, and no hedge or other vegetation shall be permitted which
materially impedes vision across such yard between heights of 30 inches and
ten feet.



      (2)   In the case of double frontage lots, front yards of the
required depth shall be provided on all frontages.



      (3)   In the case of corner lots, a front yard of the required
depth shall be provided on both frontages.



      (4)   The depth of required front yards shall be measured at
right angles to a straight line adjoining the foremost points of the side lot
lines.  The foremost point of the side lot line, in the case of rounded
property corners at street intersections, shall be assumed to be the point at
which the side and front lines would have met without such rounding.  Front
and rear front yard lines shall be parallel.



   YARD, REAR.  A yard extending across the rear of the lot between inner
side yard lines.



      (1)   In the case of double frontage lots there will be no
rear yards, but only front and side yards.



      (2)   In the case of corner lots there will be one rear yard
and one side yard to be proposed by the property owner and approved by the
village.



      (3)   The depth of a required rear yard shall be measured at
right angles to a straight line adjoining the rear most points of the side
lot lines.  Front and rear yard lines shall be parallel.



   YARD, SIDE.  A yard extending along the full depth of the lot, and
being the least distance between the side lot line and the principal
building.  The width of a required side yard shall be measured in such a
manner that the yard established is a strip of the minimum width required by
district regulations with its inner edge parallel with the side lot line.



   WALL.  Walls (other than retaining walls) shall not exceed four and
one-half feet in height.



('69 Code, § 151.02)   (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-557, passed
2-13-84; Am. Ord. C-666, passed 10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90; Am.
Ord. C-782, passed 7-11-94; Am. Ord. C-808, passed 11-13-95; Am. Ord.
2013-02, passed 3-11-13; Am. Ord. 2013-07, passed 4-8-13; Am. Ord. 2013-17,
passed 1-13-14)



DISTRICTS; ZONING MAP



§ 154.05  ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSES OF DISTRICTS.



   (A)   Establishment.  To accomplish the purpose listed in division
(B) herein, the village is divided into five types of districts, known as:



         Residence A  District



         Residence B  District



         Industrial A  District



         Industrial B  District



         Park P  District



   (B)   Purposes of districts (in order):



      (1)   To divide the entire village into types of districts
deemed best suited to carry out the purposes of this Zoning Code;



      (2)   To prohibit uses or buildings incompatible with the
character of such districts;



      (3)   To regulate and limit the height, bulk, and uses of
buildings hereafter to be erected;



      (4)   To prevent the enlarging or alteration of existing
buildings in such manner as to evade the restrictions and limitations
lawfully imposed by this Zoning Code;



      (5)   To regulate and determine minimum areas for open spaces
adjacent to buildings; and



      (6)   To regulate and limit density of development.



('69 Code, § 151.05)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)



Cross-reference:



   District regulations, see §§ 154.25 through 154.48



§ 154.06  OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.



   (A)   The village is divided into zones, or districts, as shown on
the official zoning map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon,
is adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this Zoning Code.



   (B)   The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature
of the Mayor attested by the Village Clerk, under the following words: "This
is to certify that this is the official zoning map referred to in Section
32.l of Ordinance Number 285 of the Village of Amberley Village, Ohio,"
together with the date of adoption of this Zoning Code.



   (C)   If, in accordance with the provisions of this Zoning Code and
the charter of this village, changes are made in district boundaries or other
matters portrayed on the official zoning map, such changes shall be entered
on the official zoning map promptly after the amendment has been approved by
the Council, with an entry on the official zoning map as follows:



   "On (date), by official action of the Village Council, the following
(change) changes were made in the official zoning map: (brief description of
the nature of change)," which entry shall be signed by the Mayor and attested
by the Village Clerk.  No amendment to this Zoning Code which involves
matter portrayed on the official zoning map shall become effective until
after such change and entry has been made on said map.



   (D)   Regardless of the existence of purported copies of the
official zoning map which may, from time to time, be made or published, the
official zoning map, which shall be located in the office of the Village
Clerk, shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of land
and water areas, buildings, and other structures in the village.



('69 Code, § 151.06)   (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)



Cross-reference:



   Copy of zoning map, see Ch. 154, Appendix



   Zoning changes, see § 154.72



§ 154.07  REPLACEMENT OF OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.



   (A)   In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged,
destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of
changes and additions, the Council may, by resolution, adopt a new official
zoning map which shall supersede the prior official zoning map.  The new
official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the
prior official zoning map, but no such correction shall have the effect of
amending the original official zoning map, or any subsequent amendment
thereof.  The new official zoning map shall be identified by the signature
of the Village Clerk, under the following words: "This is to certify that
this official zoning map supersedes and replaces the official zoning map
adopted (date of adoption of map being replaced) as part of Ordinance Number
285 of the Village of Amberley Village, Ohio."



   (B)   Unless the prior official zoning map has been lost, or has
been totally destroyed, the prior map, or any significant parts thereof
remaining, shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining
to its adoption or amendment.



('69 Code, § 151.07)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)



§ 154.08  RULES FOR INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.



   When uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of districts as shown on
the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply:



   (A)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center
lines of streets, highways, or alleys shall be construed to follow such
center lines;



   (B)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted lot
lines shall be construed as following such lot lines;



   (C)   Boundaries indicated as approximately following village limits
shall be construed as following such village limits;



   (D)   Boundaries indicated as following railroad lines shall be
construed to follow right-of-way lines;



   (E)   Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features
indicated in divisions (A) through (D) above shall be so construed. 
Distances not specifically indicated on the official zoning map shall be
determined by the scale of the map;



   (F)   Where physical or cultural features existing on the ground are
at variance with those shown on the official zoning map, or in other
circumstances not covered by divisions (A) through (E) above, the Board of
Appeals shall interpret the district boundaries;



   (G)   Where a district boundary line divides a lot which was in
single ownership at the time of passage of this Zoning Code, the Board of
Appeals may permit, as a special exception, the extension of the regulations
for either portion of the lot not to exceed 50 feet beyond the district line
into the remaining portion of the lot.



('69 Code, § 151.08)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 154.10  EFFECT OF ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.



   Except as hereinafter provided:



   (A)   No land or building shall be used or intended for any use
other than those permitted in the district wherein such land or building is
located.



   (B)   No building shall be erected, reconstructed, enlarged,
structurally altered, or moved, in such manner as to evade conformity with
height, bulk, yard, lot area, use, and other regulations for the district
wherein such building is located.



   (C)   Every building hereafter erected, reconstructed, enlarged,
structurally altered, or moved, shall be located on a lot as herein defined,
and in no case shall there be more than one principal building on one lot.



   (D)   No yard, provided adjacent to a building for the purpose of
complying with provisions of this Zoning Code, shall be considered as
providing any part of a yard for another building on the same lot or on an
adjacent lot.



   (E)   No street or walkway shall serve as any part of a required
yard or minimum lot area.



   (F)   No yard shall be so diminished as to make its width or depth
less than the dimension required by this Zoning Code.



   (G)   Along any boundary line between districts, an abutting side
yard or rear yard in the less restricted district shall have a minimum
required width or depth equal to the average of the required minimum widths
or depths for such yards in the districts adjoining said boundary line.



   (H)   All territory hereafter annexed to the village shall be in the
Residence A District until changed by ordinance.



('69 Code, § 151.10)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)  Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.11  RESTORING UNSAFE BUILDING.



   Nothing in this Zoning Code shall prevent the strengthening or
restoring to a safe condition of any part of any structure declared unsafe by
the Building Commissioner, or from compliance with any lawful requirement.



('69 Code, § 151.11)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)



§ 154.12  ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.



   (A)   No accessory structure shall be erected in any required front
yard.



   (B)   No accessory structure shall be erected in any side yard
within a distance from the near side lot line less than the least width of
the side yard required for the principal building and its principal access
may not face any street, road, or highway.



   (C)   Accessory buildings may be built in a required rear yard not
nearer to a rear or side lot than the side yard requirement for such lot.
Principal access may not face any street, road, or highway.



   (D)   Accessory structures shall not cover a total of more than 30%
of a required rear yard without prior approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals.



   (E)   On a corner lot, no accessory building shall project beyond
the front yard line on either street.



   (F)   No accessory building shall be constructed on a lot until
construction of 50% or more of the principal building has been completed.



('69 Code, § 151.12)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)  Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.13  VISIBILITY AT INTERSECTIONS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.



   On a corner lot in any residential district, nothing shall be erected,
placed, planted, or allowed to grow in such a manner as materially to impede
vision between a height of two and a half feet and ten feet above the center
line grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the street
lines of such corner lots and line joining points along said street lines 50
feet from the point of the intersection.



('69 Code, § 151.13)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)  Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.14  FENCES, WALLS, AND HEDGES.



   (A)   Notwithstanding other provisions of this Zoning Code, fences,
walls, and hedges not exceeding four and a half feet in height may be
permitted in any required side or rear yard or along the edge of any yard,
provided that no fence or wall, along the sides or front edge of any front
yard or in any part of a front yard shall be permitted. Hedges not over two
and a half feet in height may be permitted in a front yard.



   (B)   Privacy panels are permitted in a rear yard located directly
behind, and attached to or immediately adjacent to, the principal structure.
The finished side of a panel shall face adjacent properties. The unfinished
side of a panel, with any exposed posts or supports, shall face in toward the
principal structure of the subject property. The construction and appearance
of privacy panels shall be aesthetically pleasing and appropriate for the
location. Materials such as brick, block, lumber, vinyl, natural materials or
landscaping, shall be used and are to be similar or complementary in
appearance and style to the principal structure. Alternate materials may be
considered for approval by the Village Manager. Privacy panels are subject to
the village Property Maintenance Code. Privacy panels shall be located as
close as possible to the object or area intended to be screened so as to
allow for limited screening but also minimize adverse effects on neighboring
properties and sight lines. The maximum height of a privacy panel, as
measured from the bottom of a panel, shall be no more than six feet. The
maximum height of a privacy panel as measured from the ground or deck surface
shall be no more than six and one-half feet. The maximum length of a privacy
panel, whether constructed singularly or in combination, is 16 linear feet.



('69 Code, § 151.14)  (Ord.  C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90; Am. Ord. 2013-07, passed 4-8-13) 
Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.15  ACCESS TO PUBLIC OR PRIVATE STREET.



   (A) Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot
adjacent to a public street, or with access to an approved public or private
street, and all structures shall be located on lots as to provide safe and
convenient access for providing public services, fire protection, and
required off-street parking.



   (B)   Panhandle lots.  Panhandle lots are allowed as a conditional
use only as provided herein.  Panhandle lots are strictly regulated to
ensure they do not unreasonably and adversely impact the surrounding
property, access points, number of curb cuts, service of utilities,
aesthetics, provision of public services, or public safety requirements,
whether as to the proposed panhandle lot or nearby lots.



      (1)   Applications for panhandle lots shall contain the
following information:



         (a)   Name, address, and phone number of the owner(s) of
the property.



         (b)   Name, address, and phone number of the
applicant(s) and relationship to the owner(s).



         (c)   Street address of subject parcel.



         (d)   Existing zoning of subject property and all other
lots within 200 feet of any portion of the subject property.



         (e)   Name and address of each record property owner
within 200 feet of any portion of the subject property as determined by the
County Auditor at the time of application.



         (f)   Signatures of the owner(s) and applicant(s).



         (g)   Such additional information as may be deemed
appropriate by the Village Manager to assist village staff in evaluating and
processing the application.



      (2)   Applications for panhandle lots shall be submitted with
the following information, which is collectively referred to in this section
as the “development plan” for the panhandle lot:



         (a)   A plat in a form satisfactory for recording at the
County Recorder’s Office.



         (b)   Plat(s) or drawings to scale depicting the
following:



            1.   Distances of lots lines and area of all lots
that would comprise the proposed panhandle lot.



            2.   The topography of the proposed lot as it
exists at the time of the application, with contour lines showing each
two-foot change in elevation.



            3.   Existing utilities on, adjacent to, or
available for serving the proposed lot, as well as any additional utilities
necessary to serve the lot, including documentation from the appropriate
government agency showing how the front lot and the panhandle lot will be
served by sewers.



            4.   Existing and proposed surface storm water
drainage patterns.  Significant changes in direction or quantities must be
identified and certified by a qualified engineer that such surface water can
be appropriately managed, such as by tying into existing storm sewers,
non-erosive drainage systems, or adequate retention basins.



            5.   Existing easements on or serving the proposed
lot.



            6.   Location of all dwellings on or proposed to
be located on the site, including the direction of the front of the dwelling,
building elevations, exterior dimensions, parking areas, garages, driveways,
access points, and other areas intended to be improved or altered on the
proposed lot, with indications of proposed setbacks.



      (3)   Procedure.  Applications must be filed with the Village
Manager.  Completed applications will be submitted to the Board of Zoning
Appeals for hearing and approval.  For good cause, the Village Manager may
submit an incomplete application to the Board, but the lack of required
information may be cause for the Board to reject the application.  Prior to
the Board’s approval of an application, the Manager shall seek input on the
application from the public safety department, the Village Engineer, and
public works department, which input shall be communicated to the Board. 
The Manager shall cause written notice of applications submitted to the Board
at least ten calendar days prior to the first hearing on the application to
all record property owners within 200 feet of any portion of the proposed lot.



      (4)   Criteria for approval.  The Board of Zoning Appeals
shall approve the creation of a panhandle lot only if the application meets
the following criteria:



         (a)   The strip of land providing access from the body
of the lot to the lot frontage shall be no less than 20 feet wide at any
place and shall not exceed a length of 800 feet.



         (b)   In calculating the area of either the panhandle
lot or the front lot for purposes of determining whether they meet size and
area requirements, the strip of land providing access to the rear lot shall
not be considered part of either respective lot.



         (c)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, the
application meets all requirements of the Zoning Code.



         (d)   The proposed panhandle lot and plan must be
compatible with surrounding properties and land uses, and not unreasonably
and adversely impact surrounding properties when considering any and all
impacts of the proposed lot and development plan.  To approve a panhandle
lot, the Board must make the following findings:



            1.   The proposed lot or plan will not be
materially detrimental to the peaceful occupancy of proximate dwelling houses;



            2.   The proposed lot or plan will not have a
substantial detrimental effect upon the property values in the neighborhood;



            3.   The proposed lot or plan will not have a
substantial adverse impact upon the residential quality of the neighborhood;



            In making these findings, the Board shall consider
the impact of the proposed application on the neighborhood and adjoining
properties, including but not limited to the following:  Traffic, noise,
lighting, aesthetics, surface water drainage, screening, views and view
corridors, architectural features and aesthetics of proposed structures,
compatibility and consistency with other nearby properties and uses, access
points, curb cuts, grading, topography, all information and documents
required to be submitted by the applicant including but not limited to those
stated under paragraphs (B)(1) and (2) above, and any other factor pertaining
to the public health, safety, and welfare.



         (e)   If the application is approved, development or use
of the panhandle lot is conditioned on substantial conformity with the
development plan proposed for the lot, including any conditions on, or
alterations of, the plan required by the Board.



         (f)   If the application as submitted fails to satisfy
the criteria for approval, the Board may either deny the application, or
approve the application with conditions as necessary to bring it into
compliance.  Conditions, restrictions, or limitations may be imposed on the
proposed panhandle lot, or on the front lot if it is under common ownership
with the panhandle lot.  All conditions, restrictions, or limitations shall
be made a part of the record by the Board and issued in writing to the
applicant.



      (5)   Variances from any of the criteria set forth in this
section shall be considered by the Board of Zoning Appeals, which criteria
are deemed to be area or dimensional under a practical difficulties standard.



('69 Code, 151.15)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90; Am. Ord. 2013-17, passed 1-13-14) 
Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.16  PARKING, STORAGE, OR USE OF MAJOR RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.



   (A)   For purposes of these regulations, MAJOR RECREATIONAL VEHICLE
includes boats, boat trailers, buses, trailers, noncommercial trailers,
mobile homes, semitrailers, recreational vehicles, travel trailers, motor
homes, truck campers, fifth wheel trailers, park trailers, and cases or boxes
used for transporting major recreational vehicles, whether occupied by such
vehicles or not.



   (B)   No major recreational vehicle shall be parked or stored on any
lot in a residential district except in an enclosed building. However, such
vehicle may be parked anywhere on residential premises for not to exceed 24
hours during loading or unloading.  No such vehicle shall be used for
living, sleeping, or housekeeping purposes when parked or stored on a
residential lot.



('69 Code, § 151.16)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90; Am. Ord. 2013-02, passed 3-11-13) 
Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.17  PARKING AND STORAGE OF VEHICLES DEEMED NUISANCES.



   (A)   Automotive vehicles or trailers of any kind or type without
current license plates shall be deemed a nuisance and shall not be parked or
stored on any residentially zoned property other than in completely enclosed
buildings.



   (B)   The regular parking of commercial vehicles, bearing
advertising of any type of business or commercial enterprise, on
residentially zoned property within this village shall be deemed a
nuisance.  No such vehicle shall be parked on residentially zoned property
within this village during any part of two or more consecutive days, except
in an enclosed building or when engaged in normal business activity.



   (C)   No vehicle shall be offered and exhibited for sale or lease on
residentially zoned property within the village unless such vehicle is owned
by and titled to the owner of such property or member of his or her family
residing at such property; at no time shall more than one of such vehicles be
offered and exhibited for sale or lease; no such vehicle shall be offered and
exhibited for sale or lease unless parked upon an improved driveway or apron;
and no more than one sign or other form of advertising for the sale or lease
of such vehicles shall be displayed for more than 30 days within any six
month period.



('69 Code, § 151.17)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90; Am. Ord. 2001-3, passed 1-8-01) 
Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.18  IRREGULARLY SHAPED LOTS.



   The yard regulations and accessory structure regulations established by
this chapter may be modified by the Building Commissioner where the
regulations cannot reasonably be computed and complied with as a result of
the irregular shape of the lot or for topographical reasons.  An irregularly
shaped lot may include a lot which is a panhandle lot.  In any event, no
accessory structure shall be erected on an irregularly shaped lot closer than
20 feet to the nearest lot line.



§ 154.19 PROHIBITED USE OF PRIVATE LAND.



   Except as to a publicly owned right-of-way, no owner or person in
charge or control of any land located within the village boundaries shall
permit such land to be used, via a private drive or otherwise, to provide
access to any land located outside the village boundaries via vehicular
traffic.



(Ord. 2000-11, passed 7-10-00)



NONCONFORMITIES: LOTS, STRUCTURE SET-BACKS, AND USES



§ 154.20  INTENT REGARDING EXISTING AND FUTURE NONCONFORMING USES.



   (A)   Within the districts established by this Zoning Code, or
amendments that may later be adopted, there exist lands and land usages which
were lawful before this Zoning Code was passed or amended, but which would be
prohibited, regulated, or restricted under the terms of this Zoning Code or
future amendment, including certain:



      (1)   Lots,



      (2)   Structures,



      (3)   Uses of land and structures.



   (B)   It is the intent of this Zoning Code to permit these
nonconformities to continue until they are removed, but not to encourage
their survival.  It is further the intent of this Zoning Code that
nonconformities shall not be used as grounds for adding other structures or
uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district.



   (C)   Nonconforming uses are declared by this Zoning Code to be
incompatible with the permitted uses in the districts involved.  A
nonconforming set-back of a structure shall not be decreased and a
nonconforming use of land or structure shall not be changed after passage of
this Zoning Code by the addition of other uses of a nature which would be
prohibited generally in the district involved.



('69 Code, § 151.20)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-557, passed
2-13-84;  Am.  Ord.  C-666, passed 10-10-89;  Am.  Ord. C-692, passed
10-9-90) Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.21  NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD.



   In any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, a
single-family dwelling and customary accessory buildings may be erected on
any single lot of record at the effective date of adoption or amendment of
this Zoning Code, notwithstanding limitations imposed by other provisions
herein.  Such lot must be in separate ownership and not of continuous
frontage with other lots in the same ownership.  This provision shall apply
even though such lot fails to meet the requirements for area or width, or
both, that are generally applicable in the district, provided that yard
dimensions and requirements other than these applying to area or width, or
both, of the lot shall conform to the regulations for the district in which
such lot is located.



Variance of yard requirements shall be obtained only through action of the
Board of Appeals.



('69 Code, § 151.21)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)  Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.22  NONCONFORMING USES OF STRUCTURES OR OF STRUCTURES AND PREMISES IN
COMBINATION.



   If a lawful use involving individual structures, or of structure and
premises in combination, exists at the effective date of adoption or
amendment of this Zoning Code, that would not be allowed in the district
under the terms herein, the lawful use may be continued so long as it remains
otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions:



   (A)   No existing structure devoted to a use not permitted by this
Zoning Code in the district in which it is located shall be enlarged,
extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except
in changing the use of the structure to a use permitted in the district in
which it is located;



   (B)   Any nonconforming use may be extended throughout any parts of
a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the
time of adoption or amendment of this Zoning Code, but no such use shall be
extended to occupy any land outside such building;



   (C)   If no structural alterations are made, any nonconforming use
of a structure, or structure and premises, may, as a special exception, be
changed to another nonconforming use provided that the Board of Appeals, by
making findings in the specific case, shall find that the proposed use is
equally appropriate or more appropriate to the district than the existing
nonconforming use.  In permitting such change, the Board of Appeals may
require appropriate conditions and safeguards in accordance with the
provisions of this Zoning Code;



   (D)   Any structure, or structure and land in combination, in or on
which a nonconforming use is superseded by a permitted use, shall thereafter
conform to the regulations for the district, and the nonconforming use may
not thereafter be resumed;



   (E)   When a nonconforming use of a structure, or structure and
premises in combination, is discontinued or abandoned for six consecutive
months, or for 18 months during any three-year period (except when government
action impedes access to the premises), the structure, or structure and
premises in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformity
with the regulations of the district in which it is located;



   (F)   (1)   For the purpose of division (F)(2) below, DESTRUCTION
is defined as damage to an extent of more than 50% of the replacement cost at
the time of destruction.



      (2)   Where nonconforming use status applies to a structure
and premises in combination, removal or destruction of the structure from any
cause shall eliminate the nonconforming status of the land.



('69 Code, § 151.22)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)



RESIDENCE A DISTRICT REGULATIONS



§ 154.25  USE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Principal permitted uses.  A building or lot or other land
area in this district shall be used only for the following principal
permitted uses:



      (1)   Single-family dwellings.  Garages which are part of the
dwelling must not have their principal access face street, road or highway.



      (2)   Public water tower or reservoir;



      (3)   Farms, provided that no farm animals shall be kept on
any property that is smaller than ten acres.



   (B)   Accessory uses.



      (1) Home occupation.  A professional or business activity
conducted in a dwelling unit, provided:



         (a)   No person other than members of the family
residing on the premises, and one additional individual at any one time who
need not be a member of the family, shall be engaged in such occupation;



         (b)   The use of the dwelling unit for the home
occupation shall be clearly subordinate to its use for residential purposes
by its occupants, and not more than 25% of the floor area of the dwelling
unit shall be used in the conduct of the home occupation;



         (c)   There shall be no change in the outside appearance
of the building or premises, or other visible evidence of the conduct of such
home occupation other than one sign, not exceeding one square foot in area,
nonilluminated, and if unattached, positioned on the premises with the bottom
at a height not exceeding 12 inches.



         (d)   No home occupation shall be conducted in any
accessory building. Except for automobiles used in connection with the home
occupation, no tools, equipment, implements, machinery, supplies, inventory
or product of a home occupation shall be stored on the premises unless stored
in the principal dwelling or in an accessory building located on the premises;



         (e)   There shall be no sales made in connection with
such home occupation to customers who come onto the premises;



         (f)   Homeowner operated service businesses are
permitted subject to restrictions within these regulations.



         (g)   No traffic shall be generated by such home
occupation in greater volumes than would normally be expected in a
residential neighborhood, and any need for parking generated by the conduct
of such home occupation shall be met off the street and other than in a
required front yard;



         (h)   No equipment or process shall be used in such home
occupation which creates noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical
interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot.  In the case of
electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates
visual or audible interference in any radio, television receiver, telephone,
garage door opener, etc. off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line
voltage off the premises;



         (i)   Any person wishing to conduct a home occupation
shall apply for an accessory use permit from the Village Manager, submitting
all information as required by the Village Manager to demonstrate that the
provisions of this section will be met. The Village Manager may issue a
permit to the applicant for a period of not more than two years. Upon
expiration of the permit, the Village Manager may issue a new permit if
satisfied that the applicant continues to be in compliance with the
provisions of this section. A permit may be revoked at any time the Village
Manager determines that the provisions of this section are not being met by
the permit holder. Before issuing a permit, the Village Manager shall collect
a fee of $10.



      (2)   Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to
single-family occupancy.  No accessory building or garage shall be
constructed in such manner that its principal access faces any street, road
or highway.  Except as hereinafter provided for garages, no accessory
building shall have floor space in it greater than 1,000 square feet or 25%
of the floor space of the principal residence located on the property where
the accessory building is located, whichever is less.



      (3)   Unless upon application the Planning Commission has
authorized a larger space:



         (a)   No structures or buildings, whether an accessory
to or part of or attached to a dwelling, containing bays or areas designed or
used for storage of automobiles, other motor driven vehicles or trailers,
shall be constructed singly or in combination so as to contain more than
1,000 square feet of floor space or floor space to accommodate more than four
automobiles, other motor driven vehicles or trailers, whichever is less.



         (b)   No automobiles, other motor driven vehicles or
trailers shall be parked or stored in such structures or buildings unless
owned and used by the occupants of the dwelling to which the structure or
building is accessory or is a part of or attached.



         (c)   The above restriction shall not include or be
applicable to any area intended for the storage of lawn equipment provided
the floor space of such area is no greater than 500 square feet.



      (4)   Pools.  See Ch. 98, § 98.01 and § 98.02.



      (5)   Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction
work, which buildings shall be removed on completion or abandonment of the
construction work.



      (6)   Bulletin boards and signs as follows:



         (a)   Church or public building bulletin boards not
exceeding ten square feet in area.



         (b)   Temporary signs not over 40 inches from the ground
and not exceeding six square feet in area, the purpose of which is to
communicate information about the lease or sale of a building or lot, which
signs shall be removed as soon as the property is leased or sold.



         (c)   Small announcements or professional signs not over
one square foot in area;



         (d)   Highway directional and traffic safety signs
erected and maintained by public agencies;



         (e)   Outdoor election signs, provided that they may not
be erected prior to four weeks before the day of election and that the owner
of the property on which the sign is located must cause the sign to be
removed within 72 hours after the election; a sign permitted under this
section shall not exceed 12 square feet in area and the aggregate of all
signs placed on any parcel of real property in one ownership shall not exceed
60 square feet, nor shall they be posted such that the bottom edge of each
sign is more than 40 inches from the ground;



         (f)   No sign may be posted on public property or within
the public right-of-way along public roads, except village corporation signs,
highway directional or regulatory signs and traffic safety signs erected and
maintained by public agencies.  All signs shall be placed in such manner
that they will not obstruct the vision of drivers with regard to oncoming or
intersecting traffic on any public or private roads or driveways.



      (7)   No equipment or process shall be used as a hobby or
vocation which created noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odors, or electrical
interference detectable to the normal senses off the lot.  In the case of
electrical interference, no equipment or process shall be used which creates
visual or audible interference in any radio, television receiver, telephone,
garage door openers, etc. off the premises, or causes fluctuations in line
voltage off the premises.



   (C) Conditional uses.  Buildings, and village owned land, designed to
be occupied by or to serve the general public may be constructed and/or
utilized in Residence A and Residence B Districts provided they are
authorized pursuant to a conditional use permit granted by the Board of
Zoning Appeals.  Public buildings subject to the conditional use permit
regulations are: libraries, museums, community buildings, municipal
buildings, police or fire stations, churches, and off-street parking to
service such structures.  The Board of Zoning Appeals may grant a
conditional use permit for any of the foregoing structures if, upon
application by the instrumentality that proposes to construct and operate the
building and after a hearing, the Board of Zoning Appeals determines the
following:



      (1)   The construction and operation of the proposed public
building will not be detrimental to the peaceful occupancy of proximate
dwelling houses;



      (2)   The construction and operation of the public building
will not have a detrimental effect upon the property values in the
neighborhood;



      (3)   The design of the proposed public building is such that
it will not have an adverse impact upon the residential quality of the
neighborhood;



      (4)   The public building will have off-street parking on the
same parcel of land equal to one parking space for each three seats of
seating capacity in the structure, or one parking space for each 200 square
feet of floor space in any building which does not provide seating
capacity.  The off-street parking shall be set back a minimum of 100 feet
from all abutting streets and a minimum of 25 feet from any lot line of any
contiguous lot;



      (5)   If the plan for a public building includes a fenced area
to be used for outdoor games, recreation or play, the fenced areas designed
for these uses shall be set back from all lot lines by a distance of at least
50 feet;



      (6)   Any use authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals as a
conditional use shall not be used for any bazaar, fete or any other such
outdoor activity and provided further that said land and building shall not
be used for any commercial activity unless sponsored or directed by the
regular and primary occupant of said building.  As used herein, COMMERCIAL
shall mean having financial profit as its primary aim but shall not include
the renting of facilities for religious occasions, to charitable or civic
organizations for meetings or to individuals or groups for weddings,
anniversaries and other similar celebrations.



('69 Code, § 151.25)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68, Am. Ord. C-303, passed
8-11-69, Am. Ord. C-431, passed 10-11-76; Am. Ord. C-496, passed 3-10-80; 
Am.  Ord.  C-666, passed 10-10-89;  Am.  Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90; Am.
Ord. C-808, passed 11-13-95; Am. Ord. 2001-14, passed 6-11-01; Am. Ord.
2009-14, passed 7-28-09)  Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.26  HEIGHT REGULATIONS.



   No building shall exceed two and one-half stories or 35 feet in height,
except as provided in § 154.51.



('69 Code, § 151.26)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)  Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.27  SIZE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   No dwelling in this district shall cover less than 2,000
square feet of ground area.



   (B)   Bedrooms shall have a minimum area of 150 square feet.  The
minimum required areas in each room are exclusive of closets, halls, and
storage spaces.



   (C)   Habitable rooms shall have a clear height of not less than
eight feet, except that rooms located in a basement shall have a clear height
of not less than seven and one-half feet, and rooms located in half-stories
shall have a clear height of not less than seven and one-half feet in at
least one-half of their area and be not less than four feet in any part of
their area.



   (D)   No habitable room shall be less than eight feet in width.



('69 Code, § 151.27)   (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90; Am. Ord. 2001-5, passed
4-9-01)    Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.28  REQUIRED MINIMUM LOT AREA, LOT WIDTH, YARDS, DISTANCES FROM LOT
LINES AND DWELLINGS.



   All structures shall comply with at least the following minimum
requirements:



   (A)   Lot area, lot width, and yards.



 

 
Dwellings
 
Public Buildings


Lot area
 
1 acre
 
3 acres


Lot width
 
150 feet
 
300 feet


Front yard depth
 
50 feet
 
100 feet


Side yard width (each)
 
20 feet, or 10% of lot width, whichever is larger, but need not exceed 50 feet
 
50 feet


Rear yard depth
 
50 feet, or 20% of depth, whichever is larger, but need not exceed 75 feet
 
75 feet, or 30% of lot depth, whichever is larger, but need not exceed 100
feet



 



   (B)   Distances from lot lines and dwellings.



      (1)   Any accessory structure or enclosure for the housing of
farm animals shall be at least 300 feet from the property lines of the
property on which the farm animals are housed and a lot size of ten acres or
more is required.



      (2)   Any accessory structure or enclosure for housing family
pets shall be at least 30 feet from the lot lines of the property on which
the structure or enclosure is located.



      (3)   Stables for riding horses. See § 154.50 (A)(2).



   (C)   Additional front yard requirements.



      (1)   If the alignment of existing buildings within 200 feet
on each side of the lot in question, within the same block, and on the same
side of the street, is farther from the front lot line than 50 feet, the
principal building on the lot in question must have a front yard not less in
depth than the average formed by such existing alignment; provided that it
shall not be required to be set back farther than the rear line of a
principal building occupying a lot on either side of the lot in question.



      (2)   There shall be a front yard on each street side of a
corner lot.



('69 Code, § 151.28)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)  Penalty, see § 154.99



RESIDENCE B DISTRICT REGULATIONS



§ 154.30  USE REGULATIONS.



   Uses permitted shall be the same as those in Residence A District as
provided in § 154.25 as well as the following additional conditional uses
which must meet the same standards for conditional uses set forth in §
154.25(C).



   (A)   Schools, including public elementary schools and high schools
and educational institutions having curricula ordinarily found in public
schools, and recognized by the Ohio Department of Education as offering
curricula sufficient to satisfy the requirements of any existing compulsory
education laws of the State of Ohio.  The off-street parking requirements
outlined in § 154.25(C) do not apply to schools; instead, schools must
provide sufficient off-street parking capacity to accommodate teachers, staff
and visitors.



   (B)   Private recreational facilities, other than country clubs and
golf courses, not operated for profit or as a commercial venture, which are
located on a lot having a minimum area of four acres, and which provide
off-street parking, in accordance with § 154.25(C).



('69 Code, § 151.30)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)  Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.31  HEIGHT REGULATIONS.



   No building shall exceed two and one-half stories or 35 feet in height,
except as provided in § 154.51.



('69 Code, § 151.31)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)



§ 154.32  SIZE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   No dwelling in this district shall cover less than 1,500
square feet of ground area.



   (B)   Bedrooms shall have a minimum area of 150 square feet.  The
minimum required areas in bedrooms are exclusive of closets, halls, and
storage spaces.



   (C)   Habitable rooms shall have a clear height of not less than
eight feet, except that rooms located in a basement shall have a clear height
of not less than seven and one-half feet, and rooms located in half-stories
shall have a clear height of not less than seven and one-half feet in at
least one-half of their area and be not less than four feet in any part of
their area.



   (D)   No habitable room shall be less than eight feet in width.



('69 Code, § 151.32)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)  Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.33  REQUIRED MINIMUM LOT AREA, LOT WIDTH, YARDS, DISTANCES FROM LOT
LINES AND DWELLINGS.



   All structures shall comply with at least the following minimum
requirements:



   (A)   Lot area, lot width, and yards.



 

 
Dwellings
 
Public Buildings


Lot area
 
21,780 feet
 
3 acres


Lot width
 
110 feet
 
300 feet


Front yard depth
 
50 feet
 
100 feet


Side yard width (each)
 
12 feet, or 10% of width, whichever is larger, but need not exceed 20 feet
 
50 feet


Rear yard depth
 
40 feet, or 20% of depth, whichever is larger, but need not exceed 50 feet
 
75 feet, or 25% of lot depth, whichever is larger, but need not exceed 100
feet



 



   (B)   Distances from lot lines and dwellings.



      (1)   Any accessory structure or enclosure for the housing of
farm animals shall be at least 300 feet from the property lines of the
property on which the farm animals are housed and a lot size of ten acres or
more is required.



      (2)   Any accessory structure or enclosure for housing family
pets shall be at least 30 feet from the lot lines of the property on which
the structure or enclosure is located.



      (3)   Stables for riding horses.  See § 154.50 (A) (2).



      (4)   Any accessory structure for housing riding horses
(stable) shall be set back from all property lines a distance of a minimum of
100 feet and shall require Planning Commission approval.



   (C)   Additional front yard requirements.



      (1)   If the alignment of existing buildings within 200 feet
on each side of the lot in question, within the same block, and on the same
side of the street, is farther from the front lot line than 50 feet, the
principal building on the lot in question must have a front yard not less in
depth than the average formed by such existing alignment; provided that it
shall not be required to be set back farther than the rear line of a
principal building occupying a lot on either side of the lot in question.



      (2)   There shall be a front yard on each street side of a
corner lot.



('69 Code, § 151.33)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-351, passed
7-10-72; Am. Ord. C-666, passed 10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)
Penalty, see § 154.99



INDUSTRIAL A DISTRICT REGULATIONS



§ 154.35  USE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Principal uses.  A building or lot or other land area in this
district shall be used only for the following purposes:



      (1)   Light manufacturing or assembly of small manufactured
articles, which manufacturing or assembly will not be obnoxious or offensive
by reason of emission of dust, fumes, odor, noise, or vibration.



      (2)   Receiving, warehousing, and shipping of processed
manufactured products.



   (B)   Accessory uses.



      (1)   Accessory buildings and uses necessary to the principal
use of the property, including garage, storage buildings, water tower,
chimney, signs, railroad spurs and parking space, and recreation grounds for
employees of the industry.



      (2)   Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction
work, which buildings shall be removed on completion or abandonment of the
construction work.



      (3)   Signs of a permanent nature to be erected on the
buildings or premises, which must be approved by the Planning Commission as
to size, location, and appearance.



   (C)   Off-street parking.  Adequate facilities for parking
employees, visitors, and business vehicles must be provided on the
premises.  Such facilities must be set back a minimum of 100 feet from any
abutting street, and a minimum of 25 feet from any interior lot line.



('69 Code, § 151.35)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)  Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.36  HEIGHT REGULATIONS.



   No building shall exceed three stories or 35 feet in height, except as
provided in § 154.51.



('69 Code, § 151.36)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)  Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.37  SIZE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   No room, office, or working area, intended for human occupancy
shall have an area of less than 80 square feet.



   (B)   No room, office, or working area, intended for human occupancy
shall have a ceiling height of less than eight feet.



('69 Code, § 151.37)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)  Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.38  REQUIRED MINIMUM AREA AND DISTANCES FROM LOT LINES.



   All construction and structures shall comply with at least the
following minimum requirements:



   (A)   The minimum industrial site in this district shall be 20 acres
on which there shall be located not more than one principal building and such
accessory buildings as are necessary to the principal use of the property.



   (B)   Total ground area to be occupied by structures shall not
exceed 50% of the site area.



   (C)   All structures shall be set back at least 100 feet from any
street property line and at least 25 feet from any interior lot line.



('69 Code, § 151.38)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-520, passed
6-8-81; Am. Ord. C-666, passed 10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)
Penalty, see § 154.99



INDUSTRIAL B DISTRICT REGULATIONS



§ 154.40  USE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Principal uses.  A building or lot or other land area in this
district shall be used only for the following purposes:



      (1)   Light manufacturing or assembly of small manufactured
articles, which manufacturing or assembly will not be obnoxious or offensive
by reason of emission of dust, fumes, odor, noise, or vibration.



      (2)   Receiving, warehousing, and shipping of processed
manufactured products.



   (B)   Accessory uses.



      (1)   Accessory buildings and uses necessary to the principal
use of the property, including garage, storage buildings, water tower,
chimney, signs, railroad spurs and parking space.



      (2)   Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction
work, which buildings shall be removed on completion or abandonment of the
construction work.



      (3)   Signs of a permanent nature to be erected on the
buildings or premises, which must be approved by the Planning Commission as
to size, location, and appearance.



      (4)   No sign may be posted on public property or within the
public right-of-way along public roads, except village corporation signs,
highway directional or regulatory signs and traffic safety signs erected and
maintained by public agencies.  All signs shall be placed in such manner
that they will not obstruct the vision of drivers with regard to oncoming or
intersecting traffic on any public or private roads or driveways.



   (C)   Off-street parking.  Adequate facilities for parking
employees, visitors, and business vehicles must be provided on the
premises.  Such facilities must be set back a minimum of 50 feet from any
abutting street, and a minimum of 20 feet from any interior lot line.



('69 Code, § 151.40)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)  Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.41  HEIGHT REGULATIONS.



   No building shall exceed three stories or 35 feet in height, except as
provided in § 154.51.



('69 Code, § 151.41)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)  Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.42  SIZE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   No room, office, or working area, intended for human occupancy
shall have an area of less than 80 square feet.



   (B)   No room, office, or working area, intended for human occupancy
shall have a ceiling height of less than eight feet.



('69 Code, § 151.42)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)  Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.43  REQUIRED MINIMUM AREA AND DISTANCES FROM LOT LINES.



   All construction and structures shall comply with at least the
following minimum requirements:



   (A)   The minimum industrial site in this district shall be two
acres on which there shall be located not more than one principal building
and such accessory buildings as are necessary to the principal use of the
property.



   (B)   The total ground area to be occupied by structures shall not
exceed 50% of the site area.



   (C)   All structures shall be set back at least 50 feet from any
street property line and at least 20 feet from any interior property line.



('69 Code, § 151.43)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-520, passed
6-8-81; Am. Ord. C-666, passed 10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90) 
Penalty, see § 154.99



PARK P DISTRICT REGULATIONS



§ 154.45  USE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Principal uses.  Land in this district shall be used only for
the following purposes:



      (1)   Parks, including picnic facilities.



      (2)   Public playgrounds not used as an integral part of
schools, as defined in § 154.30.



      (3)   Golf courses.



   (B)   Accessory uses.



      (1)   Garages, stables, and equipment storage buildings.



      (2)   Caretakers' residences.



      (3)   Signs identifying the property not exceeding 16 square
feet in area.



      (4)   No sign may be posted on public property or within the
public right-of-way along public roads, except village corporation signs,
highway directional or regulatory signs and traffic safety signs erected and
maintained by public agencies; all signs shall be placed in such manner that
they will not obstruct the vision of drivers with regard to oncoming or
intersecting traffic on any public or private roads or driveways.



   (C)   Off-street parking.  Adequate facilities for parking vehicles
of any type must be provided on the premises.  Such facilities must be set
back a minimum of 25 feet from any property line.



('69 Code, § 151.45)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)  Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.46  HEIGHT REGULATIONS.



   No building or structure shall exceed two and one-half stories or 35
feet in height, except as provided in § 154.51.



('69 Code, § 151.46)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)  Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.47  AREA REQUIREMENTS.



   Any facility permitted in this district shall be operated on a site of
not less than eight acres.



('69 Code, § 151.47)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)  Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.48  DISTANCES FROM LOT LINES.



   Any structures erected on a site within this district shall be set back
a minimum of 100 feet from any lot line.



('69 Code, § 151.48)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)  Penalty, see § 154.99



EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS



§ 154.50  USE EXCEPTIONS; SPECIAL PERMITS.



   (A)   The Council, by special permit after public hearing, and
subject to such protective restrictions as it deems necessary, may authorize
the location of any of the following buildings or uses in any district within
which they are not otherwise permitted by this Zoning Code.



      (1)   Any public building erected and used by any department
of the village government.



      (2)   Riding stables and institutions.  However, such
buildings may occupy not over 20% of the total area of the lot, and will not
have any depreciating effect on the value of the neighboring properties, and
further such principal buildings shall be set back from all property lines a
distance of a minimum of 100 feet and shall require Planning Commission
approval.



   (B)   Before issuance of any special permit for any of the above
buildings or uses, the Council shall refer the proposed application to the
Planning Commission, which shall be given 60 days in which to make a report
concerning the effect of such proposed building or use on the character of
the neighborhood, traffic conditions, public utilities facilities, and other
matters pertaining to the public health, safety, and general welfare.  No
action shall be taken on any application for a proposed building or use above
referred to, until and unless the report of the Planning Commission has been
filed. Before issuing the special permit, Council shall hold a public hearing
thereon, giving at least 15 days prior notice of the time and place of such
public hearing.



('69 Code, § 151.50)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)  Penalty, see § 154.99



Cross-reference:



   Special exceptions by Board of Appeals, see § 154.66



§ 154.51  HEIGHT EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   Structures other than dwellings, heretofore mentioned in any
district as permitted, may exceed the height limit of 35 feet on approval of
the Board of Appeals, subject to all other regulations of this Zoning Code.



   (B)   Public, semi-public, or public service buildings, hospitals,
institutions, churches, or schools, when permitted in a district, may be
erected to a height not exceeding 60 feet, if the building is set back from
each yard line at least three feet for each foot of additional building
height above the height limit otherwise permitted in the district in which
the building is to be located.



   (C)   The height limitations contained in the district regulations
do not apply to spires, belfries, cupolas, water tanks, cooling towers,
elevator penthouses, ventilators, chimneys, stacks, radio towers, or other
appurtenances usually required to be placed above the roof level and not
intended for human occupancy.



   (D)   For the purposes of height regulations, a basement shall not
be counted unless more than three feet six inches of its height projects
above grade at the front building line, in which case it shall be counted as
a half story.



('69 Code, § 151.51)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90; Am. Ord. C-732, passed 4-13-92)
Penalty, see § 154.99



Cross-reference:



   Height regulations, § 154.26



§ 154.52  YARD EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   An open unenclosed porch, deck, patio or paved terrace may
project into a front yard for a distance not exceeding ten feet, or into a
side yard for a distance not more than half the side yard required.



   (B)   Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky
unobstructed, except for accessory buildings in a rear or side yard, and
except for the customary projections of sky-lights, sills, balconies,
cornices, and ornamental features.



   (C)   Open or lattice-enclosed fire escapes, fireproof outside
stairways, and balconies projecting not more than five feet into a rear yard,
and the ordinary projections of chimneys and flues may be permitted.



   (D)   Fences, not exceeding four and one-half feet in height, may be
permitted in any rear or side yard.



('69 Code, § 151.52)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)  Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.53  AREA EXCEPTIONS.



   In a residential district, any lot having an area or width less than
the standard specified for that district, shown as a lot on a subdivision
plat recorded after the effective date of this Zoning Code, in the office of
the County Recorder of Hamilton County, after approval by the Planning
Commission in the manner provided by law, may be used as a dwelling site,
subject to all other regulations of this Zoning Code.  And provided further
that in a residential district any lot of record which had, as of the
effective date of this Zoning Code an area or width less than the standard
specified herein, and no owner of which owned, at anytime after the effective
date of this Zoning Code, adjacent land which could have been added to the
lot to meet the standard specified herein, may be used as a dwelling site,
subject to all other regulations of this Zoning Code.



('69 Code, § 151.53)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)  Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.54  CHICKENS.



   (A)   Notwithstanding other provisions in the Village Code of
Ordinances, chickens may be kept within the village in any residential
district subject to the following rules and conditions.



   (B)   For purposes of this section, chickens are not deemed to be
“farm animals” as defined in the Village Code of Ordinances so long as
said chickens are kept, raised, or used in any manner related to a personal
or household use, such as for personal consumption, education, or to maintain
such animals as pets. Chickens may not be kept, raised or used for commercial
purposes, including but not limited to the sale of chickens or eggs or to
convey the same for profit, in which case such chickens are deemed to be
“farm animals” as defined in this Code.



   (C)   Restrictions.



      (1)   Each household in the village may keep up to six
chickens on the premises at any one time. If two residents share a common
chicken habitat or coop on one property, up to 12 chickens may be kept on the
premises.



      (2)   Only female chickens, aka hens, may be kept in the
village. Males, aka roosters, are not allowed at any time.



      (3)   No chickens may be slaughtered on any residential
property in the village.



      (4)   Chicken feed must be kept in a rodent- and
predator-proof container.



   (D)   Habitat.



      (1)   Chickens may only be maintained outdoors in a
predator-proof chicken house, coop, or other structure that is thoroughly
ventilated, of sufficient size to permit free movement of the animals,
designed to be easily accessed, cleaned, and maintained by the owner, and at
least two square feet in size for each chicken.



      (2)   All such structures are herein defined as “habitat”
or “habitat structure” and shall be considered as accessory structures as
defined elsewhere in this Code. A zoning permit is required for this and all
other accessory structures. All such structures shall comply with the
provisions set forth in § 154.12, including but not limited to a 20-foot
setback from adjoining property lines in Residence A Districts, and a 12-foot
setback from such lot lines in Residence B Districts.



      (3)   In addition to the other conditions and restrictions
applicable to accessory structures, at least 50% of any structure housing
chickens must be appropriately screened from the street and abutting
properties by either a fence, wall, or landscaping as permitted in the
village to provide reasonable and appropriate cover to reduce, lessen, or
obscure the visual impact of the structure. Such screening shall be evenly
spaced around the structure as appropriate.



      (4)   Chickens shall be enclosed within the habitat structure
at night from sunset to sunrise. If chickens are allowed by the owner to be
outside of the structure from sunrise to sunset, the chickens must be
contained within an area that is fenced or surrounded by other barriers
(“containment area”) so as to prevent access to the chickens by dogs or
other predators, and to prevent chickens from travelling outside of the
containment area.



      (5)   All areas in and around the chicken habitat structure
must be maintained in a clean, safe, sanitary and orderly manner for the
health and welfare of the chickens as well as all other animals and persons.
No part of the structure or surrounding area shall constitute a nuisance. In
addition to the provisions and remedies set forth in the Property Maintenance
Code, no person shall allow the chickens or the habitat to be a nuisance,
including but not limited to allowing noxious odors or any noise of a loud or
persistent and habitual nature.



   (E)   Permits.



      (1)   No person shall keep a chicken on property within the
village without a permit issued by the village. There is no fee for the
permit. The Village Manager has the authority to consider all such permit
applications as well as revocations of any such permit. Applications for a
permit shall be made in writing and submitted to the Manager. A decision on a
permit application shall be made by the Manager within 15 business days of
receipt, excluding weekends and holidays. If a permit application is denied,
or if a permit is revoked, the property owner may appeal the Manager’s
decision to the Board of Zoning Appeals within seven business days of the
date the Manager’s written decision is issued. The Manager may, at his or
her sole discretion, provide an extension of time for good cause to any
person filing an appeal. If a permit is revoked, the property owner may
continue to maintain chickens on the subject property pending an appeal and
decision by the Board of Zoning Appeals unless the revocation is due in whole
or part to a nuisance, in which event such nuisance must be remedied as
directed by the Manager whether or not the revocation is appealed.



      (2)   Any person submitting an application for a permit under
this section shall consent to an inspection by the village of the property
where the chicken(s) will be kept.



      (3)   If the Manager becomes aware of a possible violation of
this section on property subject to a permit under this section, the Manager
shall be permitted to inspect the property at any reasonable time after
written notice to the occupants of the subject property to determine whether
or not a violation exists. If the Manager determines that a violation of the
Village Code of Ordinances exists, the property owner shall be notified to
bring the property into compliance within a reasonable amount of time as
determined by the Manager. If the property is not brought into compliance
within the time to remedy a violation, the permit shall be automatically
revoked.



   (F)   The Village Manager may designate any employee or agent of the
village to perform any of the duties of the Manager, or exercise the
authority of the Manager, as prescribed by this section.



   (G)   Penalty. Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. Each day the violation exists constitutes a separate violation.



(Ord. 2012-02, passed 5-14-12)



ENFORCEMENT



§ 154.55  BUILDING COMMISSIONER TO ENFORCE PROVISIONS.



   It shall be the duty of the Building Commissioner to enforce this
Zoning Code in accordance with administrative provisions herein set forth.



('69 Code, § 151.55)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)  Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.56  BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful to commence excavation for, or construction or
repair of any structure, until a building permit shall have been obtained for
such work from the Building Commissioner.  Applications for a building
permit shall be made, in writing, to the Building Commissioner in such form
as may be prescribed by him.



('69 Code, § 151.56)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)  Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.57  APPROVAL OF PLANS AND ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMIT.



   (A)   It shall be unlawful for the Building Commissioner to approve
any plans or to issue a building permit for excavation of construction, or
for the moving, alteration or repair of any structure, until he has inspected
such plans in detail and found them to be in conformity with provisions of
this Zoning Code.  To this end, the Building Commissioner shall require that
all building permit applications for a new structure or major alteration be
accompanied by plans drawn to scale and submitted in duplicate, and that they
show:



      (1)   Accurate shape, location, and dimensions of the lot to
be built upon;



      (2)   The shape, size, and location of all buildings or other
structures to be erected, altered, or moved, and of any structure already on
the lot;



      (3)   The existing and intended use of all such buildings or
other structures;



      (4)   Such other information concerning the lot or adjoining
lots as may be necessary for determining whether the provisions of the Zoning
Code are being observed.



   (B)   All dimensions on submitted plans relating to the location and
size of the lot to be built upon, and of any structures already on the lot,
shall be based on an actual survey if the building permit sought is for a
principal structure, and when deemed necessary by the Building Commissioner
if for an accessory structure.  The lot and the location of the proposed
structure thereon shall be staked out on the ground before excavation or
construction is started.



   (C)   One copy of such plans shall be retained by the Building
Commissioner, and one copy returned to the applicant when such plans shall
have been approved by him, together with such permit as may be granted.



   (D)   If the proposed excavation, construction, alteration, or
repair, as set forth in the application for a building permit, conforms with
the provisions of this Zoning Code and applicable building code, the Building
Commissioner shall issue a building permit for such work.  If a building
permit is refused, the Building Commissioner shall state such refusal in
writing, with the cause.



('69 Code, § 151.57)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)  Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.58  CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED.



   It shall be unlawful for an owner to use or permit the use of any land
or any structure, or part thereof, hereafter created, erected, converted,
enlarged, or changed, wholly or partly, in its use or construction, until the
Building Commissioner shall have issued a certificate of occupancy.  Such
certificate shall show that such structure or premises, or part thereof, and
the proposed use thereof are in conformity with the provisions of this Zoning
Code.



('69 Code, § 151.58)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)  Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.59  ISSUANCE OF CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY; INSPECTION BY BUILDING
COMMISSIONER.



   It shall be the duty of the Building Commissioner, when notified by the
builder, owner, or agent that a building is completed, to make a final
inspection and to issue a certificate of occupancy, provided he is satisfied
that the structure or premises, and the proposed use thereof, conform to all
the requirements of this Zoning Code and the applicable building code; or, if
such certificate is refused, to state refusal in writing with the cause.



   (A)   The Building Commissioner, at his discretion, may issue a
temporary certificate of occupancy for a part of a building, pending its
completion.



   (B)   On written request of the owner or tenant, the Building
Commissioner shall issue a certificate of occupancy for any building or
premises existing at the time of enactment of this Zoning Code, certifying,
after inspection, the kind and extent of use made of the building or
premises, and whether such use conforms to provisions of this Zoning Code.



('69 Code, § 151.59)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)  Penalty, see § 154.99



§ 154.60  SOLICITOR AUTHORIZED TO PREVENT VIOLATION; REMEDIES.



   In case any structure is or is intended to be erected, constructed,
reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, moved, or maintained, or any
structure or land is or is intended to be used, in violation of the
provisions of this Zoning Code, the Village Solicitor, in addition to the
remedies provided for in the statutes of the State of Ohio and this Zoning
Code, is authorized to prevent such unlawful erection, construction,
reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion, moving, maintenance or use,
or to restrain, correct, or abate such violation.



('69 Code, § 151.60)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)



ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS



§ 154.62  APPOINTMENT.



   The Zoning Board of Appeals consists of the five members of the
Planning Commission who serve for such terms of office as will coincide with
their appointment as members of the Planning Commission.



('69 Code, § 151.62)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)



§ 154.63  GENERAL PROCEDURE OF BOARD; MEETINGS.



   (A)   Board rules.  The Board shall have power to adopt rules and
regulations for its own government, not inconsistent with law or with the
provisions of this Zoning Code and of any other ordinance of the village.



   (B)   Meetings.  Meetings of the Board of Appeals shall be held at
the call of the chairman and at such other times as the Board may
determine.  The chairman, or in his absence, the acting chairman, may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.



   (C)   Hearings.  Hearings of the Board shall be public.  The Board
shall keep minutes of its attendance, its proceedings and action taken on
each question.  Board records shall be filed by the Village Clerk and shall
be a public record.



   (D)   Quorum. The presence of three members shall constitute a
quorum.



   (E)   Voting.  The Board shall act by motion, duly made and
seconded.  The concurring vote of three members of the Board shall be
necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision, or determination of
the Building Commissioner, or to decide in favor of the applicant any matter
on which it is required to pass under this Zoning Code, or to effect any
variation in the requirements of this Zoning Code.



('69 Code, § 151.63)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)



§ 154.64  APPLICATIONS AND APPEALS TO BOARD; HEARINGS; STAY OF PROCEEDINGS.



   (A)   Applications.



      (1)   An application to the Board, in cases in which it has
original jurisdiction under the provisions of this Zoning Code, may be taken
by any affected property owner, including a tenant, or by governmental
official, department, board, or bureau.



      (2)   Such application shall be filed with the Building
Commissioner who shall transmit the same, together with all plans,
specifications, and other papers pertaining to the application, to the Board
of Appeals.



   (B)   Appeals.



      (1)   An appeal to the Board may be taken up by any affected
property owner, including a tenant, or by any governmental official,
department, board, or bureau affected by any ruling of the Building
Commissioner.



      (2)   Such appeal shall be taken within a reasonable time, as
prescribed by the rules of the Board, by filing with the Building
Commissioner and with the Board a notice of appeal specifying the grounds
thereof.  The Building Commissioner shall forthwith transmit to the Board
such notice of appeal, together with all the plans and papers constituting
the record on which the action appealed from was taken.



   (C)   Hearing; decision.  The Board shall fix a reasonable time for
the hearing of an application or of an appeal.  The Board shall serve
notices to the applicant or appellant, to the owners of all properties
adjoining the lot involved in the application or appeal, and to the Building
Commissioner, at least five days before the time when the application or
appeal shall be considered by the Board.  Any party may appear at such
hearings in person or by agent or by attorney.  The Board shall decide the
application or appeal within a reasonable time.



   (D)   Stay of proceedings.  An appeal shall stay all proceedings in
furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the Building Commissioner
certifies to the Board of Appeals, after notice of appeal shall have been
filed with him, that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay
would in his opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property.  In such
case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by order which may, on
due cause shown, be made to the Board of Appeals on application, after notice
to the Building Commissioner.



('69 Code, § 151.64)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)



§ 154.65  GENERAL POWERS AND DUTIES OF BOARD.



   The Board of Appeals shall have jurisdiction in matters, and shall have
the specific and general duties and powers set forth in §§ 154.66 through
154.70.  Variances may be authorized only for height, area, and size of
structure or size of lots, yards and open spaces.



('69 Code, § 151.65)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)



§ 154.66  SPECIAL EXCEPTIONS.



   (A)   The Board of Appeals shall have the power in specific cases to
hear and to grant or refuse to grant applications, in accordance with the
provisions of this Zoning Code and filed as hereinbefore provided, and to
authorize or refuse to authorize a building permit or certificate of
occupancy for the special exceptions set forth in this section as follows:



      (1)   The special exceptions hereinbefore specified in §§
154.50 through 154.53 of this Zoning Code.



      (2)   The substitution for a nonconforming use of another
nonconforming use which, in the opinion of the Board of Appeals, is of the
same or less objectionable nature in respect to its effect on the
neighborhood, provided no structural alterations, except such as are required
by law or ordinance, are made in any structure.



      (3)   The extension of a nonconforming use throughout a
structure manifestly designed for such use, provided no structural
alterations, except such as are required by law or ordinance, are made
therein.



      (4)   The temporary use of a structure or of land in any
district for a purpose or use which does not conform to the regulations
prescribed herein for the district in which it is located, provided that such
use be of a true temporary nature and does not involve the erection of
substantial structures.  A revocable permit for such temporary use shall be
for not more than a 12-month period, subject to such conditions as will
safeguard the public health, safety, convenience, comfort, and general
welfare.



   (B)   In authorizing a special exception, the Board may attach
thereto such conditions or requirements, governing the location, character,
or other features of the proposed structure or use, and its maintenance,
occupancy, or operation as the Board may deem necessary in furtherance of the
purpose of this Zoning Code.



('69 Code, § 151.66)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)



Cross-reference:



   Exceptions and modifications, see §§ 154.50 through 154.53



§ 154.661  CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS.



   (A)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the power to hear
applications for conditional use permits in accordance with the provisions of
this Zoning Code, §§ 154.25(C) and 154.30, and to authorize or refuse to
authorize a conditional use permit or to issue a conditional use permit upon
conditions which, in the judgement of the Board of Zoning Appeals, are
necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare and to
carry out the policies contained in this code.



   (B)   A conditional use permit shall not be granted if the proposed
conditional use will interfere with quiet enjoyment of proximate residential
uses because of the generation of noise, traffic that is incompatible with
the neighborhood in which the conditional use is proposed, or light from the
conditional use that will spill onto nearby residential uses.



(Am. Ord. C-666, passed 10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)



§ 154.662  SITE PLAN REVIEW.



   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the power to hear applications
for Site Plan Review in accordance with following provisions.



   (A)   Applicability. This section shall apply to new property
development and any expansion of existing structures, except for parking lots
of five spaces or smaller. Furthermore, no building shall be erected or
structurally altered, except in accordance with the regulations of this
section and an approved site plan. No building permit shall be issued prior
to the approval of a site plan. This section only applies to property subject
to the North Site zoning designation set forth in §§ 154.75 et seq.



   (B)   Contents of site plan. Before a permit is issued for
construction, six copies of the site plan at a scale no smaller than one inch
to 50 feet shall be filed with the Building Commissioner setting forth,
identifying and locating the following.



      (1)   The total area in the development.



      (2)   The existing zoning of the property in question and/or
all adjacent properties.



      (3)   The names, addresses and contact information of all
property owners within 200 feet.



      (4)   All public and private right-of-way and easement lines
located on or adjacent to the property which is proposed to be continued,
created, relocated or abandoned.



      (5)   Existing topography with a maximum of two foot contour
intervals.



      (6)   The proposed finished grade of the de-velopment shown by
contours not less than one foot.



      (7)   The locations of all existing and proposed buildings in
the described parcels, the uses to be contained therein and the total number
of buildings including dimensions, heights, gross floor area and number of
stories.



      (8)   Location and dimension of all curb cuts, driving lanes,
off street parking and loading areas including the number of spaces, angles
of stalls, grades, surfacing materials, drainage plans, and illumination of
facilities.



      (9)   All sidewalks and other open areas.



      (10)   All existing wooded/vegetated areas and riparian
corridors.



      (11)   Location of all walls, fences, and buffer yards.



      (12)   Location, size, height, colors, typeset, materials,
lighting, and orientation of all signs.



      (13)   Location of all existing proposed streets, highways and
alleys.



      (14)   All existing and proposed water and sanitary sewer
lines indicating pipe sizes, types and grades and verification of
availability from GCWW and MSD.



      (15)   All existing and proposed storm water facilities as
required in § 156.03.



      (16)   All existing and proposed gas, electric, telephone,
catv facilities, both public and private to be incorporated into the
development.



      (17)   The schedule of phasing of the project.



      (18)   A Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan as required in
Chapter 153.



      (19)   A lighting plan including photometric information and
proposed style and height of light fixtures.



      (20)   A landscape plan.



      (21)   A list of all requested variances from the standards of
the Zoning Code.



      (22)   Such other information as required by the Board to
determine the conformance with this Code.



   (C)   Site plan review guidelines. The following principles shall
guide the exercise of site planning review by the Board of Zoning Appeals.



      (1)   The natural topographic and landscape features of the
site shall be incorporated into the plan and the development.



      (2)   Buildings and open spaces should be in proportion and in
scale with existing structures and spaces in the area within 300 feet of the
development site.



      (3)   A site that has an appearance of being congested,
overbuilt or cluttered can evolve into a blighting influence and therefore
such should not be congested, overbuilt or cluttered.



      (4)   Open spaces should be linked together.



      (5)   Natural separation should be preserved or created on the
site by careful planning of the streets and clustering of buildings using
natural features and open spaces for separation. Existing vegetation removal
should be kept to a minimum.



      (6)   Screening of intensive uses should be provided by
utilizing landscaping, fences or walls to enclose internal areas.



      (7)   Buildings should be sited in an orderly, non-random
fashion. Long, unbroken building facades should be avoided.



      (8)   In connection with the siting of new buildings, the
location should be oriented to maximize the privacy of any adjacent
residential buildings.



      (9)   Street location and design shall conform to existing
topographic characteristics. Cutting and filling shall be minimized in the
construction of streets. Flat as possible grades shall be utilized proximate
to intersections.



      (10)   Storm water quality best management practices (BMP)
should be incorporated into the site.



      (11)   Pedestrian circulation in non- residential areas should
be arranged so that off-street parking areas are located within a convenient
walking distance of the use being served. Pedestrian and vehicular
circulation should be separated as much as possible, through crosswalks
designated by pavement markings, signalization or complete grade separation.



      (12)   Path and sidewalk street crossings should be located
where there is a good sight distance along the road, preferably away from
sharp bends or sudden changes in grade.



      (13)   Parking lots and garages should be located in such a
way as to provide safe, convenient ingress and egress. Whenever possible
there should be a sharing of curb cuts for more than one facility. Parking
areas should be screened and landscaped and traffic islands should be
provided to protect circulating vehicles and to break up the monotony of
continuously paved areas.



      (14)   Drive through establishments should be located to allow
enough automobile waiting space for peak hour operation without interference
with other parking lot circulations or vehicular traffic on adjacent public
streets.



   (D)   Action by the Board of Zoning Appeals for site plan review.



      (1)   Upon submission of the complete application for site
plan review to the Building Commissioner, the application shall be
transmitted to the Board of Zoning Appeals, where the Board shall review the
site plan pursuant to § 154.662(C), Site Plan Review Guidelines. For
applications for site plan review where no variances are requested from the
standards of the Zoning Code, no public hearing shall be required in
conjunction with the review, the approval, approval with modifications or
disapproval of the site plan. Notice of the public meeting shall be given to
the applicant, the Building Commissioner, owners of adjoining properties, and
owners of all properties that are within 50 feet of any new improvement or
structure, at least 14 days prior to the meeting. In the event the lot
involved in the application borders a neighboring governmental jurisdiction,
notice of the public meeting shall also be provided to the Safety Service
Director of the neighboring jurisdiction. The Board may approve, disapprove,
or approve with modifications the site plan as submitted. Any approval will
be subject to further review by village staff for general permitting purposes.



      (2)   For applications where variances to the standards of the
Zoning Code are requested, a public hearing shall be scheduled by the Board
of Zoning Appeals. Notice of the public hearing shall be given in the same
manner as set forth in division (D)(1) above. In addition to the guidelines
contained in § 154.662(C), the Board shall also consider the standards for
variance approval contained in § 154.67. Following the public hearing, the
Board may approve, disapprove, or approve with modifications the site plan
and requested variances as submitted.



      (3)   The Board of Zoning Appeals shall act upon all site
plans within 35 days after the receipt of the complete application from the
Building Commissioner.  Within the 35-day period, a majority of the members
of the Board present at a meeting thereof may vote to extend the period for a
period of time not to exceed an additional 90 days.



   (E)   Appeal of Board of Zoning appeals decision for site plan
review. An appeal can be made to the Village Council regarding a decision by
the Board of Zoning Appeals regarding approval of a site plan review. An
applicant, or other aggrieved party, may appeal to the Village Council to
evaluate the decision of the Board as related to a site plan review
application. The Village Council may uphold the decision of the Board,
overturn the decision of the Board, or modify the decision of the Board. An
affirmative vote of three-fourths of the Village Council is required to
overturn or modify the recommendation of the Board of Zoning Appeals.



(Ord. 2012-05, passed 8-13-12; Am. Ord. 2013-06, passed 4-8-13)



§ 154.67  VARIANCES.



   (A)   The Board of Appeals shall have the power to authorize on
appeal in specific cases any variances from the terms of this Zoning Code as
will not be contrary to the public interest, where, owing to special
conditions of the appellant's lots or to existing uses or structures on
adjoining lots, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this Zoning Code
will result in undue hardship in the case of a use variance, or will result
in practical difficulty in the case of an area variance, so as to relieve
such hardship or practical difficulty, and so that the intent of this Zoning
Code shall be observed, and substantial justice done.  In authorizing a
variance the Board may attach thereto such conditions or requirements
governing the location, character, or other features of the proposed
structure or use, and its maintenance, occupancy, and operation as the Board
may deem necessary in furtherance of the purposes of this Zoning Code.



('69 Code, § 151.67) (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord.  C-691, passed
9-10-90; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)



   (B)   The factors to be considered and weighed in determining
whether a property owner seeking an area variance has encountered practical
difficulties in the use of his property include, but are not limited to:
whether the property in question will yield a reasonable return or whether
there can be any beneficial use of the property without the variance; whether
the variance is substantial; whether the essential character of the
neighborhood would be substantially altered or whether adjoining properties
would suffer a substantial detriment as a result of the variance; whether the
variance would adversely affect the delivery of governmental services, that
is water, sewer, garbage; whether the property owner purchased the property
with knowledge of the zoning restriction; whether the property owner's
predicament feasibly can be obviated through some method other than a
variance; or whether the spirit and intent behind the zoning requirement
would be observed and substantial justice done by granting the variance.



(Ord. C-557, passed 2-13-84; Am. Ord. C-666, passed 10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-691,
passed 9-10-90; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)



   (C)   Notwithstanding the requirement contained in division (A)
above that undue hardship or practical difficulty must be demonstrated before
a variance may be granted, the Board may waive the undue hardship or
practical difficulty requirement for a variance from the prescribed set back
from a lot line or lines when the requested variance is to extend or add to
an existing nonconforming structure which encroaches on a required set back
from a lot line, so long as the extension or addition will not encroach more
than the set back of the existing structure.  If the request is to add an
additional structure or structures, such addition may not encroach more on
required set backs from lot lines than any existing structure.  All other
considerations and conditions outlined in division (A) above continue to
apply.



(Ord. C-557, passed 2-13-84)



Cross-reference:



   Variances, types authorized, see § 154.65



§ 154.68  INTERPRETATION OF ZONING MAP.



   Where the street or lot layout actually on the ground, or as officially
recorded, differs from the street and lot lines as shown on the zoning map,
the Board of Appeals shall have the power, after notice to the owners of the
properties involved and after public hearing, to interpret the zoning map in
such a way as to carry out the intent and purposes of this Zoning Code, for
the particular location in question.



('69 Code, § 151.68)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)



§ 154.69  ADMINISTRATIVE REVIEW.



   The Board of Appeals shall have the power to hear and decide appeals
where it is alleged by the appellant that there is error in any order,
requirement, decision, grant, or refusal made by the Building Commissioner in
the enforcement of the provisions of this Zoning Code.



('69 Code, § 151.69)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)



§ 154.70  ACTION OF BOARD.



   In exercising its powers, the Board of Appeals may, in conformity with
the provisions of this Zoning Code reverse, wholly or partly, or may modify
the order, requirement, decision, or determination appealed from, and may
make such order, requirement, decision, or determination as ought to be made.



('69 Code, § 151.70)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)



DISTRICT CHANGES; ZONING AMENDMENTS



§ 154.72  CHANGES BY COUNCIL; REVIEW BY PLANNING COMMISSION.



   The Council may from time to time amend, by ordinance, the number,
shape, or area of districts established on the zoning map or the regulations
set forth in this Zoning Code; but no such amendment shall become effective
unless the ordinance proposing same shall first be submitted to the Planning
Commission for review, recommendations and suggestions, and the Commission
shall have been allowed a reasonable time, not more than 60 days, for
consideration and report.



('69 Code, § 151.72)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90)



§ 154.73  PETITIONS FOR ZONING MAP OR ZONING CODE AMENDMENTS.



   Any person or persons, other than Council or the Planning Commission,
desiring an amendment of the Zoning Map or Zoning Code shall file a petition
for such an amendment with the Village Clerk, together with a statement
giving the names and addresses of the owners of all properties lying within
1,000 feet of any part of the property the zoning of which would be changed
by the proposed amendment if enacted.  In addition, such petition shall
comply with all provisions for petitions for change in the Zoning Map or
Zoning Code (Zoning Plan) found in Art. VI, Sec. 3 of the Village Charter.



('69 Code, § 151.73)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90; Am. Ord. C-782, passed 7-11-94)



§ 154.74  PUBLIC HEARINGS.



   (A)   The Planning Commission, upon referral of such petition to
change the Zoning Code or Zoning Map, shall schedule and hold a public
hearing thereon after due notice, published in the same manner as provided
for resolutions and ordinances by the Village Charter. Within a reasonable
length of time after such public hearing, the Planning Commission shall
render its report and recommendations to Council on such petition.



   (B)   Before adopting any proposed amendment to the Zoning Map or
Zoning Code, whether the proposal is initiated by Council, the Planning
Commission, or by petition, Council shall hold a public hearing thereon and
shall give at least 14 days prior notice of the time and place of such public
hearing.  Such notice shall be given to those persons, and in the form and
by the method, as determined by Council at the time of scheduling the public
hearing.



('69 Code, § 151.74)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-656, passed
5-8-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90; Am. Ord. C-782, passed 7-11-94)



NORTH SITE NS DISTRICT REGULATIONS



§ 154.75  PURPOSE.



   In addition to the purposes listed in § 154.05(B), the purpose of the
North Site District is to encourage construction of office developments, and
other similar uses, that will offer additional development opportunities
within the village adjacent to the Ronald Reagan Highway while also ensuring
an appropriate character that will result in a high quality development
pattern within the district. The North Site District is applied to property
which has an NS District designation and is bounded by the village corporate
limit on the north and west, Ronald Reagan Highway (State Road 126) to the
south, and Ridge Road to the east.



(Ord. 2012-05, passed 8-13-12)



§ 154.76  USE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Principal uses. A building or lot or other land area in this
district shall be used only for the following purposes.



      (1)   Offices, including professional business offices,
medical/dental offices, accounting services, banking/financial institutions,
legal services, professional consulting/counseling services, real estate and
securities brokering, and tax preparation services.



      (2)   Flex office/warehouse that provides its occupants the
flexibility of utilizing internal space configurations allowing a flexible
amount of office, sales, or showroom space in combination with accessory
warehouse distribution, indoor storage, or contractor services, excluding
manufacturing or assembly. Such accessory warehouse use shall occupy less
than 50% of the floor area for each leasable space.



      (3)   Hotels and motels.



      (4)   Nursing homes, assisted living facilities, and
continuing care retirement facilities.



      (5)   Recreational uses.



      (6)   Government/public buildings and facilities.



      (7)   Other institutional uses including, daycare centers,
hospitals, and schools, universities, and other educational related research
facilities.



   (B)   Accessory uses.



      (1)   Retail uses and/or facilities within a mixed-used
building and not to exceed 20% of the total building square footage,
including, but not limited to restaurants, baked goods, cheeses, fruits and
vegetables, meats, ice cream, beer, wine, liquor, confectioneries, flowers
and plants, pharmacies, cosmetics, photographic equipment and supplies, pets
and pet supplies, clothing, jewelry, sporting goods, bicycles, toys, music
and musical instruments, luggage, books, glassware, medical and surgical
equipment, office furniture equipment and supplies, appliances, business
machines.



      (2)   Drive-in or drive-through service windows and ATM
machines when the principal use is an office located on the same lot.



(Ord. 2012-05, passed 8-13-12)



§ 154.77  HEIGHT REGULATIONS.



   No building shall exceed 60 feet in height, except as provided in §
154.51.



(Ord. 2012-05, passed 8-13-12; Am. Ord. 2013-06, passed 4-8-13)



§ 154.78  REQUIRED MINIMUM AREA AND DISTANCES FROM LOT LINES REGULATIONS.



   All construction and structures shall comply with at least the
following minimum requirements.



   (A)   The minimum lot area in this district shall be three acres.



   (B)   The total ground area to be occupied by structures shall not
exceed 50% of the site area.



   (C)   All structures shall comply with the following minimum yard
requirements:



      (1)   Ronald Reagan Highway: 25 feet.



      (2)   Front yard: 25 feet.



      (3)   Side yard: 20 feet.



      (4)   Rear yard: 20 feet.



(Ord. 2012-05, passed 8-13-12)



§ 154.79  SITE DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Off-street parking. Facilities for parking employees,
visitors, and business vehicles must be provided on the premises in
accordance with the following uses and calculations. Such facilities must be
setback a minimum of 20 feet from all public streets or private access
easements, including Ronald Reagan Highway, and ten feet from any interior
lot line. Parking spaces for the handicapped shall be provided in accordance
with the provisions of the Ohio Basic Building Code.



      (1)   Offices, excluding medical: three spaces for the first
1,000 sq. ft. or fraction thereof, plus one space per 400 sq. ft. of floor
area in excess of 1,000 sq. ft.



      (2)   Offices, medical: six spaces plus one space per 200 sq.
ft. of floor space in excess of 1,000 sq. ft.



      (3)   Hotels and motels: one space per lodging unit, meeting
rooms and restaurants calculated separately.



      (4)   Nursing homes, assisted living facilities, and
continuing care retirement facilities: one space per six residents plus one
space per employee.



      (5)   Government/public buildings and facilities: one space
per 250 sq. ft. of floor area or one space per four patrons, whichever is
greater.



      (6)   Daycare centers: one space per employee plus one space
for each facility vehicle stored on the lot plus one parking space for each
six children.



      (7)   Hospitals: one space per bed.



      (8)   Schools, K-6: one space for each three seats in any
auditorium, or one space for each classroom, whichever is greater.



      (9)   School, junior high/middle school: one space for each
three seats in any auditorium, or one space for each classroom, whichever is
greater.



      (10)   School, senior high: one space per employee plus 12
visitor spaces, plus one space per six students.



      (11)   School, university, vocational/ professional, or
educational research facility: one space per employee plus one space per two
registered student capacity.



      (12)   Retail: one space per 200 sq. ft. of floor area.



      (13)   Restaurant: one space per 100 sq. ft. of floor area.



      (14)   Flex office/warehouse building: one space per two
employees on maximum work shift or for 2,000 sq. ft. of warehouse floor area
plus space(s) for office and/or retail calculated separately.



   (B)   Pedestrian facilities.



      (1)   Sidewalks shall be a minimum of five feet wide and are
required along both sides of all streets, excluding the Ronald Reagan Highway.



      (2)   A connection shall be established from abutting streets
with sidewalks to the entrance of primary structures through the use of
sidewalks and special demarcation.



      (3)   Pedestrian areas in parking lots or across interior
drives shall be demarcated with special paving, color or height change,
and/or striping for increased safety.



   (C)   Lighting.



      (1)   All outdoor lighting shall be designed, located, and
mounted at heights no greater than 18 feet from grade, must have cutoff
fixtures, and shall not shine directly onto adjacent residences.



      (2)   All outdoor lighting shall be designed and located to
permit maximum light levels of 0.0 foot-candles at any residential property
or lease line and 1.0 foot-candles at all other property or lease lines.



   (D)   Dumpsters and trash handling areas. The following requirements
shall apply to all dumpsters, trash handling areas, and related service
entrances.



      (1)   Dumpsters, trash handling areas and related screening
shall be located in compliance with the same minimum setbacks as a main
building.



      (2)   Any such structure shall be screened on three sides by a
fence or wall from the view from public streets and any abutting properties.



      (3)   Any fence or wall required under this section shall have
a height no greater than seven feet and no less than five feet. Any wall
shall be constructed in a durable fashion of brick, stone, or other masonry
materials with no greater than 25% of the wall surface left open. Any fence
shall be constructed in a durable fashion of wood posts and/or planks with
minimum diameter or width of three inches and with no greater than 25% of the
fence surface left open between posts and/or planks.



   (E)   Outdoor storage. Outdoor sales, display and storage shall be
prohibited.



   (F)   Utilities. All utility service shall be underground.



(Ord. 2012-05, passed 8-13-12)



§ 154.80  LANDSCAPING REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Streetscape buffer. A streetscape buffer shall be installed
along the property line abutting all public street right-of-way and private
access drives consisting of a minimum of ten feet in depth and including a
minimum of four understory or canopy trees and three shrubs per 100 linear
feet of frontage.



   (B)   Boundary buffer. A boundary buffer shall be installed between
any residential use and any non-residential use, including mixed use
buildings consisting of a minimum of ten feet in width and including a
minimum of four canopy or evergreen trees and three shrubs per 100 linear
feet of boundary length.



   (C)   Interior parking lot landscaping. Interior parking lot
landscaping shall be required for all new and expanded parking areas in
accordance with the following standards.



      (1)   The total landscape area required in parking lot areas
is 22 sq. ft. per parking space.



      (2)   Landscape areas shall consist of parking islands or
peninsulas and all required landscape materials shall be planted within these
island or peninsula areas. Best management practices (BMPs) such as rain
gardens or bio swales are encouraged.



      (3)   The minimum number of canopy trees is one canopy tree
for each ten parking spaces. Any fractional number of trees should be
calculated to the next highest whole number.



      (4)   To determine the total number of required shrubs,
multiply the total number of required canopy trees by three. One canopy tree
may substitute for three shrubs. Trees and shrubs do not have to be equally
spaced and may be grouped.



   (D)   General landscaping standards. All required streetscape,
boundary buffer, and interior parking lot landscaping shall comply with the
following standards.



      (1)   Canopy trees shall be deciduous trees with a minimum of
12 feet in overall height or a minimum caliper of 2.5 inches when installed,
and have an expected height of at least 35 feet at maturity.



      (2)   Understory trees (flowering/ornamental trees) shall be a
minimum of five feet in height in clump form or a minimum caliper of 1.5
inches when installed.



      (3)   Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of five feet in
height when installed.



      (4)   Shrubs shall be at least 18 inches in height or 24
inches in spread when installed.



      (5)   Existing mature trees and shrubs that are preserved may
be used to fulfill landscape requirements on a one to one basis except that
any mature trees with a caliper greater than six inches may substitute for
two required trees.



(Ord. 2012-05, passed 8-13-12)



§ 154.81  ARCHITECTURAL REGULATIONS.



   The purpose of this section is to require architectural features which
increase visual interest, reduce undifferentiated masses and relate to the
pedestrian scale, in accordance with the following standards.



   (A)   Facades shall have a defined base or foundation, a middle or
modulated wall, and a top formed by a pitched roof or articulated cornice, in
each instance appropriate to the building style.



   (B)   Buildings with continuous facades that are 90 feet or greater
in width shall be designed with offsets (projecting or recessed) not less
than two feet deep, and over intervals between offsets of not greater than 60
feet.



   (C)   Building facades may be constructed from stone, masonry,
cement fiber board, split-face, textured concrete, heavy gauge vinyl, glass
or other materials which provide the same desired quality.



      (1)   Concrete masonry units (CMU or block) shall be textured
or split-face and otherwise not smooth.



      (2)   Office uses may use architectural metal panels, glass
(up to 75% of the facade area) and ornamental metal.



      (3)   Wood, stucco, EIFS, or other similar material shall be
used for trim or architectural features only.



   (D)   Buildings constructed of metal shall be prohibited, except as
provided in § 154.81(C)(2).



   (E)   Roofs may be pitched, use stepped parapet walls, three
dimensional cornices, dimensioned or integrally-textured materials, or be
sloped with overhangs and brackets. Parapets shall not exceed more than
one-third the height of the supporting wall.



   (F)   Entryway features are required at the primary entrance to the
structure and shall include elements such as: covered entries, integral
planters, awnings, raised corniced parapets over the door, arches, or
architectural details such as tile work and moldings that are integrated into
the building structure and design.



   (G)   The architectural style, materials, color and design on the
front elevation shall be applied to all elevations of the structure adjacent
to Ronald Reagan Highway and/or any public street, primary internal drive or
residential use.



(Ord. 2012-05, passed 8-13-12)



§ 154.82  SIGNAGE REGULATIONS.



   (A)   Generally. No sign may be posted on public property or within
the public right-of-way along public roads, except village corporation signs,
highway directional or regulatory signs and traffic safety signs erected and
maintained by public agencies. All signs shall be placed in such manner that
they will not obstruct the vision of drivers with regard to oncoming or
intersecting traffic on any public or private roads or driveways. Only the
following types of signs are permitted.



   (B)   Building signs. Any business or other permissible use shall be
permitted one square foot of building sign surface area for each foot of
building frontage that fronts a public right-of-way, including Ronald Reagan
Highway, or the facade that contains the main entrance to the building and
such building signage shall be located on the facade from which the
measurement is taken.



   (C)   Freestanding signs. Businesses and/or centers containing
multiple businesses shall be permitted a maximum of one monument or pole sign
for the business or center for the joint use of all tenants for which the
facility is designed, including any outlots, subject to the following
criteria.



      (1)   Signs shall be allowed only for parcels with at least
150 feet of frontage adjoining a public street.



      (2)   Freestanding signs shall not exceed 20 feet in height.



      (3)   The sign shall be setback a minimum of five feet from
all public rights-of way and private access easements.



      (4)   The supporting structure of a pylon sign shall not
include exposed metal pole(s), but shall be surrounded by a decorative cover
that is architecturally compatible with the sign cabinet and the
architectural character of buildings on the site.



      (5)   Freestanding signs shall be a minimum of 20 feet from a
lot line of any residentially zoned or used property.



      (6)   Signs shall have a message area of not more than 50
square feet for single tenant facilities or 150 square feet for multi-tenant
facilities.



(Ord. 2012-05, passed 8-13-12)



§ 154.83  SITE PLAN REVIEW REQUIREMENT.



   Site plan review by the Board of Zoning Appeals is required for all new
structures and expansions of existing uses located in the North Site NS
District. This review shall be conducted in accordance with the standards and
procedures outlined in § 154.662.



(Ord. 2012-05, passed 8-13-12)



INTERIM DEVELOPMENT CONTROL DISTRICT



§ 154.85  PURPOSE.



   The Interim Development Control (IDC) Overlay District is intended to
temporarily regulate the establishment of uses, construction of new buildings
and demolition or alteration of existing structures in areas where the
adoption of amendments to the Zoning Code have been or are likely to be
proposed.



(Ord. 2003-17, passed 11-10-03)



§ 154.86  APPLICABILITY AND ZONING MAP DESIGNATOR.



   The IDC Overlay District may be applied to any district or any part
thereof.  It is adopted as an amendment to the zoning map.  This Overlay
District is shown on the zoning map by an IDC designator applied to the base
district designation.  Where inconsistencies exist between the IDC Overlay
District regulations and other provisions of this chapter and other
provisions of this code, the IDC Overlay District regulations apply.



(Ord. 2003-17, passed 11-10-03)



§ 154.87  ESTABLISHMENT OF IDC OVERLAY DISTRICTS.



   Council may establish and IDC Overlay District on finding that:



   (A)   Proposed amendments.  Map amendments to this chapter have
been or are likely to be proposed.



   (B)   Study and review.  The proposed amendments may substantially
affect permitted uses in the area of consideration and will require the study
and review by the Planning Commission, Village Administration and Council
prior to adoption.



   (C)   Public interest.  The protection of the public interest
requires that interim development controls be imposed during the period of
study and review.



(Ord. 2003-17, passed 11-10-03)



§ 154.88  LAND USES DURING PENDENCY OF AN IDC OVERLAY DISTRICT.



   During the period that an IDC Overlay District is in effect, no use
shall be made of the land, buildings or structures with the defined areas of
the IDC Overlay District, other than uses set forth in the ordinance
establishing the IDC Overlay District, nor shall any applications for zone
change be acted upon by Council or the Planning Commission.



(Ord. 2003-17, passed 11-10-03)



§ 154.89  THREE-MONTH IDC OVERLAY DISTRICTS.



   Council may establish IDC Overlay Districts to remain in effect for
three months without prior notice, advertisement or public hearing.  The
Village Clerk shall send notice of the establishment of Three-month IDC
Overlay District, within ten business days of establishing such district, to
all owners of record of property within such district.



(Ord. 2003-17, passed 11-10-03)



§ 154.90  ONE-YEAR IDC OVERLAY DISTRICTS.



   Council may establish IDC Overlay District to remain in effect for one
year, or extend IDC Overlay Districts established pursuant to § 154.87 for
nine additional months, if the process set forth in §§ 154.72 through
154.74 are satisfied, and on a finding that:



   (A)   Ongoing study.  The Planning Commission, Council and/or the
village's administration are studying amendments to this chapter that would
affect the area within the IDC District;



   (B)   Study incomplete.  The study of proposed or possible
amendments to this chapter has not yet been completed; and



   (C)   Inconsistent uses.  There is a prospect of changes in use,
construction of new structures or alteration or demolition of existing
structures that would be inconsistent with the existing Chapter 154.



(Ord. 2003-17, passed 11-10-03)



§ 154.91  EXTENSION OF IDC OVERLAY DISTRICTS.



   Council may extend the duration of an IDC Overlay District for an
additional six months, provided that an IDC Overlay District May not remain
in effect for more than two years from the date it was first established, and
the processes set forth in §§ 154.72 through 154.74 are satisfied before
the adoption of any IDC Overlay District extension.  Council may only adopt
an IDC Overlay District extension after receiving an affirmative
recommendation from the Planning Commission and finding that:



   (A)   Complex study.  Ths study of proposed or possible amendments
to this chapter that would affect the allowable land uses within the IDC
Overlay District has proven to be extraordinarily complex by reason of
unusual geographic, physical, or social conditions in the district;



   (B)   Study incomplete.  The study of proposed or possible
amendments to this chapter had not yet been completed; and



   (C)   Inconsistent uses.  There is a prospect of changes in use,
construction of new structures or alteration or demolition of existing
structures that would be inconsistent with the existing Chapter 154.



(Ord. 2003-17, passed 11-10-03)



§ 154.99  PENALTY.



   Any person, firm, or corporation who violates, disobeys, omits,
neglects, or refuses to comply with, or who resists the enforcement of any
provisions of this Zoning Code, shall be guilty of a minor misdemeanor and
fined not more than $150 for each offense or violation.  Each and every day
that a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense.



('69 Code, § 151.99)  (Ord. C-285, passed 7-8-68; Am. Ord. C-666, passed
10-10-89; Am. Ord. C-692, passed 10-9-90; Am. Ord. 2004-17, passed 7-12-04)



APPENDIX: OFFICIAL ZONING MAP







 



Cross-reference:



   Zoning map provisions, see § 154.06



CHAPTER 155: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS



Section



   155.01   Definitions



   155.02   Approval of subdivision required



   155.03   Subdivision for which no plat is required



   155.04   Subdivision approval process for which plat is required



   155.05   Concept plan; items to be shown on a concept plan



   155.06   Concept plan approval



   155.07   Items to be shown on subdivision improvement plan



   155.08   Design standards



   155.09   Procedure for securing subdivision plan approval; permits
and deposits



   155.10   Variances



   155.11   Inspection of public improvements



   155.12   Items to be shown on plat of subdivision



   155.13   General requirements for plat approval



   155.14   Procedure for obtaining approval of final or record plat



   155.15   Security for completion of subdivision improvements



   155.16   Approval not acceptance



   155.17   Acceptance of public streets or other public improvements



   155.18   Guarantee bond



   155.19   Subdivider's certificate of title



   155.20   Guarantee of payment of taxes and assessments



   Appendix:   Subdivision exhibits



§ 155.01  DEFINITIONS.



   For the purpose of this chapter the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.



   ALLEY.  A minor right-of-way used primarily for vehicular access to
the rear or side of properties.



   BUILDING SETBACK LINE.  The line indicating the minimum distance
between the property line and buildings or structures on the site.



   CONCEPT PLAN.  The initial development proposal to scale including
both narrative and site design information, intending to provide the Village
Planning Commission with a firm understanding of the manner in which the site
is to be developed.



   CROSSWALKWAY.  A right-of-way used primarily for pedestrian travel
through or across any portion of a block.



   CUL-DE-SAC.  A short, minor street having but one end open for motor
traffic, the other being permanently terminated by a vehicular turnaround of
prescribed dimensions.



   EASEMENT.  A grant by a property owner of the use for a specific
purpose or purposes of a designated strip of land to the general public, a
corporation or other individuals.



   LOT.  A unit area of land within a subdivision intended for transfer
of ownership or for building development.



   LOT, DOUBLE FRONTAGE.  A lot with opposite ends abutting on streets.



   MASTER PLAN.  The comprehensive plan made and adopted by the Amberley
Village Planning Commission indicating the general location recommended for
motorways, parks and other public open spaces, public building sites, public
utilities, and residential development.



   MOTORWAY.  A principal arterial route designated on the Master Plan as
a thoroughfare.



   PLAT OF SUBDIVISION.  A map showing the division of a tract of land at
least five acres or more in size, into two or more parcels, and prepared for
the purpose of recording.



   PROTECTIVE COVENANT.  A restriction on the use of private property
within a subdivision for the purpose of providing mutual protection against
undesirable aspects of development.



   PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.  Any of the following: roadway pavement, curbs,
gutters, sidewalks, crosswalkways, water mains, sanitary and storm sewers and
other appurtenant construction as related to the subdivision improvement plan.



   RIGHT-OF-WAY.  The entire strip of land lying between the property
lines of a street, alley, or crosswalkway.



   STREET.  A right-of-way designed for vehicular and pedestrian traffic,
regardless of its designation by name, such as street, motorway,
thoroughfare, avenue, lane, place, or the like.



   STREET, COLLECTOR.  A street designed to serve as an important traffic
way for a neighborhood, or as a feeder to a thoroughfare, or important
neighborhood street.



   STREET, HALF.  That half, within a subdivision, of a street whose
centerline is coincident with a subdivision boundary.



   STREET, LOCAL.  Any street other than a thoroughfare or important
neighborhood street.



   SUBDIVISION.  The division of any parcel of land shown as a unit or as
contiguous units on the last preceding tax roll, into two or more parcels,
sites, or lots; or the improvement of one or more parcels of land for
residential, commercial, or industrial structures or groups of structures
involving the division or allocation of land for the opening, widening, or
extension of any street or streets, except private streets serving industrial
structures; or the division or allocation of land as open spaces for common
use by owners, occupants, or leaseholders or as easements for the extension
and maintenance of public sewer, water, storm drainage, or other public
facilities.



   SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT PLAN.  A drawing to scale showing a proposed
subdivision of land, together with the public improvements which are to be
installed therein.  Such drawing is not recordable.



   THOROUGHFARE.  A street of considerable continuity designed as a major
traffic way and designated as such in the master plan.



   ZONING.  Regulation by districts of the height, area, and use of
buildings, use of land, and density of population and the ordinances adopted
by the village regulations.



('69 Code, § 152.01)  (Ord. passed 9-13-54; Am. Ord.  passed 4-14-58; Am.
Ord. C-611, passed 2-9-87)



§ 155.02  APPROVAL OF SUBDIVISION REQUIRED.



   (A)   No subdivision shall be made of land within the jurisdiction
of the Planning Commission without the preparation, approval, and recording
of a plat of subdivision as defined in § 155.01 or if no plat is required
without the approval required by § 155.03.



   (B)   The plat of subdivision is the official record plat.  It may
be submitted concurrently with the subdivision improvement plan or at any
time within three years following the Commission's authorization to proceed
under the provisions of the subdivision improvement plan. The plat of
subdivision shall not be approved by the Commission prior to the completion
or assurance of completion of all public improvements, in accordance with the
subdivision improvement plan and the provision of this chapter.



('69 Code, § 152.03)  (Ord. passed 9-13-54; Am. Ord. passed 4-14-58; Am.
Ord. C-611, passed 2-9-87)



§ 155.03  SUBDIVISION FOR WHICH NO PLAT OF SUBDIVISION REQUIRED.



   (A)   No plat shall be required for subdivisions:



      (1)   Along an existing public street, not involving the
opening, widening, or extension of any street or road and involving no more
than five lots after the original tract has been completely subdivided; or,



      (2)   Not involving the opening or extension of any street or
easement of access and in which past subdivision and development has so far
proceeded that the preparation and recording of a plat would serve no public
or planning purpose.



   (B)   The proposed division shall be presented to the representative
authorized by the Planning Commission to approve such conveyances without a
plat.  The representative may, in addition to the conveyance document,
require a sketch and such other information as is pertinent to his
determination hereunder.  Within a reasonable period of time following
submission of the proposed division and any information requested, the
representative shall determine if the proposed subdivision qualifies for
approval without preparation of a plat and if so shall further determine
whether or not the proposed division conforms to the design standards and
other requirements of this chapter.



      (1)   The representative must secure the approval of the
Village Manager before approving the division.  The Village Manager will
then stamp the conveyance "Approved by Planning Commission, Village of
Amberley, no plat required."



      (2)   If the representative disapproves the division, he shall
so inform the person submitting the conveyance stating the reasons therefor.



      (3)   In the event the representative refuses approval, the
person submitting the proposed division may appeal to the Planning
Commission.  The representative may prefer to refer the matter to the
Planning Commission for the determinations required by this section.



('69 Code § 152.04(C))  (Am. Ord. C-611, passed 2-9-87)



Statutory reference:



   Approved by planning authority without plat, see R.C. § 711.131



§ 155.04  SUBDIVISION APPROVAL PROCESS FOR WHICH PLAT IS REQUIRED.



   The steps required for approval of a subdivision of land in the village
for which a plat is required are as follows:



   (A)   Approval of a concept plan as described in §§ 155.05 and
155.06.



   (B)   Approval of a subdivision improvement plan as described in§
§ 155.07 through 155.09.



   (C)   Security required for the completion of subdivision
improvements as described in § 155.15.



   (D)   Approval of plat of subdivision as described in §§ 155.12
through 155.14.



   (E)   Required guarantee of subdivision improvements as described in
§ 155.18.



   (F)   Acceptance of public streets or other public improvements as
described in § 155.17.



(Ord. C-611, passed 2-9-87)



§ 155.05  CONCEPT PLAN; ITEMS TO BE SHOWN ON A CONCEPT PLAN.



   (A)   The concept plan shall precede or accompany and supplement the
subdivision improvement plan and plat of subdivision.  Its purpose is to
show all facts needed to enable the Planning Commission and the
administrative officers of the village and county to determine whether the
proposed layout of the land in question and the proposed public improvements
are in compliance with this chapter and are satisfactory from the standpoint
of the public interest.



('69 Code, § 152.02)



   (B)   The concept plan and the subdivision improvement plan must be
made by a qualified technician trained in the layout of subdivisions.  All
required engineering and surveying work must be performed by or under the
supervision of a registered engineer or surveyor, as the case may be, in
accordance with R.C. §§ 4733.01 et seq.



('69 Code, § 152.02)



   (C)   Purpose.  Each individual subdivider's blueprint of today
becomes a permanent part of the community tomorrow.  It is the objective of
the Planning Commission to see to it that the combination of many such
blueprints will not result in a formless patchwork, but rather in a unified
pattern for an attractive, economical, and durable neighborhood.  In order
to achieve this purpose, the Village Planning Commission has adopted and
administers design standards for subdivisions.  All subdivisions shall meet
the design standards set forth in division (D) below.



   (D)   General requirements.



      (1)   Master plan.  Streets shall conform substantially to
the street plan being utilized by the Village Planning Commission.



      (2)   Neighborhood plan.  If a tentative plan has been
prepared by the Planning Commission for the neighborhood of the proposed
subdivision, the street system of the latter shall in general conform thereto.



      (3)   Physical features.  Streets shall be platted with
appropriate regard for topography, creeks, wooded areas, and other natural
features which would enhance attractive development.



      (4)   Existing streets.  Existing streets (constructed or
recorded) in adjoining territory shall be continued at equal or greater width
and in similar alignment to streets proposed in the subdivision, unless
variations are recommended by the Planning Commission.



      (5)   Circulation.  The street pattern shall provide ease of
circulation within the subdivision as well as convenient access to adjoining
streets, thoroughfares, or unsubdivided land, as may be required by the
Planning Commission.  Where a street will eventually be extended beyond the
plat but is temporarily dead-ended, an interim turnaround may be required.



      (6)   Unsubdivided portion of tract.  If the plat to be
submitted includes only part of the tract owned by the subdivider, the
Planning Commission shall require a sketch of a tentative future street
system for the unsubdivided portion.



      (7)   Street intersections.  Streets shall intersect as
nearly at right angles as possible.



      (8)   Cul-de-sacs.  Cul-de-sacs shall not be longer than 800
feet, unless necessitated by topography or other circumstances beyond the
subdivider's control.



      (9)   Alleys.  Except where justified by special conditions,
alleys will not be approved in residential districts.  At an intersection of
alleys, a five-foot chord shall cut off each corner. Dead-end alleys are
prohibited.



      (10)   Street-half.  The street layout shall be planned to
avoid half-streets, if possible.  Where there exists a dedicated or platted
half-street adjacent to the tract to be subdivided, the other half shall be
platted if deemed necessary by the Planning Commission.



      (11)   Utility easements.  Where utilities are located
outside of street right-of-way lines, easements shall be provided. 
Easements along rear or side lot lines are preferable where possible.



   (E)   The developer shall:



      (1)   Discuss the proposed plan of subdivision, while still in
sketch form, with the staff of the Regional Planning Commission and with the
Village Engineer, noting:



         (a)   The relation of the tract to the Master Plan and
other official plans;



         (b)   The external factors having a significant relation
to the subdivision design;



         (c)   The availability of sanitary sewers and stormwater
mains; and



         (d)   Compliance with the rules and regulations in this
chapter including the design standards set forth in § 155.08.



      (2)   Discuss proposed methods of:



         (a)   Sanitary sewage disposal and storm drainage at the
office of the Village Engineer;



         (b)   Water supply at the office of the Greater
Cincinnati Water Works Department.



   (F)   The developer shall prepare a concept plan giving
consideration to the items noted above.



      (1)   Concept plan contents.  The concept plan shall be drawn
at a scale either 100 feet to the inch or 50 feet to the inch. Concept plans
shall be on one or more sheets 24 by 36 inches in size and shall be clearly
and legibly drawn.  The concept plan shall contain the following information
(all of the following shall be required for a completed application):



         (a)   Proposed name of the subdivision, which shall not
duplicate or closely approximate the name of any other subdivision in the
county.



         (b)   Location by section, town, range or military
survey number, township, county, and state.



         (c)   Names, addresses, and telephone numbers of the
owner, subdivider, the registered surveyor who prepared the plat, and the
registration number and seal of the surveyor.



         (d)   Date of survey, which shall be the date of
topographic, aerial, or any other type of survey that is the basis for the
concept plan.



         (e)   Scale of the plat, north point, and date.



         (f)   Boundaries of the subdivision, indicated by a
heavy line, and its acreage.



         (g)   Names of adjacent subdivisions, owners of
adjoining parcels of unsubdivided land, and the location of their boundary
lines.



         (h)   Locations, widths, and names of existing streets,
railroad rights-of-way, easements, parks, permanent buildings, corporation
and township lines; the location of wooded areas and other significant
topographic and natural features within the subdivision whose presence and
accurate location need to be known in order for decisions regarding the
subdivision to be made.  The general limits of any wet or flood-prone areas
shall be shown.



         (i)   Zoning classification of the tract and adjoining
properties and a description of proposed zoning changes, if any.



         (j)   Existing topography with contours shown at an
interval of not greater than two feet if the slope of ground is 15% or less,
and not greater than five feet where the slope is more than 15%. Elevations
are to be based on sea level datum and the nearest benchmark shall be
specified and described.  The existing topography shall be shown for an area
extending a minimum of 200 feet beyond the boundaries of the subdivision.



         (k)   Existing and proposed sewers, water lines, storm
water drainage facilities, and power and transmission lines, within and
adjacent to the tract.  Utility and cable television lines within the tract
shall be underground unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission.



         (l)   Proposed location of fire hydrants.



         (m)   Location, names, and widths of proposed
rights-of-way, streets, and easements.



         (n)   Front building setback lines.



         (o)   Layout and number of lots, and approximate sizes
and approximate dimensions of each lot.  When a lot is located on a curved
street or when side lot lines are not radial or perpendicular to street
lines, the width at the front building setback line shall be shown.



         (p)   Parcels of land to be reserved for public use or
to be reserved by covenant for residents of the subdivision.  The
approximate size of these parcels shall be noted.



         (q)   A vicinity map at a scale of not less than 2,000
feet to the inch.  This map shall show all existing roads and an outline of
the subdivision.



         (r)   Location of all existing buildings and an
indication as to whether or not they will be retained.



         (s)   Description of proposed covenants and restrictions.



         (t)   The location of water supply and wastewater
disposal systems which are proposed for the subdivision.



         (u)   A copy of a United States Geological Survey (USGS)
map at a scale of 2,000 feet to the inch on which the watershed within which
the subdivision is located is delineated.  Accompanying the map shall be
data indicating the amount of land, by zoning classification, which drains
onto the property within the subdivision.



         (v)   A schedule outlining the order of development of
each section of the subdivision.



(Ord. C-611, passed 2-9-87)



§ 155.06  CONCEPT PLAN APPROVAL.



   (A)   The developer shall transmit ten prints of the concept plan to
the Village Planning Commission and two prints to the Village Engineer for
review.  The Village Engineer, after review, shall submit a written report
to the Village Planning Commission.



   (B)   The Planning Commission may request additional information
deemed necessary to make a reasonable decision when the proposed development
presents difficult or unusual problems.



   (C)   The Village Planning Commission shall submit copies of the
plan to the Regional Planning Commission Office for review.  The Regional
Planning Commission shall forward copies of the concept plan to such
officials and agencies as may be necessary for purpose of study and
recommendation.  After receipt of reports from such officials and agencies,
the Regional Planning Commission shall send a written report to the Village
Planning Commission Office.



   (D)   The Village Fire Chief shall review the plan for water line
sizes, location of fire hydrants, and the like.



   (E)   The Planning Commission shall determine whether the concept
plat shall be approved, approved with modifications, or disapproved. If a
plat is disapproved, the reasons for such disapproval shall be stated in
writing.



   (F)   Approval of the concept plan by the Village Planning
Commission shall be conditional upon compliance with all other applicable
statutes, ordinances, resolutions, and regulations of the village.



   (G)   Expiration of authority to proceed.  The Planning
Commission's written authority to proceed with development shall be valid for
a period of 12 months.  If subdivision improvement plans have not been
approved within the 12-month period, the authority to proceed will be void
and a new request complying with the procedures specified will be required.



(Ord. C-611, passed 2-9-87)



§ 155.07  ITEMS TO BE SHOWN ON SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT PLAN.



   The subdivision improvement plan shall incorporate all changes in the
concept plan required by the Planning Commission.  The following graphic and
descriptive items are normally required to be shown on a subdivision
improvement plan:



   (A)   Items pertaining to the title:



      (1)   Proposed name of the subdivision, which shall not
duplicate or too closely approximate phonetically, the name of any other
subdivision in Hamilton County;



      (2)   Location by section, township, range, county, state;



      (3)   Names and addresses of owner, developer, technician who
made the plan, and engineer responsible for engineering details;



      (4)   Scale of the plan at any of the following:



         1 inch = 60, 50, 40, 30, or 20 feet;



      (5)   Date;



      (6)   North point.



   (B)   Existing items pertaining to the plan:



      (1)   Boundary of the proposed subdivision accurately
indicated by a heavy solid line, and the acreage comprised therein;



      (2)   Locations, widths, and names of all existing or platted
streets or other public ways; railroad and utility rights-of-way; parks and
other public open spaces; permanent buildings; section and corporation lines,
all within or adjacent to the tract;



      (3)   Existing sewers, water mains, culverts, or other
underground items within the tract or immediately adjacent thereto, with pipe
sizes, grades, and locations indicated;



      (4)   Names of adjacent subdivisions and owners of adjoining
parcels of unsubdivided land (shown by dotted lines);



      (5)   Zoning districts;



      (6)   Existing contours with intervals of not more than five
feet.  Elevations shall be based on sea-level datum;



      (7)   Drainage channels, and any other significant physical
items;



      (8)   Description of bench mark used.



   (C)   Items pertaining to the proposed development:



      (1)   Layout of streets, including names and widths of
proposed streets, and widths of alleys, crosswalks, and easements. Proposed
street names shall not duplicate or too closely approximate, phonetically,
the name of any other street in Hamilton County;



      (2)   Layouts, numbers, and approximate dimensions of lots;



      (3)   Parcels of land intended to be dedicated or temporarily
reserved for public use, or to be reserved by deed covenant for use of all
property owners in the subdivision, and the conditions (if any) of such
dedication or reservation;



      (4)   Typical street cross-sections (or half-sections) at a
scale not smaller than l/4 inch = 1 foot, showing widths of roadways and
locations, and widths of sidewalks.  Where considerable cut and fill are
involved, or wherever grading will affect adjacent properties, several actual
cross-sections showing proposed grading may be required, and their locations
indicated on the plan.



      (5)   Profile of each street, with tentative grades (including
adequate extension, where necessary, beyond the subdivision boundaries),
including any proposed sewer lines and manholes. Scale: horizontal, same as
plan: vertical, one inch = ten feet;



      (6)   Plan and profiles of proposed sanitary, storm, or
combined sewers, with grades and pipe sizes.  These shall include
connections to outlets which might be beyond the boundaries of the
subdivision.



(Items (5) and (6) may be shown on a separate drawing.);



      (7)   Statement that water mains and appurtenances will be
installed in accordance with the rules and regulations and under the
supervision of the agency supplying water to the subdivision.  Two copies of
the approved water improvement plan must be provided to the village prior to
issuing a permit to install public improvements.



      (8)   Building setback lines, shown graphically along all
streets, with dimensions.  This requirement is applicable wherever such
setbacks are greater than those required by prevailing zoning;



   (D)   A vicinity sketch, at legible scale, showing the relation of
the proposed development to its general surroundings, shall accompany the
subdivision improvement plan.  Proposed streets on the plat shall be shown,
with connections to existing or proposed streets and alleys in neighboring
subdivisions.  In case the plat forms only a part of an ownership holding,
all of the latter shall be shown, with a tentative street layout for the
remainder of the tract shown by dashed lines.



('69 Code, § 152.02)  (Ord. passed 9-13-54; Am. Ord.  passed 4-14-58; Am.
Ord. C-611, passed 2-9-87)



§ 155.08  DESIGN STANDARDS.



   All public improvements shown on the subdivision improvement plan are
the responsibility of the subdivider.  All public improvements shall be
installed in accordance with the standards and specifications of the village
and Hamilton County.  Unless otherwise specifically provided, inspection of
the construction of the improvements shall be by the village and paid for by
the subdivider.  The following improvements are required to be constructed.



   (A)   Water mains.  All water main and fire hydrant installations
shall be designed and installed in accordance with standards and
specifications of the Cincinnati Water Works and under its supervision and
inspection.  All permits for this work shall be obtained directly from the
appropriate department of the City of Cincinnati.



   (B)   Sanitary sewers.  Subdivisions should be provided with a
complete sanitary sewer system connected to the sanitary sewer trunk
system.  Each lot shall be provided with a lateral connection to the
sanitary sewer.  All sewer installations shall be designed and installed in
strict accordance with standards and specifications of the county.



(Am. Ord. C-483, passed 4-9-79)



   (C)   Storm water management and drainage system.  Subdivisions
shall be provided with a storm water management system adequate to serve the
platted area and meeting the requirements of Ch. 156.



   (D)   Curbs and gutters. All streets shall have concrete curbs and
gutters which shall conform to the standard pavement drawing setting out the
specifications for combined curb and gutter, key joint, longitudinal section
of curb, and half-section with curb and gutter and sidewalk on file at the
office of the Village Clerk which are by this reference incorporated herein.



   (E)   Grading.  The entire right-of-way of all streets, including
side streets, shall be graded.



('69 Code, § 152.06(D))



   (F)   Street name signs.  Street name signs shall be provided at
all street intersections or where a change of direction of a street requires
a change of street name.  The signs shall be of the size and type approved
for use by the village.



   (G)   Backfill requirements. 



      (1)   All excavations for any purpose under street pavement,
sidewalks, or under the area to be paved, shall be backfilled with granular
material meeting the requirements of 310 material as per the state
construction and material specifications. No paving operation shall be
permitted until all excavations have been backfilled, compacted, inspected,
and approved.



      (2)   All trenches made in the subgrade of the proposed
roadbed or sidewalk area, and all trenches parallel to the roadway where the
edge of the trench is nearer than one foot to the edge of the proposed
pavement or the proposed curb, shall be backfilled with granular material. 
All transverse trenches shall be backfilled two feet outside the limits of
the proposed roadbed of the pavement.



      (3)   Granular material used for bedding and backfilling shall
be compacted under and around the conduit and to the top of the trench in
layers not to exceed four inches in thickness with mechanical tampers. 
Granular material may be compacted with water if satisfactory drainage is
provided for the free water.  When compacting with water the granular
material may be deposited in ponded water, or it may be placed in layers not
to exceed 12 inches loose depth and each layer thoroughly saturated with
water.  The material shall be filled and compacted to the final grade, line,
and cross section of the subgrade as shown on the improvement plan.  The
granular material shall be compacted to 95% of its maximum laboratory dry
weight.



      (4)   Trenches in areas in the unimproved portion of the
right-of-way shall be backfilled with suitable soil placed in layers not to
exceed four inches in thickness and compacted with mechanical tampers.  The
soil shall be compacted to 95% of its maximum laboratory dry weight. 
Granular material may be used in backfilling these trenches.  The granular
material shall be placed and compacted as mentioned above.



   (H)   Pavements.  All street pavements shall be designed and
installed in strict accordance with village standards and specifications,
except that the type of pavement shall conform to the appropriate standard
pavement drawing setting out typical sections of streets required for
subdivisions in the village which drawings are on file at the office of the
Village Clerk which are by this reference incorporated herein.



('69 Code, § 152.06(C))  ('69 Code Exhibit I)



   (I)   Dimensional standards.



      (1)   Minimum right-of-way widths.



         (a)    Thoroughfares, as indicated by the adopted master
plan.



         (b)   Local streets:  60 feet.  All cul-de-sacs shall
terminate in a circular area with a minimum diameter of 96 feet, unless the
Commission approves a "T" or "Y" type of turning facility.



         (c)   Alleys:  26 feet



         (d)   Crosswalkways:  15 feet



         (e)   Easements:  Ten feet on each side of the
designated centerline, or such width as may be required for necessary
maintenance of the utility involved.



      (2)   Minimum pavement widths.



         (a)   Local streets: 28 feet including curb.  Collector
streets:  40 feet.  Thoroughfare streets: 52 feet.



         (b)   Alleys:  24 feet.



         (c)   Sidewalks:  At least four feet wide, and normally
one foot from the property line; crosswalks the same width, in the center of
crosswalkways.



      (3)   Grades.



         (a)   Maximum percent.



            1.   Collector streets and thoroughfares:  6%



            2.   Local streets and alleys:  9%



            3.   Crosswalks:  No more than 8% for handicapped
use.



         (b)   Minimum percent for all streets:  l%



      (4)   Alignment; minimum standards.



         (a)   Vertical.  For collector streets and
thoroughfares, profile grades shall be connected by vertical curves to a
minimum length (measured horizontally) equivalent to 45 times the algebraic
difference between the rates of grade, expressed in feet per hundred; for
local streets and alleys, profile grades shall be connected by vertical
curves to a minimum length (measured horizontally) equivalent to 25 times the
algebraic difference between the rates of grade, expressed in feet per 100.



         (b)   Horizontal-radii of centerline curvature.



            1.   Thoroughfares:  500 feet



            2.   Collector streets:  200 feet



            3.   Local streets:  100 feet



         (c)   For local streets there shall be a tangent between
reverse curves of at least 100 feet.  For collector streets and
thoroughfares the minimum tangent length shall be greater than 100 feet as
determined by the Village Engineer.  Compound curves shall not be permitted.



      (5)   Intersections.



         (a)   At the intersection of two streets, property line
corners shall be rounded by a radius of 12.5 feet radius.



         (b)   Street curbs or edges of street pavements shall be
rounded by radii of at least 25 feet for local streets and 50 feet for
collector streets and thoroughfares.



         (c)   The minimum radii, noted above, shall be increased
when the smallest angle of intersection is less than 60 degrees, or in any
case where the Village Engineer considers an increase necessary.



      (6)   Blocks.



         (a)   Length.  The normal maximum length for blocks
shall be 1800 feet.  In a block over 900 feet long, a crosswalkway may be
required.



         (b)   Width. The width of a block shall normally be
sufficient to allow two tiers of lots of appropriate depth.



         (c)   Irregular shape.  Irregularly shaped blocks
(including superblocks) indented by cul-de-sacs, containing interior parks or
playgrounds and adequate parking space, will be acceptable when properly
designed and covered by agreements as to maintenance of such park areas.



         (d)   Orientation on motorway.  If the frontage on a
motorway is involved, the long dimension of the block shall preferably front
thereon.



      (7)   Lots.



         (a)   Size, shape, and orientation.  Size, shape, and
orientation of lots shall be appropriate to the location of the proposed
subdivision and for the types of development contemplated.



         (b)    Length and width ratio.  Excessive length in
relation to width shall be avoided.



         (c)    Every lot shall abut on a street or other public
right-of-way.



         (d)    Double frontage lots shall be avoided as far as
practicable.



         (e)   Side lot lines.  Side lines of lots shall be
approximately at right angles or radial to the street lines unless, in the
opinion of the Planning Commission, a variation from this rule will give a
better street and lot plan.



         (f)   Corner lots.  Corner lots shall have an extra
width sufficient to allow for building setback lines on both street fronts.



      (8)   Public open spaces and sites.  Where, as indicated by
the Master Plan, a proposed subdivision contains, wholly or in part, a
proposed public open space or a proposed site for a public building, the
Planning Commission will immediately notify the public authority concerned
(Council, Board of County Commissioners, Park Board, Board of Education, and
the like).  If, within 30 days thereafter, the Planning Commission is not
advised that the property has been acquired by the public authority by
negotiation and agreement, or within a second period of 30 days after such
notification that the authority has commenced the necessary procedure to
acquire the property by appropriation, then the Planning Commission will not
require that the open space or site be reserved or included in the
subdivision plan.



('69 Code, § 152.05)  (Ord. passed 9-13-54; Am. Ord. passed 4-14-58; Am.
Ord. C-611, passed 2-9-87)



      (9)   Soil erosion management and sediment control plan. Each
subdivision or section thereof is subject to the provisions of the village
requirements for soil erosion management and sediment control as required in
Ch. 153.



(Ord. C-611, passed 2-9-87)



Cross-reference:



   Acceptances and dedications, see T.S.O. I



   Improvement of undedicated streets, see Ch. 155, Appendix, Exh. B



   Permit applications, see § 155.09(B)



   Sewer and water line works, see Ch. 155 Appendix, Exh. C



§ 155.09  PROCEDURE FOR SECURING SUBDIVISION PLAN APPROVAL; PERMITS AND
DEPOSITS.



   (A)   After the submission of the completed subdivision improvement
plan, the Village Planning Commission, after determination as to whether or
not the subdivision improvement plan complies with the requirements, shall
take formal action authorizing or denying authorization for the development
to proceed in accordance with the subdivision improvement plan and with this
chapter.



      (1)   If the Commission authorizes the development to proceed,
it shall so inform the developer, and request eleven blueprints which shall
be stamped in accordance with Commission's action and distributed, one to the
Regional Planning Commission, one to the Cincinnati Water Works, one to the
Metropolitan Sewer District, one to the Board of Health, one to the
Cincinnati Gas and Electric Company, one to the Village Engineer, two to the
developer, and three to the Village Planning Commission files.



      (2)   If the Commission fails to authorize the development to
proceed, the developer shall be so informed by letter, noting reasons
therefor, including citation of or reference to the provision violated by the
plan.



      (3)   Expiration of authority of develop.  The Planning
Commission written authority to proceed with development shall be valid for a
period of three years.  If substantial development has not been started
within the three-year period and proceeded to the satisfaction of the
Planning Commission, the authority to proceed will be void and a new request
complying with the procedures specified will be required.



   (B)   Permits and deposits.  Before starting work on any
improvements, the developer or his contractor shall make application to the
village for a permit to install public improvements.  Three sets of plans
shall accompany the application.  Before the permit is issued, the developer
or his contractor shall deposit with the village a sum of money sufficient,
in the sound discretion of the Village Engineer, to cover the cost of testing
and inspection as provided in § 155.11. In accordance with Chapter 50, a
non-refundable fee amounting to 2% of the cost of all sanitary sewer work
must be paid to the village for the sanitary sewer maintenance fund prior to
issuance of the permit. The application shall be in the following form:



AMBERLEY VILLAGE, OHIO



                                20     



TO:  THE VILLAGE OF AMBERLEY VILLAGE



The undersigned, representing the ownership of (name of subdivision)      
                                            for which
the SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT PLAN was approved by the Amberley Planning
Commission hereby requests permission to make the following improvements:



                                                   
   



                                                   
   



                                                   
   



CONDITIONS OF PERMIT IF ISSUED:



      (1)   The applicant agrees that the entire expense of the
improvement shall be borne by the applicant, and agrees to pay the cost of
inspection and the testing of all materials as required by ordinance.  The
applicant with this application has deposited the sum of $         to
provide a fund out of which the village may pay for inspection and testing of
material as provided in § 155.11 of the Codified Ordinances of the
Village.  Any surplus in the fund shall be returned to the applicant at the
completion of the improvement.



      (2)   The applicant agrees to perform any work necessary to
connect the proposed improvement with an existing improvement.  If any
openings are made in existing pavements for underground work, a permit shall
be obtained for such work.



      (3)   When the proposed work includes main sewers and/or
lateral connections, the applicant agrees that permits shall be obtained as
provided in Chapter 50 of the Codified Ordinances of Amberley Village.



      (4)   If the applicant does not represent the entire ownership
of the lots abutting both sides of the proposed improvement, the applicant
agrees that the village reserves the right to require that an adequate
indemnity bond be filed to protect the village from any claims for damages by
the owners of the unrepresented frontage.



Witness:



                                                  
           



               Applicant



                                                  
             



               Address



('69 Code, Ch. 152 Exhibit III)



   (C)   Charges.  Charges for services provided by the Village
Engineer and the Village Solicitor, including but not limited to charges for
review of subdivision improvement plans and for final subdivision approval,
plus any other village costs attributable to review of plans and approval of
the subdivision, shall be paid to the village by the developer, such payment
to be made within 15 days after receipt by the developer of a statement of
such charges.



(Am. Ord. C-611, passed 2-9-87; Am. Ord. C-624, passed 9-14-87)



§ 155.10  VARIANCES.



   (A)   Where the Planning Commission finds that as to a particular
subdivision, an extraordinary hardship may result from strict compliance with
any of the provisions of this chapter, it may, in writing or by minutes
adopted, vary the regulations regarding a particular subdivision so that
substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured; provided
such variation will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose
of the Master Plan or this chapter.



   (B)   In granting variances and modifications, the Planning
Commission may require such additional conditions as necessary, in its
judgment, in order to secure substantially the objectives of the standards or
requirements varied or modified.



('69 Code, § 152.07)  (Ord. passed 9-13-54; Am. Ord.  passed 4-14-58; Am.
Ord. C-611, passed 2-9-87)



§ 155.11  INSPECTION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   Inspection.  All materials used to construct or install all
public improvements must be inspected and approved by a competent testing
laboratory at the developer's expense.  Two copies of all reports of the
testing laboratory shall be sent to the Village Engineer.



   (B)   The following items in connection with the installation of
public improvements in the development of subdivisions are subject to
inspection by an authorized village representative:



      (1)   Installation of sanitary sewers shall be inspected by
the Metropolitan Sewer District including laying of trunk lines, laterals and
service branches, construction of manholes and backfilling of trenches.  All
material shall be inspected and a certification of conformance to applicable
specifications shall be furnished to the Village Engineer.



      (2)   Installation of storm sewers, including laying of pipe,
construction of manholes, inlets and headwalls, and backfilling of trenches.



      (3)   Construction of culverts or other drainage structures.



      (4)   Construction of streets, including subgrade, placing of
curb and gutter, laying of base courses and laying of surface courses.



      (5)   All concrete, asphalt, and aggregate materials shall be
tested and inspected.  Concrete shall be 4000 psi at 28 days with 5% + 0.5%
entrained air.  Four concrete test cylinders shall be made by a testing
laboratory from each load of concrete.  Test cylinders shall be tested at
seven days and 28 days with reports furnished to the Village Engineer. 
Asphalt materials shall be inspected at the asphalt plant.  Aggregate
materials shall be inspected at the plant.  Test reports for asphalt and
aggregate materials shall be furnished to the Village Engineer.



   (C)   The installation of water mains, fire hydrants and water
service branches are subject to the inspection of the Cincinnati Water
Works.  Fire hydrants are subject to inspection by the Village Fire
Department.  Compaction of backfill over water line trenches is subject to
approval by the village representative.



   (D)   All costs of inspection shall be borne by the developer.
Designated village inspectors are not full-time village employees, but are
contract inspectors whose entire earnings are paid from the inspection fund
set up and maintained at the construction contractors' expense as a condition
of the construction permit.  These inspectors are paid an hourly rate for
the time actually spent on inspection work on any subdivision.  Time and
one-half is allowed for work in excess of eight hours in any one weekday, or
for work on Saturdays.  Double time is allowed for work on Sundays or
recognized holidays.



   (E)   It is the responsibility of the contractor to keep the
inspector advised of the work schedule.  Any work subject to inspection,
performed and covered without the knowledge of the inspector, will, at the
discretion of the inspector, have to be uncovered for inspection at the
contractor's expense.



   (F)   Failure to notify the inspector at least one hour before
starting time that no work subject to inspection is to be performed that day,
will result in a minimum two-hour charge for show-up time.



   (G)   Inspection time reports turned in to the village office for
payment should be signed by the contractor's representative on the job as an
acknowledgment that the inspector has actually been on the job for the amount
of time charged.  It is also recommended that the contractor's
representative keep a record of the inspection time charged so as to be able
to check the status of the inspection fund at any time.



   (H)   In the event an inspector does not report to a job after being
notified that work is to be performed, the Village Manager should be notified.



('69 Code, Ch. 152. Exhibit V)  (Am. Ord. C-611, passed 2-9-87)



§ 155.12  ITEMS TO BE SHOWN ON PLAT OF SUBDIVISION.



   The following items are required to be shown on a plat of subdivision:



   (A)   Items pertaining to the title:



      (1)   Name of subdivision;



      (2)   Location by section, township, range, county, state;



      (3)   Names and addresses of owner and engineer;



      (4)   Scale, not smaller than 1 inch = 50 feet;



      (5)   Date;



      (6)   North point.



   (B)   Graphic items pertaining to the plat:



      (1)   Boundary of the plat, with accurate distances and
bearings, and its acreage;



      (2)   Exact location and width of all streets, alleys and
crosswalkways, within and adjoining the plat;



      (3)   Bearings and distances to the nearest established street
lines, political subdivision boundaries, section or patent corners, or other
official monuments;



      (4)   Names of streets and alleys within and adjoining the
plat.  The names of new streets shall not duplicate or too closely
approximate phonetically, the name of any other street in Hamilton County;



      (5)   Lengths of all arcs, radii, internal angles, points of
curvature, and tangent bearings;



      (6)   All easements for rights-of-way provided for public
services or utilities, and any limitations of such easements;



      (7)   All lot numbers and lines, with accurate dimensions in
feet and hundredths, and with bearings or angles related to street and alley
or crosswalkway lines;



      (8)   Accurate outlines of any areas to be dedicated for
public use, with the purpose indicated thereon; and of any area to be
reserved by deed covenant for common use of all property owners in the
subdivision;



      (9)   Building setback lines, shown graphically along all
streets, with dimensions.  The requirement is applicable wherever such
setbacks are greater than those required by prevailing zoning.



   (C)   Other items pertaining to the plat:



      (1)   Notation regarding protective covenants, if any;



      (2)   Certification by a registered, professional surveyor to
the effect that the plat represents a survey made and closed by him and that
all the monuments shown thereon actually exist, and that their location, size
and material are correctly shown;



      (3)   A signed and notarized certification by the owner or
owners, of his or their adoption of the plat, and dedications of streets and
any other public areas;



      (4)   Notation giving deed reference of last transfer of title
to owners making dedication;



      (5)   Description of restrictions on sewer easements if such
easements are involved;



      (6)   Space for statement of approval by the Planning
Commission with lines for signature and date;



      (7)   Space for statement of acceptance of land dedicated by
the owners for streets, easements and other public areas, with lines for
signature and date.



('69 Code, § 152.03)  (Ord. passed 9-13-54; Am. Ord.  passed 4-14-58; Am.
Ord. C-611, passed 2-9-87)



§ 155.13  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PLAT APPROVAL.



   No plat of subdivision shall be approved by the Planning Commission
unless:



   (A)   The plat submitted conforms to the design standards contained
in § 155.08 and contains the items required in § 155.12 and;



   (B)   The public improvements shown or noted on the subdivision
improvement plans or required under § 155.08 have been constructed in
conformance with this code; or



   (C)   Adequate assurances for completion as required by § 155.15
have been given to the village by the developer that the improvements will be
so constructed.



(Am. Ord. C-611, passed 2-9-87)



§ 155.14  PROCEDURE FOR OBTAINING APPROVAL OF FINAL OR RECORD PLAT.



   (A)   The developer shall submit the plat of subdivision in tracing
form, to the Village Engineer.  If improvements have already been
constructed, detailed as-built plans shall also be submitted.



      (1)   The Village Engineer shall examine the plat and/or plans
for its conformance with these rules and regulations, and with the approved
subdivision improvement plan and for final check, including closures, and for
a report as to whether all public improvements have been completed in or if
assurance of such completion has been given as provided in § 155.15.



      (2)   The Village Engineer shall transmit the subdivision
plat, together with a written report, to the Planning Commission.



      (3)   The Planning Commission shall take final action on the
subdivision plat after study and consideration of the Village Engineer's
report thereon.



         (a)   If the plat is approved, the Chairman of the
Planning Commission shall sign a certification of the approval of the
subdivision plat.  Then the Commission shall transmit the signed tracing to
the developer and request one print for its files.



         (b)   If the subdivision plat is disapproved, the
developer shall be so informed by letter, noting reason thereon, including
citations of or references to the regulations or provisions violated.



   (B)   Once the record plat is approved and signed by the Planning
Commission, it shall be recorded by the owner at the County Recorder's
office.  The original reproducible shall then be returned to the village for
its records.



('69 Code, § 152.04(B))  (Ord. passed 9-13-54; Am. Ord. passed 4-14-58; Am.
Ord. C-611, passed 2-9-87)



§ 155.15  SECURITY FOR COMPLETION OF SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENTS.



   As a condition precedent to the approval of a subdivision plat, the
subdivider must complete the improvements outlined in the plan or must give
security for such completion.  Reserving to itself the right to vary the
arrangements in order to provide for security as the circumstances in
individual cases may indicate, the Planning Commission sets out the following
alternative plans for the giving of security in those cases where public
improvements are not completed prior to final approval of the plat.



   (A)   If the subdivider has a contract with a contractor approved by
the Village Manager, he may execute an agreement with the village under which
he will furnish a bond or cash sufficient to cover the contract price, plus
$500 or plus 10% of the contract price, whichever is the larger, and agree
that such account may be drawn upon only by checks signed jointly by the
subdivider and a co-signer designated by the Planning Commission.  Such
checks are to be issued only to the contractor for payments in accordance
with the terms of his contract and upon certification by the Village Manager
that performance has been had under the contract in accordance with its
terms; for the payment of the expenses of the Commission in the preparation
of the necessary contract; and repayment to the subdivider of any balance
left in the account after the improvements have been completed, inspected,
and approved by the Village Engineer, and the contractor and expenses paid in
full.  The agreement will further provide that if the contractor fails to
comply with the contract, the subdivider shall have the privilege to
substitute another contractor, but in the event of failure to do so or to
have the improvements completed within a specified time, the village shall
have the right to contract for the completion of the improvements and to draw
upon the fund to the extent necessary to pay for such completion.



   (B)   If the subdivider has executed no contract for the making of
improvements, he may enter into an agreement with the village by making a
similar deposit in an amount equal to the cost of the improvement as
estimated by the Village Manager, plus 15%, this deposit to be disbursed in
the same manner as provided in division (A) above.  The cost of the estimate
shall be borne by the developer. When a contract is let, the deposit must be
adjusted to equal that required in division (A) above.



   (C)   The subdivider may furnish a surety bond or certified check to
the village in the amount of the estimated cost of the improvement plus
15%.  That bond is to authorize the village to make the improvements if the
subdivider has not had them completed within a specified time, and obligates
the surety to pay to the village the cost of making such improvements, up to
the extent of the amount of the bond.  The subdivider's contract shall take
the following form subject to such additional provisions or amendments as
deemed necessary by the Planning Commission to adequately secure the
construction of the improvements:



   SUBDIVIDER CONTRACT



   This contract executed on the         day of              
                    , 20        , by and between          
        , Subdivider(s), as evidenced by a proposed plat of a subdivision
which is on file in the office of the Amberley Village Planning Commission,
referred to as             Subdivision, Village of Amberley Village,
Ohio, and the Village of Amberley Village, Ohio.



WITNESSETH:



      (1)   The Subdivider(s) hereinabove set forth are/is the
owner(s) in fee simple of the real estate known as                
Subdivision, located and situated on Section         , Town       ,
Range         , and                 Township, Hamilton County,
Ohio.



      (2)   It is the purpose and intention of this agreement to
have Subdivider(s) agree in writing to the performance and completion of
certain work in connection with the improvements to be located in and on said
subdivision, including installation of streets, utilities, and the like.  It
is further the purpose of this agreement to enter into a contract obligating
the Subdivider(s) to perform as hereinafter set forth, which contract shall
be secured by a performance bond, or certified check attached hereto and made
a part thereof.



   NOW, THEREFORE, IT IS AGREED:



   A.   Subdivider(s) as hereinbefore described, do(es) herewith agree
to construct, install, and provide all public improvements as shown on the  
            Subdivision improvement plan on file in the office of the
Amberley Village Planning Commission, and those improvements required under
Chapter 155 of the Codified Ordinances of the Village of Amberley Village
including specifically the attached work which has been determined by the
Village Engineer to be performed but incomplete as of this date:



   B.   Subdivider(s) further agree(s) to construct, install, or
otherwise make all public improvements shown on the subdivision preliminary
plan, those further shown and set forth to be done and performed by the
engineering drawings as specifications noted or shown on the subdivision
improvement plan on file in the office of the Planning Commission, and those
further improvements required under Chapter 155 of the Code.



   C.   Subdivider(s) further agree(s) to do all that is necessary to
accomplish the acceptance of the road(s) as public road(s), within the
specified time limits, which includes posting a guarantee surety with the
Village as prescribed in Chapter 155 of the Code.



   D.   All of the foregoing shall be performed within a period of  
    months from the date of this contract, which length of time is hereby
fixed by the village as a reasonable period of time, but, if requested by the
subdivider, an extension thereof may be granted if approved by the village.



   E.   Subdivider(s) does/do herewith and hereby agree to execute a
performance bond or certified check in the sum of               ($ 
.00) dollars, which amount is equal to the figure established by the Village
Manager, and which shall be to the satisfaction of and in favor of, the
Village of Amberley Village, Ohio, to insure the faithful performance of this
contract.



IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties have hereunto set their hands this      
day of                   , 20     .



Witness:



                                                  
                 



         Subdivider



VILLAGE OF AMBERLEY VILLAGE



                         



               By                             



(Am. Ord. C-611, passed 2-9-87)



§ 155.16  APPROVAL NOT ACCEPTANCE.



   Approval of a subdivision improvement plan or record plat shall not
constitute acceptance of any public improvement, including any street or road
shown or indicated by ordinance thereon.  Acceptance may only be obtained by
approval of Council pursuant to §§ 155.17 through 155.20.



(Am. Ord. C-611, passed 2-9-87)



§ 155.17  ACCEPTANCE OF PUBLIC STREETS OR OTHER PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS.



   (A)   The developer shall notify the Village Engineer when all
public improvements have been completed and request a final inspection.  If
public streets are to be accepted, a copy of the pavement core report shall
also be submitted with the request for final approval.



   (B)   The Village Engineer shall inspect the improvements and
determine if the public improvements shown or noted on the subdivision
improvement plan or required under this chapter have been completed.



   (C)   The developer shall post the guarantee bond as required in §
155.18 and provide for certificates contained in §§ 155.19 and 155.20.



   (D)   The Clerk shall prepare an ordinance accepting the public
improvements for Council's consideration.



(Am. Ord. C-611, passed 2-9-87)



Cross-reference:



   Dedication of land or public right-of-way for public use, see T.S.O. I



§ 155.18  GUARANTEE BOND.



   (A)   Before any improvement is accepted or any responsibility is
assumed by the village, a guarantee shall be posted by the developer or owner
in an amount equal to $20 per lineal foot of street accepted (measured along
the center line) to the satisfaction of Council and in favor of the village,
and kept on file in the office of the Clerk.  The guarantee shall assure the
correction of any defect or failure from any cause whatsoever appearing in
any public improvement, as shown on the detailed improvement plans, or an
improvement required under this chapter.  Except as extended by division (B)
below, in the case of rigid pavements, at the option of the Planning
Commission, the guarantee shall be for at least three years; in the case of
flexible pavement, two years; such periods to commence after acceptance and
after obstructions, such as building materials, equipment, and temporary
buildings, have been moved from the right-of-way, whichever last occurs.



   (B)   In addition to the time period established in division (A)
above, the Planning Commission has the right to establish a minimum period of
time and a minimum percentage of building completions in the subdivision
prior to release of the bond.



(Am. Ord. C-611, passed 2-9-87)



§ 155.19  SUBDIVIDER'S CERTIFICATE OF TITLE.



   SUBDIVIDER'S ATTORNEY'S



   CERTIFICATE OF TITLE



Amberley Village, Ohio,                   20   



TO THE VILLAGE OF AMBERLEY VILLAGE



   The undersigned                             , an
attorney-at-law practicing in Hamilton County, Ohio hereby certifies that he
has examined the title to all land dedicated to public use as Public Roads
and/or Walkways and/or Easements for maintenance and operation of Storm
and/or Sanitary sewers, or other public improvement in proposed        
  Subdivision, Block         , Section         , and that as of   
    , 19       , the following person(s) is (are) the owner(s) of all of
said property and that he (they) secured title to said property by the
instrument(s) recorded in the Hamilton County Recorder's office.



OWNER            RECORD



   The undersigned further states that the above owner(s) has (have) a
good and marketable title thereto in fee simple, subject only to the
following:



Taxes-current, unpaid                                    
       



Taxes-delinquent                                        
         



Assessments                                            
           



Mortgages                                            
             



(If there is a mortgage, the mortgagee must sign the plat.)



   Property proposed for acceptance of dedication to public use will be
cut out of:



Auditor's Parcels numbered:



          Book           Page       ;



          Book           Page       ;



          Book           Page       ;



Of the current 19     tax duplicate, and is taxed in the names of:



                                ,                  
           



and                                                
           



      This certification is made for the purpose of securing acceptance
of the streets, sewers, and other public improvements thereon.



                             



Attorney-at-law



(Am. Ord. C-611, passed 2-9-87)



§ 155.20  GUARANTEE OF PAYMENT OF TAXES AND ASSESSMENTS (example).



   GUARANTEE OF PAYMENT OF TAXES



   AND ASSESSMENTS ON PUBLIC STREETS



   OR OTHER PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS



   TO BE ACCEPTED BY THE VILLAGE.



To the Village of Amberley Village:



   In the event and in consideration of the acceptance of the property
described in the foregoing certificates and tendered on the plat therein
described, the undersigned(s) do hereby jointly and severally agree to pay
all taxes and assessments which now are a lien, or which may become a lien
prior to such time as said property is exempted from taxation.



                                             
 



                                             
 



                                             
 



(Am. Ord. C-611, passed 2-9-87)



APPENDIX: SUBDIVISION EXHIBITS



Exhibit



   l.   Standard pavement drawings



   2.   Application for permit to improve undedicated streets under
village supervision



   3.   Regulations for sewer and water line work



EXHIBIT 1.  STANDARD PAVEMENT DRAWINGS.



   The standard pavement drawings setting out typical sections of streets
required for subdivisions in the village and setting out the specifications
for combined curb and gutter, key joint, longitudinal section of curb, and
half section with curb and gutter and sidewalk are incorporated by reference
at this place in the code, as fully as if reproduced herein.  Copies of
standard pavement drawings are available at the office of the Village Clerk.



('69 Code, Appendix - Exhibits I and II)  (Am. Ord. C-611, passed 2-9-87)



EXHIBIT 2.  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT TO IMPROVE UNDEDICATED STREETS UNDER
VILLAGE SUPERVISOR.



AMBERLEY VILLAGE, OHIO



                      , 19   



TO:  THE VILLAGE OF AMBERLEY VILLAGE



   The undersigned, representing the ownership of (name of
subdivision)                                          
        for which the SUBDIVISION IMPROVEMENT PLAN was approved by the
Amberley Village Planning Commission on                     , 19 
  , hereby requests permission to make the following improvements under
Village supervision:



                                                   
               



                                                   
               



                                                   
               



      l.   The entire expense of the improvement shall be borne by
the applicant, who shall also pay the cost of inspection and the testing of
all materials as required.  The applicant shall deposit the sum of $     
to provide a fund for payment of inspection and testing of materials.  Any
surplus in the fund shall be returned to the applicant at the completion of
the improvement.



      2.   Any work necessary to connect the proposed improvement
with an existing improvement shall be performed by the applicant.  If any
openings are made in existing pavements for underground work, a permit shall
be obtained for such work.



      3.   When the proposed work includes main sewers and/or
lateral connections, permits shall be obtained as provided in Chapter 50.



      4.   If the applicant does not represent the entire ownership
of the lots abutting both sides of the proposed improvement, the village
reserves the right to require that an adequate indemnity bond be filed to
protect the village from any claims for damages by the owners of the
unrepresented frontage.



Witness:



                                                  
             



         Applicant



                                                  
             



         Address



('69 Code, Appendix - Exhibit III)  (Am. Ord. C-611, passed 2-9-87)



EXHIBIT 3.  REGULATIONS FOR SEWER AND WATER LINE WORK.



   (A)   All sewer installations (storm and sanitary) shall be made in
strict accordance with standards and specifications of Hamilton County.



   (B)   All water line and fire hydrant installations shall be made in
strict accordance with the standards and specifications of the City of
Cincinnati.



   (C)   Where trench bottoms are rock, a minimum four-inch cushion of
bank run gravel will be required for bedding the pipe and giving it uniform
support.



   (D)   Where sewer trench bottoms are unstable, a stabilizing bed of
one part cement to nine parts bank run gravel (dry mix) will be required.



   (E)   Backfill for all trenches (including sewer and water service
branches) that will be under the paved portion of the street, must be bank
run gravel, flushed to insure maximum compaction.  Outside paved areas,
suitable backfill material (free of rocky material around sides and top of
pipe) from the trench excavation will be permitted.  If the inspector
determines that the excavated material is not suitable for backfill, bank run
gravel will be required.



   (F)   Manholes of precast sectional concrete rings are acceptable.
Base must be built of concrete brick or 1:6 poured concrete. Channels in
bottom of sanitary manholes shall be lined with vitrified brick or channel
pipe.  Benches must be brick or smooth finished concrete.  Channels in
bottoms of storm sewer manholes may be formed and shaped from concrete, or
lined with concrete brick or channel pipe.



   (G)   Stacks at drop manholes, or on service branches, must be
adequately supported, braced, reinforced, or in cases with brick or concrete
for their full height to insure no displacement or damage during backfilling
operations.



   (H)   In accordance with Chapter 50, a nonrefundable fee amounting
to 2% of the cost of all sanitary sewer work must be paid to the village for
the sanitary sewer maintenance fund.



('69 Code, Appendix - Exhibit VI)  (Am. Ord. C-611, passed 2-9-87)



CHAPTER 156: STORM WATER MANAGEMENT



Section



General Provisions



   156.01   Application



   156.02   Drainage systems



   156.03   Submission requirements



   156.04   Storm water run-off analysis



   156.05   Large areas



   156.06   Catch basins, inlets, manholes, and storm sewers



   156.07   Culverts



   156.08   Open channels



   156.09   Natural channels



   156.10   Man-made channels



   156.11   Detention/retention basins



   156.12   Major drainage system



   156.13   Standards, specifications, forms, and charts



Administration



   156.25   Application for permit



   156.26   Plan review and approval procedures



   156.27   Inspections



   156.28   Bonds



   156.29   Revocation of storm water management sediment control plan
permit



   156.30   Variances



   156.31   Final storm water management control plan project approval



Cross-reference:



   Storm sewers, see Ch. 51



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 156.01  APPLICATION.



   (A)   All residential subdivisions and industrial land developments
shall be provided with a storm water management system which is adequate to
serve the area, meet the requirement of design, blend with natural site
features, and any other criteria of the village.



   (B)   Subdivision and land development improvements shall be
designed such that after the development is completed, the quantity and rate
of water leaving the site at points of hydraulic analysis is no more than if
the site had remained in its undeveloped natural state.



   (C)   If necessary, storage facilities shall be included to assure
that this requirement is met.



   (D)   The developer shall meet submission requirements as
hereinafter specified.  However, the village may require information more
detailed than specified when a better understanding of a situation is needed.



   (E)   Storm water management systems will be designed for the
ultimate use of the land.



   (F)   The village may require a higher degree of design than
specified in these criteria if the resulting drainage systems appear to
jeopardize areas of high value or where the design results do not appear
adequate to provide safety and protect the health of the residents.



   (G)   Where a storm sewer, culvert, open channel, catch basin,
inlet, manhole, or other drainage structure lies outside the public
right-of-way, easements of sufficient size as determined by the Village
Engineer shall be provided to assure easy access and maintenance.



   (H)   Sub-surface drainage such as underdrains may be required at
the discretion of the Village Engineer.



   (I)   Nothing in this chapter shall overturn provisions of Chapter
152, Flood Damage Prevention.  If conflicts occur, Chapter 152 shall govern.



(Ord. C-604, passed 9-8-86)



§ 156.02  DRAINAGE SYSTEMS.



   (A)   The development of a comprehensive storm water management
system requires providing two separate and distinct drainage systems–the
minor system and the major system.



   (B)   The minor drainage system is for collecting and transporting
run-off from frequently occurring storms.  It includes open channels, street
curbs and gutters, and underground storm sewers, manholes, catch basins,
culverts, and the like.  This system's purpose is to lessen or eliminate
inconveniences and safety and health hazards associated with frequent
storms.  Except where otherwise indicated, the criteria included in these
regulations are directed to the design of the minor drainage system.



   (C)   The major drainage system is to insure that storm water
run-off which exceeds the capacity of the minor drainage system has a route
to follow that will not cause substantial damage.  It must be recognized
that the major drainage system exists even when it is not planned and whether
or not physical facilities are intelligently located in respect to it.



(Ord. C-604, passed 9-8-86)



§ 156.03  SUBMISSION REQUIREMENTS.



   Plans, profiles, and supporting documentation to verify conformance
with these criteria shall be submitted along with the usual plan submissions
required in Chapter 155, Subdivision Rules and Regulations, and shall be
referred to as the Storm Water Management Control Plan.  This plan shall
include:



   (A)   Preliminary plans.  In addition to the requirements of
Chapter 155, Subdivision Rules and Regulations, a plan showing the total area
contributing run-off to the subdivision or land development being considered
(project area) shall be submitted with the preliminary plan.  This plan
shall contain, but is not limited to, the following information:



      (1)   A contour plan showing the outline of all areas outside
the project area that contributes run-off to it.



      (2)   Estimated run-off (Q) before and after development for
terminal points along natural streams, proposed open channels, and other
strategic points such as existing storm sewers or culverts.



      (3)   Location of proposed detention/ retention areas.



      (4)   Any other information required by the village to clarify
intent.



   (B)   Improvement plans.  In addition to the requirements of
Chapter 155, Subdivision Rules and Regulations, the improvement plan for the
project area shall contain, but is not limited to, the following information:



      (1)   Diameter, length, slope, concrete pipe, and class (if
other than Class II), of all storm sewers, culverts, and sub-surface drainage.



      (2)   Invert elevations on profiles of all pipes at terminal
points such as manholes, inlets, catch basins, and headwalls.



      (3)   Top of grate elevations of manholes and grate flow lines
of catch basins and inlets located outside the public right-of-way.  This
information shall be submitted for structures within the right-of-way when
required by the Village Engineer.



      (4)   Type of catch basin, inlet, and manhole.



      (5)   Headwall type.



      (6)   Cross-sections of proposed open channels showing width
of bottom, depth of water, erosion control measures and limits, and side
slopes at each point of design along with a profile indicating the
longitudinal slope and bottom elevations at the terminal points and points of
design.



      (7)   High and low points, on the plan, indicating the
direction of run-off flow on the roadway.



      (8)   Structural details and design data for detention/
retention facilities.



      (9)   Details of construction for all structures not included
in the standard construction drawings of the Subdivision Rules and
Regulations, these criteria, or other referenced standards.



      (10)   Easements.



      (11)   Other requirements of Chapter 153, Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control.



      (12)   Any other information required by the village to
clarify intent or design features.



   (C)   Drainage and grading plans.  In addition to the improvement
plan, a drainage and grading plan shall be submitted.  This plan may be
superimposed on the required improvement plan, or similar plan at a scale of
1 inch equaling 100 feet or larger, showing at least the following additional
information:



      (1)   Contours indicating the existing and final grading at
vertical increments of no more than two feet.



      (2)   Discharge (Q), co-efficient of run-off (c), and drainage
area (A) along with the outline of the drainage area for each inlet, catch
basin, culvert and open channel point of design, and at other locations
designated by the Village Engineer.  Drainage areas that lie partially
outside the limits of the drainage and grading plan may be delineated on any
contour map acceptable to the Village Engineer.



      (3)   Discharge (Q), before and after development at strategic
points within and at the extremities of the project area.



      (4)   Delineation of the boundaries and contour elevation
along with the route of the major drainage system through downstream areas to
an adequate outlet although the outlet may be outside the project area.



      (5)   Delineation of the horizontal limits of ponding areas
for storms with frequencies of 25 years and 100 years at low points (sags) in
the street profile and low points outside the street right-of-way including,
but not limited to, culvert headwater, natural stream water surfaces, and
sump type inlets.



      (6)   High and low water horizontal limits and contour
elevation of detention/retention/ sedimentation facilities along with water
surface and control weir elevations, outlet structures, and the like.



      (7)   All requirements of Chapter 153, Soil Erosion and
Sediment Control.



      (8)   Any other information required by the village to clarify
intent, specified requirements, or design features.



   (D)   Supporting data.  All data and design information used for
the design of drainage facilities and for determining downstream flood
information shall be submitted with the drainage and grading plan.  To
facilitate review and avoid confusion, legends, descriptions, structure
numbering, and the like used on design forms or other calculations shall be
identical to those used on the improvement plans and the drainage and grading
plan.  This data shall include, but is not limited to:



      (1)   Weighted run-off coefficient calculations for each
contributing area.



      (2)   Pavement drainage computations.



      (3)   Storm sewer computations.



      (4)   Culvert design computations.



      (5)   Open channel computations.



      (6)   Detention/retention facilities computations.



      (7)   Any other information required by the Village Engineer
to clarify intent or design features.



(Ord. C-604, passed 9-8-86)



§ 156.04  STORM WATER RUN-OFF ANALYSIS.



   Determining the peak rate of storm water run-off reaching the point of
consideration is fundamental to the design of the storm water management
system.  Careful selection of variables is prerequisite to adequate design.



   (A)   Rational method.  The rational method shall be used to
determine peak rate of run-off from areas not larger than 50 acres. The basic
formula for the rational method is Q = ciA where:



      (1)   Q = Peak rate of run-off in cubic feet per second (cfs).



      (2)   c = Run-off coefficient representing the characteristics
of the drainage area.



      (3)   i = Average intensity of rainfall in inches per hour for
a duration equal to the time of concentration (tc) for a selected rainfall
frequency.



      (4)   A = Area drained in acres.



   (B)   Run-off coefficient.  The following table presents values for
use with the rational method.  A weighted run-off coefficient must be
individually computed for each drainage area contributing to a catch basin,
an inlet, a culvert, an open channel, or any other drainage facility.  The
Village Engineer may permit a general weighted run-off coefficient to be used
within a subdivision, land development, or for portions of the area.  The
calculations will be part of the drainage and grading plan submission.



Character of Surface         Run-off Coefficient



Pavements, roofs, and



other hard surfaces         0.90



Lawns, yards, and other



unpaved areas, except



wooded areas



    Flat - less than 4:1 slope      0.40



    Steep - 4:1 slope or greater      0.70



Natural dense wooded areas       0.1 to 0.40



      (1)   The use of the above run-off coefficients for natural
dense wooded areas is restricted to areas 50 feet or more away from a
building which will remain undisturbed and in their natural state; and where
engineering data verifying the coefficient has been presented to and approved
by the Village Engineer.



      (2)   Time of concentration.  The time of concentration in
minutes is the estimated time for storm run-off from the most remote part of
the drainage area to reach the point being analyzed.  Time for flow in open
channels, gutters, pipes, and the like will be estimated using appropriate
hydraulic methods.  The total time of concentration in minutes is the
summation of overland flow, open channels, gutters, pipe flow, and the
like.  The time of concentration to any drainage facility or point of design
is the greater of the summation as defined above or the minimum time of ten
minutes.



      (3)   Intensity of rainfall.  The intensity of rainfall will
be obtained from the most recent edition of the Hamilton County Storm
Drainage Standards, Plate II.  The frequency of storm to use is specified in
the section of these criteria covering the type of facility being designed.



(Ord. C-604, passed 9-8-86)



§ 156.05  LARGE AREAS.



   For drainage areas larger than 50 acres, methods other than the
Rational Method may be required to estimate the amount of run-off. Methods
specified for detention/retention basins are acceptable.  The Village
Engineer must approve the method used in each case.



(Ord. C-604, passed 9-8-86)



§ 156.06  CATCH BASINS, INLETS, MANHOLES, AND STORM SEWERS.



   This section deals with underground storm sewer systems and
appurtenances.



   (A)   Catch basins, inlets, and manholes.  It will be the
responsibility of the designer to locate catch basins or inlets in the street
or in other locations using accepted empirical techniques, and falling within
the criteria below.



      (1)   Storm frequencies.  Surface run-off for each catch
basin or inlet on a continuous grade in the street will be determined using a
storm frequency of five years.



      (2)   Catch basin or inlet interception requirements.  Each
catch basin or inlet on a continuous grade in the storm water system should
intercept no less than 80% of the gutter flow reaching it, except at
intersections and low points where 100% of the flow must be intercepted.



      (3)   Size and spacing.  The size and spacing of pavement
catch basins or inlets with grates on continuous grades will be selected
assuming the grate alone will intercept water from the gutter.  Where
feasible catch basins and inlets should be constructed upstream of crosswalks
and at intersections.  At any design point requiring more than two catch
basins or inlets side by side, no more than two will be permitted.  Others
must be placed upstream at least 100 feet, at a point halfway between the
high point and the subject dual catch basins or inlets, or at some other
logical point approved by the Village Engineer.



      (4)   Manholes.  Manholes shall be located at each horizontal
change of direction, vertical change of grade, and generally no more than 400
feet apart.



      (5)   Street sags and other low points.  Low point catch
basins or inlets will be designed to accept the flow reaching them through
the curb opening only.  The depth of water cannot exceed the top of the curb
opening of the catch basin or inlet for a storm with a frequency of 25
years.  A backup system may be required at each low point in the street
profile to accept overflow from the low point catch basin and to function
independently of it to the main sewer or to eventual outlet.



   (B)   Storm sewer design.



      (1)   Storm frequencies.  Surface run-off for design of the
storm sewer shall be determined by using the following storm frequencies: 
pipe size and slope - ten years.



      (2)   Pipe capacities.  Storm sewers shall be designed to
carry peak flows as calculated by the method specified in § 156.04. Size of
pipes shall be determined by Manning's Formula.  Appropriate charts such as
those found in "Design Charts for Open Channel Flow Hydraulic Design Series
No. 3," published by the U.S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway
Administration may be used.



      (3)   Roughness coefficient.  The roughness coefficient (n)
used in Manning's Formula shall be:



         (a)    n = 0.013 for concrete pipe 30 inches in diameter
or larger.



         (b)   n = 0.015 for concrete pipe less than 30 inches in
diameter.



      (4)   Pipe size.  The minimum diameter for storm sewer pipe
shall be 12 inches.  In no case shall the diameter of a storm sewer pipe
leaving a structure such as a manhole be less than the largest pipe entering
it.



      (5)   Minimum cover.  Unless specifically requested and
approved by the Village Engineer, the minimum cover for any storm sewer will
be one foot measured from the bottom of the roadway base material to the top
of pipe.  Outside the paved roadway the minimum cover shall be three feet
unless prohibited by topography or other restrictions impractical to change.



      (6)   Maximum and minimum velocities.  Velocities in storm
sewer pipes shall not be less than 2.5 feet per second nor more than 12 feet
per second.  Higher velocity than that allowed will be considered in rare
cases where it can be shown that staying within the maximum would cause an
unreasonable burden.  In such situations, special provisions shall be made
to protect the sewer pipe against erosion and displacement by shock or for
checking the flow velocity.



      (7)   Free outlets.  Where a storm sewer outlets to an open
channel, erosion control will be determined by the same method as specified
in these criteria for culvert outlets.



(Ord. C-604, passed 9-8-86)



§ 156.07  CULVERTS.



   Culverts are used to convey storm water in an open channel, natural or
man-made, through an embankment such as a roadway.



   (A)   Design.



      (1)   Storm frequencies.  Surface run-off used for selecting
the culvert shall be determined by using the following storm frequencies:



         (a)   Design for 25 years.



         (b)   Check for 50 years to meet maximum allowable
headwater elevations.



         (c)   Determine for 100 years to check building impacts.



         (d)   Driveway pipes are the responsibility of the
property owner and should be sized for a storm of at least ten years
frequency.  Each driveway pipe need not be formally designed except when the
headwater approaches the maximum allowable.



   (B)   Data design and submission.  Culverts will be designed by the
methods, nomographs, and the like found in "Hydraulic Charts for the
Selection of Highway Culverts - Highway Engineering Circular No. 5, 1965" and
"Capacity Charts for the Hydraulic Design of Highway Culverts - Highway
Engineering Circular No. 10, 1965", published by the U.S. Department of
Transportation, Federal Highway Administration.



   (C)   Type of culvert flow.  All culverts will be reviewed for both
inlet control and outlet control.  The assumption resulting in the higher
headwater elevation will govern.



   (D)   Headwalls.  All culverts except driveway pipes will be
constructed with headwalls according to the requirements of these criteria.



   (E)   Allowable headwater elevations.  Maximum headwater or any
water surface:



      (1)   For a 100-year storm, shall be two feet below the lowest
opening in any building affected by the storm;



      (2)   For a 50-year storm, shall be one foot below the top of
bank or embankment on the upstream end of the culvert;



      (3)   For a driveway pipe, shall be no higher than the roadway
shoulder at the ditch or the driveway sag, whichever is lower.



      (4)   Depressed culvert inlets (dropped channels) may be used
except for driveway pipes.



   (F)   Minimum cover.  The minimum cover for culverts except
driveway pipes shall be two feet from bottom of roadway base material to the
top of pipe.  Driveway pipes will be constructed according to applicable
standard drawings.



   (G)   Erosion control.  Outlet velocity will determine the erosion
control needed at the culvert outlet.  Height of protection along the slope
shall be the outlet depth of water in the culvert for a 25-year storm plus
two feet.  Specially designed energy dissipators may be used with the
approval of the Village Engineer.



(Ord. C-604, passed 9-8-86)



§ 156.08  OPEN CHANNELS.



   This section deals with the design and construction of open channels. 
While the continued use of natural channels in open space is encouraged,
those natural and man-made channels through inhabited areas are to be
restricted according to the criteria in this section.



   (A)   Proposed channels.  Open channels through areas not presently
containing a natural stream, depression, or diversion ditch will be permitted
only for the collection of surface run-off from small areas.



   (B)   Channel locations.  Man-made channels should be constructed
on or behind the rear property lines of lots and will be routed to permanent
surface or subsurface outfalls.



   (C)   Collection points.  At any point where channel design flow
exceeds the maximum allowable depth, velocity, and the like, the storm water
must be collected in an approved catch basin, inlet, or culvert and directed
through an underground storm sewer system.



   (D)   Private drainage.  All open channels shall be placed in
private drainage easements.  Maintenance shall be the requirement of the
property owner.



(Ord. C-604, passed 9-8-86)



§ 156.09  NATURAL CHANNELS.



   (A)   Evaluation.  All natural channels permitted to remain
undisturbed will be reviewed for depth, width, velocity, and the like for a
100-year storm using hydraulic techniques acceptable to the village.  These
channels must be located such that the maximum water surface elevations due
to the 100-year storm including backwater from culverts or other restrictions
shall be two feet below the lowest opening in any building.



   (B)   Alignment.  The horizontal or vertical alignment of a natural
channel may not be indiscriminately changed and continued as an open channel
simply to provide more useable land.  A channel changed for any purpose must
become part of the underground storm sewer system except as outlined below.



   (C)   Channel upgrading.  At the village's discretion, natural
channels contiguous to or running through an area being considered for
development, but not to be disturbed by the development, shall be studied by
the village to determine the need for upgrading, rehabilitation, or
maintenance.  If required, the developer shall provide such design
information as needed along with a plan showing in detail the work to be
done.  This work may consist of tree, debris, and obstruction removal,
bottom and slope erosion control, slope establishment with rock or other
protection, recut of slopes to more stable angle and the like.  Each area
will be considered on its own merits.  The developer shall make any
improvements deemed necessary by the village.



   (D)   Private drainage easements.  Size of required private
easements will be based on the water surface spread for the 100-year storm. 
Each natural channel shall be individually studied and easements required
which will be in the best interests of the village and the property owner.



(Ord. C-604, passed 9-8-86)



§ 156.10  MAN-MADE CHANNELS.



   (A)   Type of channels.  Man-made channels located on the rear lot
lines shall be either:



      (1)   Swales with side slopes no steeper than 8:1 with the
bottom rounded four feet on each side of the channel centerline of V-type
bottom.



      (2)   Flat bottom channel with side slopes no steeper than 4:1.



      (3)   Swales in lieu of flat bottom channels are desirable
where feasible.



   (B)   Channel capacity.  Channels will be designed for the selected
storm frequency to carry peak flows as calculated by the method specified in
§ 156.04.



   (C)   Submission of data.  Data and design calculations will be
submitted to the Village Engineer.



   (D)   Points of design.  Open channels will be designed by
considering each point along the channel where a concentrated flow enters the
channel, at each change of longitudinal grade, and at various points as
necessary throughout its length.  The entire reach under consideration shall
be designed for the discharge at the lower end of the reach.



   (E)   Storm frequency and velocities.  Velocity in the channel
shall be no less than 2.5 fps nor more than 5.0 fps based on a storm of
25-year frequency.



   (F)   Roughness coefficient.  Manning's n will be 0.04 for sod.



   (G)   All channels shall be constructed with sod. If the soil is not
capable of supporting vegetation, appropriate action must be taken to bring
the soil to a condition which will support the growth of sod. In areas where
sod growth is not assured, such as continuous running streams, other means of
controlling erosion acceptable to the Village Engineer and the Hamilton
County Soil and Water Conservation District may be utilized.



   (H)   Easements.  Private drainage easements will be granted for
every designed man-made open channel.



   (I)   Typical section.  A typical section of all proposed man-made
open channels shall be shown on the improvement plan and shall contain at
least the following information:



      (1)   Side slopes.



      (2)   Flat bottom width, if applicable.



      (3)   Depth of water at design storm.



      (4)   Width of sod lining.



   (J)   Design.  Channels shall be so designed that the water surface
for the 100-year storm is two feet below the lowest opening of building
subject to flooding by the channel unless approved by the village.



(Ord. C-604, passed 9-8-86)



§ 156.11  DETENTION/RETENTION BASINS.



   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.



   DETENTION BASINS.  Dry surface storage areas created by constructing
an excavated or embankment basin.



   DETENTION/RETENTION OF STORM WATER.  Storage of excess run-off on the
site of a development and gradual release of the storm run-off at an
acceptable rate.



   RETENTION BASINS.  Permanent ponds where additional storage capacity
is provided above the normal water level.



   (B)   Objective.  The objective of a detention/ retention facility
is to regulate the run-off from a rainfall and to control discharges to
downstream areas in order to reduce the impact on downstream drainage systems.



   (C)   Requirement.  Detention/retention of storm water will be
required for each subdivision or land development unless specifically
exempted.



   (D)   Exemptions to detention/retention requirements.  The
developer may apply to the village for exemption from construction of
detention facilities.  Each request will be reviewed on its own merit and as
it affects the entire drainage area in which it lies and into which it flows.



   (E)   Design.



      (1)   Run-off and volume calculation methods.  The methods
outlined in "Ohio Supplement to Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds:
Technical Release No. 55 Engineering Division, Soil Conservation Service,
(SCS), U.S.  Department of Agriculture," will be used to determine run-off.



      (2)   Dams in excess of ten feet are subject to Ohio
Department of Natural Resources (ODNR) review.



      (3)   In some instances, as determined by the Village
Engineer, a hydrograph method may be necessary to predict the length of time
of high discharge from a detention/retention basin.  This determination will
be made at the preliminary plan stage.  It is the developer's responsibility
to obtain this determination prior to beginning design procedures.



      (4)   Allowable run-off.  The volume and peak rate of run-off
from an area after full development shall not exceed the volume and peak rate
of run-off from the same area before development for all 24-hour storms with
frequencies of 5, 10, 25, 50, and 100 years.



      (5)   For those areas where a study of the downstream area
indicates the extended time of high discharge or velocity due to restricted
release rate and storage may cause flooding or excessive erosion, the Village
Engineer in cooperation with the Hamilton County Soil and Water Conservation
District may require additional controls.



      (6)   Basin construction.



         (a)   The side slopes of a detention/ retention basin
shall not exceed 4:1 and shall be seeded or sodded.



         (b)   The bottom of the basin shall be seeded or sodded
and sloped to the outlet flow control device.  A method of carrying low flow
through the basin shall be provided and include appropriate erosion control.



         (c)   The maximum water depth for detention basins shall
be six feet, unless otherwise approved by the village.



         (d)   The top of the embankment shall have a minimum
width of eight feet.



         (e)   Outlet flow control devices may be either
single-stage or multi-stage, with provision for emergency overflow.



         (f)    Other requirements may be imposed for specific
cases.



         (g)   The basin shall be provided with vehicular access
for service vehicles.



         (h)   Public easements shall be granted for each basin
and access road, on all single-family developments.



         (i)   Operation and maintenance of basins in commercial
and industrial zones shall be the responsibility of the property owner. 
Private drainage easements will be provided specifying long-term maintenance
responsibilities.



   (F)   Submission requirements.  Plans and supporting data to verify
storage volumes, release rates, and the like shall be submitted.  The
submission shall include, but is not limited to, the following:



      (1)   A plan, which may be the Improvement Plan, Drainage and
Grading Plan, or similar plan at a scale of one inch equaling 100 feet or
larger, shall be submitted and contain at least the following information:



         (a)   The outline and designation of the drainage area.



         (b)   All existing and proposed drainage facilities.



         (c)   Existing and proposed contours (two foot minimum
interval).



         (d)   Existing structures.



         (e)    Downstream restrictions (may be on a separate
plan).



         (f)   The detention/retention basin with outlet
structures, including emergency overflow features.



         (g)   Pertinent elevations such as water surface,
flowline of flow control devices, and the like.



         (h)   Any other information required by the village to
clarify intent or design features.



      (2)   All calculations and other supporting data in sufficient
detail and form to facilitate an expedient and accurate review.



(Ord. C-604, passed 9-8-86)



§ 156.12  MAJOR DRAINAGE SYSTEM.



   (A)   Planning.  Planning for the major drainage system is to
insure that storm water run-off which exceeds the capacity of the minor
drainage system has a route to follow that will not cause substantial
damage.  This system exists whether or not it is planned.



   (B)   Criteria.



      (1)   Storm frequencies.  Surface run-off for the major
drainage system shall be determined using a storm with a frequency of 100
years.



      (2)   Building restriction.  No building opening will be
located at an elevation lower than two feet above the water surface elevation
at the 100-year storm unless approved by the village.



   (C)   Points of consideration.  All open channels, street cross
sections, low points, culverts, entrances, and the like will be considered as
possible flood areas due to the 100-year storm and will be included as part
of the major drainage system investigation.



   (D)   Submittals.  All calculations will be submitted with the
drainage plan.  The boundaries, contours, and extremes of the major drainage
system will be delineated on the drainage plan.  The designer will point out
the problem and proposed solutions to avoid damage due to the 100-year storm.



(Ord. C-604, passed 9-8-86)



§ 156.13  STANDARDS, SPECIFICATIONS, FORMS, AND CHARTS.



   (A)   Generally, the construction methods, standard drawings, and
specifications contained in Chapter 155, Subdivision Rules and Regulations,
shall apply.



   (B)   The latest editions of "Construction and Material
Specifications" and "Standard Construction Drawings," both published by the
Ohio Department of Transportation (ODOT), will apply to all work not
specifically covered by Chapter 155, Subdivision Rules and Regulations.



      (1)   Pipe.  All pipe shall be ODOT 706.02 or 706.04 of a
strength determined as adequate for the location.



      (2)   Manholes.  Unless previously approved by the village,
storm sewer manholes No. 1, No. 2, or No. 3 will be used as shown in ODOT
standard construction drawings.



      (3)   Catch basins and inlets.  Any catch basin or inlet
found in the ODOT standard construction drawings or other approved standards
may be used for its intended purpose.  In individual cases special inlets or
catch basins may be approved by the Village Engineer prior to their inclusion
in the plans.



      (4)   Headwalls.  All headwalls for culverts, storm sewer
outlets, and driveway pipe shall be full wingwall Headwall type, Hamilton
County or ODOT standard.



(Ord. C-604, passed 9-8-86)



ADMINISTRATION



§ 156.25  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.



   (A)   A minimum of three complete sets of the Storm Water Management
Control Plan shall be submitted to the Planning Commission at least 15
working days prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting.



   (B)   No applications for permits to improve undedicated streets or
building permits shall be issued until a Storm Water Management Control Plan,
together with other submissions required by the village, are approved by the
village.



(Ord. C-604, passed 9-8-86)



Cross-reference:



   Storm Water Management Control Plan, see § 156.03



   Application for permit to improve undedicated streets, see Ch. 155,
Appendix



§ 156.26  PLAN REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES.



   (A)   Upon receipt of the recommendations of the Village Engineer
and the Hamilton County Soil Conservation Service and after consideration
thereof, the Planning Commission shall act upon the request.  Approval of
the Storm Water Management Control Plan by the Planning Commission shall
constitute a permit.



   (B)   Minor revisions to plans originally approved by the Planning
Commission may be approved by the Village Engineer who may consult the
Hamilton County Soil Conservation Service in his review.  The Village
Engineer shall determine if a revision is a major or minor revision. All
major revisions shall be subject to approval by the Planning Commission with
recommendations from the Village Engineer and the Hamilton County Soil
Conservation Service.



(Ord. C-604, passed 9-8-86)



§ 156.27  INSPECTIONS.



   (A)   Required inspections.  Inspection by the Village Engineer or
Hamilton County Soil Conservation Service, as hereinafter required, shall
either approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the
permittee wherein the same fails to comply with the Storm Water Management
Control Plan.  Where it is found by inspection that conditions are not
substantially as stated or shown in the Plan, the Engineer may recommend to
the Village Manager the stoppage of work until approval is obtained for a
revised plan conforming to the existing conditions.  Plans for the work,
bearing the stamp of approval of the Village Engineer, shall be maintained at
the site during progress of the grading.  In order to obtain inspections in
accordance with the following schedule, the permittee shall notify the
Village Engineer at least two full working days before the inspection is to
be made:



      (1)   Rough grading.  When all rough grading has been
completed.



      (2)   Final inspection.  When all work, including
installation of all drainage and other structures and required planting, has
been completed.



      (3)   Intermediate inspection.  Additional intermediate
inspections as deemed necessary by the Engineer.



   (B)   Special precautions to be added to each plan as a general note.



      (1)   If at any stage of the work, the Village Engineer
determines by inspection that the nature of the formation is such that
further work as authorized by an existing permit is likely to imperil any
property, public way, water course or drainage structure, the Village
Engineer may require, as a condition to allowing the work to continue, that
such reasonable safety precautions be taken as he considers advisable to
avoid the likelihood of such peril.  Special precautions may include, but
shall not be limited to, specifying a more level exposed slope, construction
of additional drainage facilities, berms, terracing, compaction, cribbing,
installation of planting materials for erosion control, and reports of a
registered engineering geologist whose recommendations may be made
requirements for future work.



      (2)   Where it appears that storm damage may result because
the grading is not complete, work may be stopped and the permittee required
to install temporary planting to control erosion, install temporary
structures, or take such other measures as may be required to protect
adjoining property or the public safety.  On large operations or where
unusual site conditions prevail, the Village Engineer or Hamilton County Soil
Service may specify the time of starting grading and the time of completion
or may require that the operations be conducted in specific stages so as to
insure completion of protective measures or devices prior to the advent of
seasonal rains.



(Ord. C-604, passed 9-8-86)



§ 156.28  BONDS.



   (A)   In order to insure that emergency measures could be taken by
the village if the storm water management control measures were not
implemented according to the agreed upon plan and schedule, a performance
bond in the amount agreed upon by the Village Engineer to be sufficient to
cover the cost of the storm water management measures shall be required to be
filed with the village prior to commencing any construction or grading on the
site.  The performance bond shall authorize immediate payment to the village
upon certification by the Village Manager with the concurrence of the
Planning Commission, that necessary emergency work must be done immediately
to insure proper storm water management as a result of the
landowner/developer's failure to complete or adhere to the approved Storm
Water Management Control Plan.  The bond shall remain in effect until such
time that the Planning Commission has granted final Storm Water Management
Control Plan project approval as called for in § 156.31.  At that time any
unused balance of the bond shall be returned to the developer.



   (B)   A guarantee bond for the Storm Water Management Control Plan
project shall be included and shall be a part of the guarantee bond for all
public improvements in the subdivision as directed by § 155.18.



(Ord. C-604, passed 9-8-86)



§ 156.29  REVOCATION OF STORM WATER MANAGEMENT SEDIMENT CONTROL PLAN PERMIT.



   (A)   Authority.  In the event any person holding a permit pursuant
to this chapter violates the terms of the permit, or conducts or carries on
the site development in such a manner as to materially adversely affect the
health, welfare, or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood
of the subject property of the permittee, or conducts or carries on the site
development so that it is materially detrimental to the public welfare or
injurious to property or improvements in the neighborhood, the Planning
Commission shall revoke or suspend the permit.



   (B)   Procedure for revoking permit.  No permit shall be
permanently revoked or suspended until a hearing is held by the Planning
Commission.  Written notice of the hearing shall be served upon the
permittee, either personally or by registered mail, and shall state:



      (1)   The grounds for complaint or reasons for the revocation
or suspension.



      (2)   The time when, and the place where the hearing is to be
held.  The notice shall be served by registered mail or personal service on
the permittee at least five days prior to date set for the hearing.  At the
hearing, the permittee shall be given an opportunity to be heard, and he may
call witnesses and present evidence on his behalf.  Upon conclusion of the
hearing, the Commission shall determine whether or not the permit shall be
suspended or revoked.



      (3)   The penalty for revocation of the permit shall be
forfeiture of the performance bond to the village.  This does not preclude a
lawsuit for damages being filed against the developer by the village.



(Ord. C-604, passed 9-8-86)



§ 156.30  VARIANCES.



   The Planning Commission may authorize variances to any of the
requirements and regulations set forth in this chapter.



   (A)   Application for variance.  Application for any variance shall
be made by a verified petition of applicant stating fully the ground of the
application and the facts relied upon by the petitioner. The application
shall be filed as an attachment to the developer's Storm Water Management
Control Plan.  In order for the petition to be considered by the Planning
Commission it shall be necessary that all of the following facts are
applicable:



      (1)   That the land is of such shape or size, is affected by
such physical conditions, or is subject to such title limitations of record
that it is impossible or impractical for the subdivider to comply with all of
the regulations of this chapter.



      (2)   That the variance is necessary for the preservation and
enjoyment of a substantial property right of the petitioner.



      (3)   That the granting of the variance will not be
detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the
vicinity of the subject property.



   (B)   Referral of proposed variance.  Each proposed variance shall
be referred to the Village Engineer and the Hamilton County Soil Conservation
Service for their recommendations to the Planning Commission prior to the
Planing Commission hearing.



(Ord. C-604, passed 9-8-86)



§ 156.31  FINAL STORM WATER MANAGEMENT CONTROL PLAN PROJECT APPROVAL.



   After completion of the project, the Planning Commission shall meet for
the purpose of reviewing the compliance with the approved Storm Water
Management Control Plan.  The approval of the construction by the Village
Engineer shall be required prior to this final review. Following this review,
the Planning Commission will formally approve or disapprove project
completion.



(Ord. C-604, passed 9-8-86)



CHAPTER 157: CELLULAR OR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS TOWERS AND SYSTEMS



Section



   157.01   Purpose



   157.02   Definitions



   157.03   Application procedure



   157.04   Use regulations



   157.05   Standards for location of cellular or wireless
communications antennas and towers



   157.06   Standards for approval of all cellular or wireless
communications antennas and towers



   157.07   Maintenance



   157.08   Removal



   157.09   Prohibitions



 



   157.99   Penalty



§ 157.01  PURPOSE.



   (A)   It is the purpose of the provisions of this chapter, known as
"Cellular or Wireless Communication Towers and Systems," to:



      (1)   Accommodate the need for cellular or wireless
communications towers and facilities for the provision of personal wireless
services while regulating their location and number in the village;



      (2)   Minimize adverse visual effects of communications towers
and support structures through proper siting, design and screening;



      (3)   Avoid potential damage to persons and adjacent
properties from failure of communications towers and support structure or
other hazards; and



      (4)   Encourage the joint use of any new and existing
communications towers and support structures to reduce the number of such
structures needed in the future.



   (B)   This chapter is applicable to commercial operators and
operations, and is not applicable to a licensed amateur operator (ham
operator) of a single amateur radio station.



(Ord. 1997-22, passed 12-8-97)



§ 157.02  DEFINITIONS.



   The following definitions shall apply to this chapter:



   CELLULAR COMMUNICATION SERVICES.  Personal communications accessed by
means of cellular equipment and services.



   CELLULAR OR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS ANTENNA.  Any structure or device
used to receive or transmit electromagnetic waves between cellular phones,
pagers, commercial mobile services, wireless services and ground-wired
communications systems including both directional antennas, such as panels,
microwave dishes and satellite dishes, and omni-directional antennas such as
whips and other equipment utilized to serve personal communication services.



   CELLULAR OR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS SITE.  A tract, lot or parcel of
land that contains the cellular or wireless communications tower, antenna,
support structure(s), parking and any other uses associated with and
ancillary to cellular or wireless communications transmission.



   CELLULAR OR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS SUPPORT STRUCTURE.  Any building
or structure, including equipment shelter, guy wire anchors, accessory to but
necessary for the proper functioning of the cellular or wireless
communications antenna or tower.



   CELLULAR OR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS TOWER, HEIGHT OF.  The height from
the base of the structure, at grade, to its top or to the top of any antenna
located thereon, whichever is greater.  Grade shall be determined as the
elevation of the natural or existing topography of the ground level prior to
construction of the tower.



   CELLULAR OR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS TOWER.  A freestanding structure
used to support a cellular or wireless communications antenna. Such tower may
be constructed as a "monopole", meaning one cylindrical column in the air,
or, subject to the provisions of this chapter, as a "lattice tower", meaning
three or more vertical legs trussed together; or a "guyed tower", meaning a
structure that because it is less substantial is secured to the ground by
wires, cables or similar material. [See § 157.06(A)]



   FENCE.  A barrier intended to enclose or restrict access to an area or
to mark a boundary, constructed of wood, wire or other material, supported on
posts.



   MICRO ANTENNAS.  Any cellular or wireless communication antennas which
consist solely of the antenna and which do not have any supporting structures
other than brackets, including micro cells.



   PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES.  Commercial mobile services, unlicensed
wireless services and common carrier wireless exchange access services,
including cellular services.



   TALL STRUCTURES.  Any structure or building, including but not limited
to, smoke stacks, water towers, buildings over 35 feet in height, antenna
support structures of other cellular or wireless communication companies, and
other communication towers.



(Ord. 1997-22, passed 12-8-97)



§ 157.03  APPLICATION PROCEDURE.



   (A)   Any person or company intending to apply for the placement or
operation of a cellular or wireless communications antenna, tower, or site
within the village shall first schedule a pre-application conference with the
Village Manager or his assignee. At this conference, the prospective
applicant must present to the Village Manager or his assignee any proposed
locations for the equipment or site, also demonstrating the need for a tower
and that all alternatives to the construction of a new tower, such as
co-location, have been exhausted. This information should identify the area
within which the tower may be located, the maximum height of the proposed
tower and identify any possible users that may co-locate at the site. The
purpose of the pre-application conference will be to evaluate the impact on
adjacent areas and neighborhoods, discuss possibilities of co-location, and
identify alternative suitable sites that may minimize the negative impact on
residential areas.



   (B)   Upon completion of the pre-application conference, an
application may be filed with the office of the Village Manager. The
application shall be in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, and
in compliance with all applicable provisions of the Village Zoning Code
except those in conflict with this chapter, and in such form as approved by
the Village Manager. If the application does not conform with said
provisions, the applicant shall be notified by the Village Manager and no
further consideration of the application shall occur until it is in
compliance with the terms of the ordinance.



   (C)   The application fee for a cellular or wireless communication
system, tower, antenna, or site shall be $1,500 for each proposed location
and $500 for each new user proposing to co-locate.



(Ord. 1997-22, passed 12-8-97)



§ 157.04  USE REGULATIONS.



   The following use regulations shall apply to cellular or wireless
communication antennas and towers:



   (A)   A cellular or wireless communications site, subject to this
chapter, may be permitted as follows: within Industrial A and Industrial B
zoning districts; within the area of the village owned property located north
of the Cross County Highway, the exact location requiring village approval;
and in French Park within a 3,600 square foot area in the vicinity of the
existing Valley Band Radio Tower, such area to be set back at least 340 feet
from the north property line and at least 720 feet from the right-of-way to
the west, and provided that the antennas of the police departments currently
utilizing the Valley Band Radio Tower shall be installed by the owner on any
new tower without diminution of the existing radio service.



   (B)   Cellular or wireless communications sites in a zoning district
or area where such use is permitted shall not be located any closer to any
residential zoning district than as follows:



      (1)   If a cellular or wireless communication tower is 100
feet or less in height, the site shall be located no closer than 500 feet to
any residential zoning district.



      (2)   For any cellular or wireless communication tower
exceeding 100  feet in height, the site may not be located closer to any
residential zoning district than a distance equal to 500 feet plus two feet
for each foot of height that the tower exceeds 100 feet.



   (C)   A cellular or wireless communications antenna may be mounted
to an existing structure, such as a communications tower (whether the tower
is for cellular or wireless purposes or not), smoke stack, water tower or
other tall structures in any zoning district or area where a cellular or
wireless communication site is permitted. Cellular or wireless communication
antenna may only be placed on the top of buildings that are no less than 35
feet in height.



   (D)   Micro antennas shall be equal to or less than five feet in
height and with an area of not more than 580 square inches and may be placed
on any buildings in a zoning district or area where a cellular or wireless
communication site is permitted. A micro antenna may be attached to any
existing building located in a zoning district or area described in the
preceding sentence, and shall not be subject to the set back requirements of
other cellular or wireless communication towers provided it is placed on the
roof of an existing building.



   (E)   All other uses accessory to the cellular or wireless
communications antenna and towers including, but not limited to business
offices, maintenance depots, and materials and vehicle storage, are
prohibited from the site unless otherwise permitted in the zoning district in
which the cellular or wireless communications antenna and/or tower is located.



(Ord. 1997-22, passed 12-8-97)



§ 157.05  STANDARDS FOR LOCATION OF CELLULAR OR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
ANTENNAS AND TOWERS.



   (A)   The following standards shall apply to all cellular or
wireless communications antennas and towers:



      (1)   The cellular or wireless communications company shall
demonstrate, using the latest technological evidence, why the antenna or
tower must be placed in a proposed location in order to serve its necessary
function in the company's grid system. Part of this demonstration shall
include a drawing showing the boundaries of the area around the proposed
location which would probably also permit the antenna to function properly in
the company's grid system. This area shall be considered the allowable zone.



      (2)   If the communications company proposes to build a
cellular or wireless communications tower (as opposed to mounting the antenna
on an existing structure), it is required to demonstrate that it has
contacted the owners of any nearby tall structures within the allowable
district or area, asked for permission to install the cellular communications
antenna on those structures, and was denied for either non-economic reasons
or that a clearly unreasonable economic demand was made by the owner, based
on prevailing market values.



   (B)   The village may deny the application to construct a new
cellular or wireless communications tower if the applicant has not made a
good faith effort to mount the antenna on existing structures.



(Ord. 1997-22, passed 12-8-97)



§ 157.06  STANDARDS FOR APPROVAL OF ALL CELLULAR OR WIRELESS COMMUNICATIONS
ANTENNAS AND TOWERS.



   (A)   Antenna/tower height.  The applicant shall demonstrate that
the planned "Height" of a cellular or wireless communications tower is no
higher than necessary to function satisfactorily and to accommodate the
co-location requirements as set out in division (F) of this section.  No
tower that is taller than the necessary height shall be approved, and the
"Height" of any tower to be greater than 200 feet must first be approved by
the Planning Commission.  Cellular towers shall be monopole construction
unless it is demonstrated upon application that another type of tower is
required for safety purposes and it has been approved by the Planning
Commission.



   (B)   Setbacks from the base of the tower.  If a new cellular or
wireless communications tower is to be constructed in an industrial zoning
district, the minimum distance between the base of the tower, or if so
supported, between any guy wire anchors supporting the tower, and any
property line which abuts a zoning district other than a residential district
shall be no closer to that district than the greater of 50% of the tower
height or 50 feet.



   (C)   Cellular or wireless communications tower safety.  All
cellular or wireless communications towers shall be fitted with anti-climbing
devices as approved by the manufacturers.  Furthermore, the applicant shall
demonstrate that the proposed cellular or wireless communications tower and
its antenna are safe and that the surrounding properties will not be
negatively affected by tower failure, falling ice or other debris,
electromagnetic fields or radio frequency interference.  However, if a
specific safety issue in question is determined to be regulated by either FCC
regulations or applicable building code regulations, and the operation or
construction is in compliance with such regulations, then this requirement
for safety shall be deemed to have been met.  Subsequent to the installation
of a cellular or wireless communications tower site, if it is determined by
the Village Council, upon presentation of proper and sufficient
documentation, and after a public hearing, that the operation of a cellular
or wireless communications tower is inherently dangerous or is a demonstrable
health hazard, the cellular or wireless communication tower shall be declared
to be a nuisance and all operation shall cease.  The tower or antenna shall
also be removed as provided under § 157.08 of this chapter.  However, no
order of removal shall be made if it is inconsistent with any provisions
herein or with any existing FCC regulations.



   (D)   Fencing.  A fence shall be required around the cellular or
wireless communications tower and its support structure(s), unless the
antenna is mounted on an existing structure. The fence shall be a minimum of
eight feet in height and shall be erected to prevent access to non-authorized
personnel.



   (E)   Landscaping.  Landscaping, in compliance with a plan approved
by the Village Manager or his assignee, shall be provided to screen as much
of the support structure and ground level features as is possible. In
addition, existing vegetation on and around the site shall be preserved to
the greatest extent possible.



   (F)   Limiting the number of cellular or wireless communications
towers.



      (1)   In order to reduce the number of antenna support
structures needed in the village in the future, the owner of an existing
cellular or wireless communications tower shall not unreasonably deny a
request to accommodate other users, including other cellular or wireless
communications companies, and the antenna of local or joint police, fire, and
ambulance departments. Nothing contained herein is intended to prevent the
owner of the existing cellular or wireless communications tower from
receiving reasonable compensation for the use of its tower by commercial
users.



      (2)   Unless waived for good cause by the Planning Commission
to minimize impact on adjoining property, for the purposes of encouraging
co-location of cellular or wireless antenna and other users, cellular or
wireless communication towers shall be designed, engineered, and constructed
as follows:



         (a)   Towers less than 75 feet tall shall be designed,
engineered and constructed to support antennas installed by at least two
cellular or wireless communication service users;



         (b)   Towers more than 75 feet in height, but less than
150 feet shall be designed, engineered and constructed to support antennas
installed by at least three wireless communication service users; and



         (c)   Towers 150 feet in height or taller shall be
designed, engineered and constructed to support antennas installed by at
least four cellular or wireless communication service users.



      (3)   As used in subdivision (2)(a), (b), and (c) above, the
term USERS shall include the antennas of police, fire and ambulance
departments. In addition, an applicant must demonstrate that the area
acquired by lease or otherwise acquired for the use and construction of the
cellular tower and accessory structures is sufficient in size to accommodate
any additional structures that may be required if additional users are added
to the tower.



   (G)   Licensing.  The communications company must demonstrate to
the village that it is licensed by the Federal Communications Commission
(FCC). The owner of the tower must also annually provide to the village no
later than January 31 of each year, and at such time as a new user is added,
a list of all users of the tower and each user shall provide the village with
a copy of that user's license with the FCC. No approval will be granted to
any applicant or user unless proof of a current FCC license for the proposed
use of the tower is provided.



   (H)   Required parking.  If the cellular or wireless communications
site is fully automated, adequate parking shall be required for maintenance
workers. If the site is not fully automated, the number of required parking
spaces shall equal the number of employees working on the largest shift. All
parking specifications and requirements shall be consistent with the
applicable parking requirements as established in the village's Code of
Ordinances.



   (I)   Appearance.  Cellular or wireless communications towers under
200 feet in height shall be painted silver or have a galvanized finish
retained in order to reduce visual impact. Cellular or wireless
communications towers shall meet all Federal Aviation Administration (FAA)
regulations.  No cellular or wireless communications towers may be
artificially lighted except when required by the FAA. Furthermore, no
cellular or wireless communication tower or antenna and accessory buildings
and structures shall contain any signage except safety signage. All utility
lines serving the towers shall be underground.



   (J)   Site plan and documentation required.  A full site plan shall
be required for all proposed cellular or wireless communications sites,
except antennas to be placed on existing structures, at a reasonable scale,
but not smaller than 1 inch to 20 feet (1"= 20'), indicating, as a minimum,
the following:



      (1)   The total area of the site, and the identity of the
owner(s).



      (2)   The existing zoning of the property in question and
existing zoning and ownership of all adjacent properties.



      (3)   All public and private right-of-way and easement lines
located on or adjacent to the property which is proposed to be continued,
created, relocated or abandoned.



      (4)   Existing topography with a maximum of five foot contours
intervals.



      (5)   The proposed finished grade of the development shown by
contours not exceeding five foot intervals.



      (6)   The location of all existing buildings and structures
and the proposed location of the cellular or wireless communications tower
and all cellular or wireless communications support structures including
dimensions, heights, and where applicable, the gross floor area of the
buildings.



      (7)   The locations and dimensions of all curb cuts, driving
lanes, off-street parking and loading areas including the number of spaces,
grades, surfacing materials, drainage plans and illumination of the facility.



      (8)   All existing and proposed sidewalks and open areas on
the site.



      (9)   The location of all proposed fences, screening and walls.



      (10)   The location of all existing and proposed streets.



      (11)   All existing and proposed utilities including types and
grades.



      (12)   The schedule of any phasing of the project.



      (13)   Documentation which shows all buildings and structures
on adjacent lots and any additional lot which has a lot line within 500 feet
of the lot on which the cellular tower is proposed to be located, and the
identity of the owner(s).  The approximate elevation of the highest point of
each building or structure shall be noted. Applicant may identify any
additional features in the area (such as existing screening, fences and
topography) which may be helpful in considering the impact of the proposed
tower on nearby property.



      (14)   A report for all proposed cellular or wireless
communication sites, except antenna to be placed on existing structures, to
include: a description of the tower with technical reasons for its design;
documentation establishing the structural integrity for the tower's proposed
uses; the general capacity of the tower, and information necessary to assure
that ANSI standards are met; a statement of intent on whether excess space on
the tower will be leased; proof of ownership of the proposed site or
authorization to utilize it; and a visual study depicting "where within the
village limits any portion of the proposed tower could be seen."



      (15)   Any other information as may be required to determine
the conformance with this chapter and any applicable provisions of the
Building and Zoning Codes.



   (K)   For cellular or wireless communications antenna to be placed
on an existing structure, with no new tower to be erected, the applicant need
submit to the Village Manager only such information as is required to insure
compliance with the applicable provisions of this chapter and the Building
and Zoning Codes, including but not limited to, FCC licensing, safety
provisions as to the antenna, and authorization to utilize the site.



(Ord. 1997-22, passed 12-8-97)  Penalty, see § 157.99



§ 157.07  MAINTENANCE.



   Any owner or person in charge of property used as a cellular or
wireless communications site shall maintain such property and all structures
in good condition and free from trash, outdoor storage, weeds and other
debris, and the Village Manager or his designee may inspect the property at
any reasonable time to assure that such property is properly maintained. 
Any owner of a cellular or wireless communications tower shall, at least 30
days in advance, notify the Village Manager in writing of its intent to
discontinue operations or service, or transfer of ownership.



(Ord. 1997-22, passed 12-8-97)  Penalty, see § 157.99



§ 157.08  REMOVAL.



   (A)   Any cellular or wireless communications tower that has
discontinued its service for a period of two continuous months or more is
hereby determined to be a nuisance. A tower declared to be a nuisance, except
as otherwise provided in § 157.09(D), must be removed, along with all
accessory structures related thereto, and the property restored to its former
condition. DISCONTINUED shall mean that the structure has not been properly
maintained, has been abandoned, become obsolete, or is unused or has ceased
the daily activities or operations which had occurred.



   (B)   Whenever, upon inspection, it shall appear that a cellular or
wireless communications tower or site has been abandoned or its use
discontinued, and its removal is directed by the Village Council, the Village
Manager or a designated representative shall notify, either by personal
delivery or by certified mail, the owner or person in charge of the property
on which the tower is located that the tower must be taken down and removed.
The Village Manager or a designated representative, in addition to any other
citations, notices, penalties or remedies provided by law or ordinance, is
authorized to proceed in a manner consistent with and pursuant to R.C. §§
715.26 and 715.261 to maintain the public health, safety and welfare and to
recover costs as appropriate.



   (C)   If the owner or person in charge of the property referred to
in the preceding division fails to comply with the notice from the Village
Manager or his designated representative, the Village Manager shall cause the
tower to be taken down and removed, and when this has been accomplished, a
statement of the cost therefor shall be mailed to the owner or person in
charge by certified mail, return receipt requested. Upon failure of the owner
or person in charge to pay within 30 days the amount of the statement
provided, the Village Manager shall make a written return to the County
Auditor of the village's action, together with the statement of the costs to
take down and remove the tower, and such amounts shall be entered upon the
tax duplicate as an assessment for taking down and removing the tower and be
a lien upon such owner's land from and after the date of entry, and shall be
collected as other taxes and returned to the village with the general fund
settlements.



(Ord. 1997-22, passed 12-8-97)  Penalty, see § 157.99



§ 157.09  PROHIBITIONS.



   (A)   No cellular or wireless communications tower shall be
permitted on any lot on which any non-conforming building or structure is
located or on which any non-conforming use or activity is occurring without
first obtaining permissions from the Village Zoning Board of Appeals.



   (B)   No cellular or wireless communications tower shall be
constructed, replaced, or altered without first obtaining an applicable
building permit.



   (C)   A cellular or wireless communication antenna or communication
site shall not be placed, operated, constructed, affixed or otherwise located
within the village except as allowed and permitted by this chapter.



   (D)   No tower shall be erected or maintained on the French Park
site unless and until the entity proposing to erect and maintain such tower
shall have entered into an agreement with the Valley Band Radio Network
("Network") for the co-use of such tower on terms reasonably satisfactory to
the Network including provisions respecting the use of the tower by the
Network in the event the erector chooses to discontinue its operations on
such tower.



   (E)   The Planning Commission shall have the power to authorize on
appeal in specific cases any variances from the terms of this chapter as will
not be contrary to the public interest.



(Ord. 1997-22, passed 12-8-97)  Penalty, see § 157.99



§ 157.99  PENALTY.



   (A)   Any person, firm or corporation who constructs a cellular or
wireless communications support structure or a cellular or wireless
communications tower in violation of any provisions of this chapter or the
Zoning Code shall be fined not more than $10,000.



   (B)   Except as otherwise provided herein, any person, firm or
corporation who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply
with, or who resists the enforcement of any provisions of this chapter, shall
be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree for each offense or violation.
Each and every day that an offense or violation continues shall constitute a
separate offense.



(Ord. 1997-22, passed 12-8-97)



CHAPTER 158:  ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEMS



Section



General Provisions



   158.01   Purpose



   158.02   Definitions



   158.03   Accessory structures



   158.04   Commercial generation prohibited



   158.05   Maintenance



   158.06   Permit required



   158.07   Compliance



Solar Energy Systems



   158.15   Location



   158.16   Signage



   158.17   Design



   158.18   Exemptions



Geothermal Energy Systems



   158.30   Location



   158.31   Nuisance



   158.32   Excavation notice



Wind Energy Systems



   158.40   Residential use



   158.41   Location



   158.42   Design



   158.43   Maintenance



   158.44   Nuisance



   158.45   Insurance/liability



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 158.01  PURPOSE.



   It is the purpose of this chapter, known as "Alternative Energy
Systems," to accommodate the need for alternative energy systems in the
village for the generation of power through renewable resources such as
solar, geothermal, and wind, while regulating their location and number and
otherwise minimizing their adverse impacts on neighboring properties.



(Ord. O-2010-20, passed 11-8-10)



§ 158.02  DEFINITIONS.



   The definitions set forth in § 154.02 are applicable to this chapter
and are incorporated herein. The following definitions shall also apply to
this chapter.  Where there is a conflicting provision, the definitions set
forth in this chapter shall control.



   ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEM.  Any energy system using renewable,
non-fossil fuels to generate power, including but not limited to solar,
geothermal, and wind.



   GENERATION OF POWER FOR COMMERCIAL PURPOSES.  The generation of more
than twice as much energy as used annually by the subject property upon which
an alternative energy system is installed.



   GEOTHERMAL ENERGY SYSTEMS (GES).  A system that extracts heat from the
earth by an open or closed system. An open system typically utilizes a well
that is drilled to extract ambient tepid water, whereby the system extracts
the heat and returns the water to the earth through the well. A closed system
is normally a network of pipe or tubing that circulates water to transfer the
heat from the earth to the liquid within the closed loop, whereby the system
extracts the hear and recycles the liquid to repeat the cycle.



   NON-RESIDENTIAL ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEM.  An alternative energy
system which is an accessory use to a lawful non-residential use in any
zoning district.



   OWNER.  The record owner of the real property upon which an
alternative energy system is installed or maintained.



   RESIDENTIAL ALTERNATIVE ENERGY SYSTEM.  An alternative energy system
which is an accessory use to a lawful residential use in any zoning district.



   SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEM (SES).  An energy system and all associated
equipment which converts solar energy to usable thermal, mechanical,
chemical, or electrical energy to meet all or part of a structure's energy
requirements, including but not limited to the use of solar panels to heat
water or air, or otherwise generate electric power.



   SOLAR PANEL.  A single photovoltaic panel or a group of photovoltaic
panels containing one or more receptive cells, the purpose of which is to
convert solar energy into usable thermal, mechanical, chemical, or electrical
energy.



   WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS (WECS).  Any device, such as a wind
charger, windmill, or wind turbine, and associated facilities including the
support structure of the system such as a tower, that converts wind energy
into mechanical or electrical energy.



(Ord. O-2010-20, passed 11-8-10)



§ 158.03  ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.



   Unless otherwise indicated in this chapter, alternative energy systems,
including but not necessarily limited to GES, SES, and WECS, are permitted in
all zoning districts as accessory structures pursuant to the Zoning Code,
including but not limited to §§ 154.12 and 154.25.



(Ord. O-2010-20, passed 11-8-10)



§ 158.04  COMMERCIAL GENERATION PROHIBITED.



   The installation or maintenance of an alternative energy system shall
be to provide power for the principal use of the property upon which the
system is located and shall not be for the generation of power for commercial
purposes. This provision shall not prohibit the sale of excess power
generated from time to time from an alternative energy system.



(Ord. O-2010-20, passed 11-8-10)



§ 158.05  MAINTENANCE.



   All alternative energy systems shall be maintained by the owner of the
property upon which the system is installed. This chapter shall be enforced
consistent with the Property Maintenance Code as it applies to accessory
structures, including but not limited to § 159.167.  This provision shall
not be construed to abolish or impair additional remedies of the village or
its officers or agents relating to the health, safety, and welfare of the
public and village residents.



(Ord. O-2010-20, passed 11-8-10)



§ 158.06  PERMIT REQUIRED.



   The installation of any alternative energy system, or the replacement
or alteration of more than 50% of an existing alternative energy system,
shall require a permit from the village to be considered and administered by
the Board of Zoning Appeals.



(Ord. O-2010-20, passed 11-8-10)



§ 158.07  COMPLIANCE.



   The owner of the property upon which an alternative energy system is
installed shall ensure that the design, installation, and maintenance of such
systems comply with all applicable regulations of the Hamilton County
Building Department, state, and federal regulations, as well as obtain all
required permits and approvals from the village. The installation or
substantial improvement or change to an alternative energy system.



(Ord. O-2010-20, passed 11-8-10)



SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS



§ 158.15  LOCATION.



   (A)   Roof mounted systems.  Roof mounted solar energy systems
shall not extend beyond the existing roof (width and height) of the structure
to which they are attached.  Roof mounted systems shall not exceed the
height of the roof line on a pitched roof; SES may project vertically up to
five feet above a flat roof line.  Roof mounted systems are not permitted in
a front yard or on the front roof plane of a structure.



   (B)   Ground mounted systems.



      (1)   Ground mounted SES shall be located in a side or rear
yard only.  Solar energy systems will not be permitted in front yards and
shall not extend beyond the front of the building.



      (2)   Ground mounted SES shall maintain the setbacks required
for accessory structures from property lines, and shall not be located in a
platted easement.  The side yard setback shall apply to all ground mounted
SES whether measuring from a side or rear lot line.



      (3)   Ground mounted solar panels shall not exceed eight feet
in height.



      (4)   Ground mounted solar panels shall be fully screened from
adjacent properties by fencing or structures (detached garages, other
permitted accessory structures, etc.) or landscaping.



   (C)   Solar panel installation and arrangement. Solar panels shall
be installed and arranged so as to avoid unreasonable glare projected onto
neighboring properties.



(Ord. O-2010-20, passed 11-8-10)



§ 158.16  SIGNAGE.



   Solar energy systems shall not be used for displaying any advertising
except for reasonable identification of the manufacturer or operator of the
system.  In no case shall any identification be visible from a property line.



(Ord. O-2010-20, passed 11-8-10)



§ 158.17  DESIGN.



   To the extent a solar energy system cannot be screened, the design of
solar energy systems shall, to the extent reasonably possible, use materials,
colors, and textures that will blend the systems into the natural setting and
existing environment.



(Ord. O-2010-20, passed 11-8-10)



§ 158.18  EXEMPTIONS.



   Solar panels less than two square feet in area and those installed
within the right-of-way by a utility company or the village, and approved by
the village, are not subject to the regulations set forth above.  For panels
less than two square feet in area, all panels on the same lot shall be
combined and treated as if they formed a single panel for purposes of
determining their size and whether they fall under this exemption.



(Ord. O-2010-20, passed 11-8-10)



GEOTHERMAL ENERGY SYSTEMS



§ 158.30  LOCATION.



   Geothermal energy systems shall not be located within ten feet of any
property line, utility lines, or right-of-way.  Geothermal energy systems
located underground may be permitted in the front yard.



(Ord. O-2010-20, passed 11-8-10)



§ 158.31  NUISANCE.



   Geothermal energy systems shall not cause a nuisance to any neighboring
property, including but not limited to any unreasonable noise, heat,
vibration, or other such adverse effects.



(Ord. O-2010-20, passed 11-8-10)



§ 158.32  EXCAVATION NOTICE.



   It shall be the responsibility of the owner of the property upon which
any part of a GES is installed underground to identify the presence and
location of GES facilities and equipment to any contractor, utility, or other
person when appropriate, including but not limited to any time when the owner
has reasonable notice that any excavation will occur within ten feet of any
part of the GES.



(Ord. O-2010-20, passed 11-8-10)



WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS



§ 158.40  RESIDENTIAL USE.



   A wind energy conversion system (WECS) is not permitted in a
residential area. A WECS for commercial properties is only permitted as a
conditional use to be reviewed by the Board of Zoning Appeals.



(Ord. O-2010-20, passed 11-8-10)



§ 158.41  LOCATION.



   (A)   A WECS shall be placed away from any property line or above
ground utility line at least as far as the total length of the tower height
plus the blade length plus ten feet.  For example, for a tower 20 feet tall
and a blade length of eight feet, the WECS must be located at least 38 feet
from any property line.



   (B)   The height of any WECS shall be limited to 60 feet.  Taller
structures constitute a conditional use and are to be reviewed by the Board
of Zoning Appeals.



   (C)   WECS shall be located only in the rear or side yards of the
property and shall not extend beyond the front of the primary structure.



   (D)   WECS may only be mounted on the ground. WECS may not be
mounted on the roof of any structure without a conditional use permit from
the Board of Zoning Appeals.



(Ord. O-2010-20, passed 11-8-10)



§ 158.42  DESIGN.



   (A)   Towers shall be monopole towers. Other types of towers, such
as lattice towers and guyed towers, may be acceptable as a conditional use to
be reviewed by the Board of Zoning Appeals.



   (B)   All towers shall be hot-dipped galvanized, chemically cleaned,
and painted with two coats of rust-inhibitive enamel.



   (C)   All advertising and identification of any kind on the WECS is
prohibited except for applicable warning and equipment information signage
required by the manufacturer or by federal, state or local regulations.



   (D)   Lighting shall be limited only to that required by the Federal
Aviation Administration.



   (E)   The tower must not encourage climbing.  There shall be no
rungs or ladders at the bottom ten feet of the tower.



(Ord. O-2010-20, passed 11-8-10)



§ 158.43  MAINTENANCE.



   (A)   All WECS shall be kept in good repair and free from rust,
damaged supports, framework or other components.



   (B)   All abandoned or unused WECS shall be removed within six
months of the cessation of operations unless an extension is granted by the
Board of Zoning Appeals.  After the WECS is removed, the owner or operator
shall restore the site to its original, or to an improved, condition.



   (C)   The village is not responsible for the abandonment of a
WECS.  The owner of the property upon which a WECS is installed is
responsible for removal or repair of the WECS.



(Ord. O-2010-20, passed 11-8-10)



§ 158.44  NUISANCE.



   (A)   WECS shall not cause a nuisance to any neighboring property,
including but not limited to any unreasonable noise, heat, vibration, glare,
or other such adverse effects.



   (B)   The noise level generated by a WECS shall not exceed 50
decibels measured at a distance from the base of the unit equivalent to the
height of the unit. The height of the unit is calculated by adding the height
of the tower plus the length of the blade.



(Ord. O-2010-20, passed 11-8-10)



§ 158.45  INSURANCE/LIABILITY.



   The owner of the real property where a WECS is installed must maintain
liability insurance. Proof of liability insurance is a condition of approval
by the Board of Zoning Appeals. The owner shall provide the village with a
copy of a current general liability insurance certificate on a continued, up
to date basis, indicating policy limits of at least $500,000/ $1,000,000 (per
occurrence/aggregate limit), and listing the village as an additional
insured. As a condition of approval, the owner shall indemnify and defend the
village and hold the village harmless for any claim or action pertaining to
the WECS on the owner's property.



(Ord. O-2010-20, passed 11-8-10)



CHAPTER 159:  PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE



Section



General Provisions



   159.001   Title



   159.002   Purpose



   159.003   Intent



   159.004   Severability



   159.005   Definitions



Applicability



   159.015   Applicability



   159.016   Maintenance



   159.017   Application of other codes



   159.018   Existing remedies



   159.019   Workmanship



   159.020   Requirements not covered by code



Duties and Powers of Enforcement Officer



   159.030   Enforcement officers



   159.031   Rule making authority



   159.032   Inspections



   159.033   Right of entry



   159.034   Identification



   159.035   Notices and orders



   159.036   Department records



   159.037   Coordination of inspections



Approval



   159.050   Modifications



   159.051   Alternative materials; methods and equipment



   159.052   Required testing



Violations



   159.060   Unlawful acts



   159.061   Notice of violation



   159.062   Prosecution of violation



   159.063   Penalties



   159.064   Abatement of violation



Notices and Orders



   159.080   Notice to person responsible



   159.081   Notice



   159.082   Method of service



   159.083   Abatement and remediation



   159.084   Transfer of ownership



Unsafe Structures and Equipment



   159.090   General



   159.091   Closing of vacant structures



   159.092   Notice



   159.093   Placarding



   159.094   Prohibited occupancy



Emergency Measures



   159.100   Imminent danger



   159.101   Temporary safeguards



   159.102   Emergency repairs



   159.103   Costs of emergency repairs



   159.104   Hearing



Demolition



   159.115   General



   159.116   Notices and orders



   159.117   Failure to comply



   159.118   Salvage materials



Means of Appeal



   159.130   Application for appeal



   159.131   Membership of Board



   159.132   Notice of meeting



   159.133   Open hearing



   159.134   Board decision



   159.135   Court review



   159.136   Stays of enforcement



General Maintenance Requirements



   159.145   Scope



   159.146   Responsibility



   159.147   Vacant structures and land



Exterior Property Areas



   159.160   Sanitation



   159.161   Grading and drainage



   159.162   Drainage swales



   159.163   Sidewalks and driveways



   159.164   Weeds



   159.165   Rodent harborage



   159.166   Exhaust vents



   159.167   Accessory structures



   159.168   Motor vehicles



   159.169   Construction equipment and materials



   159.170   Lawn and garden equipment and trailers



   159.171   Trade or business equipment



   159.172   Toys, recreational and sports equipment



   159.173   Defacement of property



Swimming Pools, Spas and Hot Tubs



   159.180   Swimming pools



Exterior Structure



   159.190   General



   159.191   Protective treatment



   159.192   Premises identification



   159.193   Structural members



   159.194   Foundation walls



   159.195   Exterior walls



   159.196   Roofs and drainage



   159.197   Decorative features



   159.198   Overhang extensions



   159.199   Stairways, decks, porches and balconies



   159.200   Chimneys and towers



   159.201   Handrails and guards



   159.202   Window, skylight and door frames



   159.203   Doors



   159.204   Basement hatchways



   159.205   Guards for basement windows



   159.206   Building security



Interior Structure



   159.215   General



   159.216   Structural members



   159.217   Interior surfaces



   159.218   Stairs and walking surfaces



   159.219   Handrails and guards



   159.220   Interior doors



Rubbish and Garbage



   159.230   Accumulation of rubbish or garbage



   159.231   Disposal of rubbish



   159.232   Disposal of garbage



   159.233   Storage



   159.234   Curbside pickup



Extermination



   159.245   Infestation



   159.246   Mosquito control



   159.247   Owner



   159.248   Single occupant



   159.249   Multiple occupancy



   159.250   Occupant



GENERAL PROVISIONS



§ 159.001  TITLE.



   These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of
Amberley Village, Ohio, also referred to herein as "this code."



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.002  PURPOSE.



   The purpose of this exterior property maintenance code is to protect
the public health, safety, and general welfare as it pertains to premises and
buildings used for residential, commercial and industrial purposes.  This
protection is hereafter provided by:



   (A)   Establishing minimum standards for maintaining residential,
commercial and industrial environmental quality to preserve and achieve the
presentable appearance of existing structures and premises; avoiding
blighting effects of the substandard maintenance of structures and premises
and the negative impact on the value of surrounding properties; and
eliminating hazardous conditions;



   (B)   Fixing the responsibilities of owners, operators and occupants
of structures and their premises; and



   (C)   Providing for administration, enforcement, and penalties.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.003  INTENT.



   This code shall be construed to secure its expressed intent, which is
to insure public health, safety and welfare insofar as they are affected by
the continued occupancy and maintenance of structures and premises. 
Existing structures and premises that do not comply with these provisions
shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of health and safety
as required herein.  Repairs, alterations, additions to and change of
occupancy in existing buildings shall comply with the Amberley Village
Building Code.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.004  SEVERABILITY.



   If a section, subsection, sentence or clause or phrase of this code is,
for any reason, held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect
the validity of the remaining portions of this code.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.005  DEFINITIONS.



   (A)   Scope.  Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following
terms shall, for the purposes of this code, have the meanings shown in this
chapter.



   (B)   Interchangeability.  Words stated in the present tense
include the future; words stated in the masculine gender include the feminine
and neuter; the singular number includes the plural and the plural, the
singular.



   (C)   Terms defined in other code.  Where terms are not defined in
this code and are defined in other codes that apply to the village, such
terms shall have the meanings ascribed to them as in those codes.



   (D)   Terms not defined.  Where terms are not defined through the
methods authorized by this section, such terms shall have ordinarily accepted
meanings such as the context implies.



   (E)   Parts.  Whenever the words DWELLING UNIT, DWELLING, PREMISES,
BUILDING, ROOMING HOUSE, ROOMING UNIT, HOUSEKEEPING UNIT, or STORY are stated
in this code, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the
words OR ANY PART THEREOF.



   (F)   General definitions.



      ACCESSORY STRUCTURE.  A structure which is subordinate to and
incidental to that of the main building on the same lot.



      APPROVED.  Approved by the Enforcement Officer.



      BASEMENT.  That portion of a building which is partly or
completely below grade.



      BATHROOM.  A room containing plumbing fixtures including a
bathtub or shower.



      BEDROOM.  Any room or space used or intended to be used for
sleeping purposes.



      BUILDING.  Any permanent or stationary structure having a roof
supported by columns or walls.



      BUILDING CODE.  The most current addition of the State of Ohio
Building Code, or such other code as may be officially designated by the
Hamilton County Commissioners for the regulation of construction, alteration,
addition, repair, removal, demolition, use, location, occupancy, and
maintenance of all buildings and structures.



      CONDEMN.  To adjudge unfit for occupancy.



      DWELLING UNIT.  A single unit providing complete, independent
living facilities for one or more persons, including permanent provisions for
living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.



      EASEMENT.  That portion of land or property reserved for present
or future use by a person or agency other than the legal fee owner(s) of the
property. The easement shall be permitted to be for use under, on or above
said lot or lots.



      ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.  The official who is charged with the
administration and enforcement of this code, or any duly authorized
representative.



      EXTERIOR PROPERTY. The open space on the premises and on
adjoining property under the control of owners or operators of such premises.



      EXTERMINATION.  The control and elimination of insects, rats or
other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making
inaccessible materials that serve as their food; by poison spraying,
fumigating, and trapping or any other approved pest elimination methods.



      GARBAGE.  The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the
handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food.



      GRADED.  The leveling of land to intended height by removing
high ground and filling low ground. All dirt fill shall be brought to the
same level.



      GUARD.  A building component or a system of building components
located at or near the open sides of elevated walking surfaces that minimizes
the possibility of a fall from the walking surface to a lower level.



      HABITABLE SPACE.  Space in a structure for living, sleeping,
eating or cooking. Bathrooms, toilet rooms, closets, halls, storage or
utility spaces, and similar areas are not considered habitable spaces.



      HOUSEKEEPING UNIT.  A room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable space equipped and intended to be used for living, sleeping,
cooking and eating which does not contain, within such a unit, a toilet,
lavatory and bathtub or shower.



      IMMINENT DANGER.  A condition which could cause serious or
life-threatening injury or death at any time.



      INFESTATION.  The presence, within or contiguous to, a structure
or premise of insects, rats or other vermin or other pests.



      INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE.  A vehicle which cannot be driven upon
the public streets for reasons including, but not limited to, being
unlicensed, wrecked, abandoned, in a state of disrepair, or incapable of
being moved under its own power.



      LABELED.  Devices, equipment, appliances, or materials to which
has been affixed a label, seal, symbol or other identifying mark of a
nationally recognized testing laboratory, inspection agency or other
organization concerned with product evaluation that maintains periodic
inspection of the production of the above-labeled items and by whose label
the manufacturer attests to compliance with applicable nationally recognized
standards.



      LET FOR OCCUPANCY OR LET.  To permit, provide or offer
possession or occupancy of a dwelling, dwelling unit, rooming unit, building,
premises or structure by a person who is or is not the legal owner of record
thereof, pursuant to a written or unwritten lease, agreement or license, or
pursuant to a recorded or unrecorded agreement of contract for the sale of
land.



      OCCUPANCY.  The purpose for which a building or portion thereof
is utilized or occupied.



      OCCUPANT.  Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or
having possession of a space within a building.



      OPENABLE AREA.  That part of a window, skylight or door which is
available for unobstructed ventilation and which opens directly to the
outdoors.



      OPERATOR.  Any person who has charge, care or control of a
structure or premises which is let or offered for occupancy.



      OWNER.  Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having
a legal or equitable interest in the property; or recorded in the official
records of the state, county or municipality as holding title to the
property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian
of the estate of any such person, and the executor or administrator of the
estate of such person if ordered to take possession of real property by a
court.



      PERSON.  An individual, corporation, partnership or any group
acting as a unit.



      PREMISES.  A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public
way, including any structures thereon.



      PUBLIC WAY.  Any street, alley or similar parcel of land
essentially unobstructed from the ground to the sky, which is deeded,
dedicated or otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for public use.



      ROOMING HOUSE.  A building arranged or occupied for lodging,
with or without meals, for compensation and not occupied as a one- or two-
family dwelling.



      ROOMING UNIT.  Any room or group of rooms forming a single
habitable unit occupied or intended to be occupied for sleeping or living,
but not for cooking purposes.



      RUBBISH.  Combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except
garbage; the term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal,
coke and other combustible materials, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood,
excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals,
mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials.



      STRICT LIABILITY OFFENSE.  An offense in which the prosecution
in a legal proceeding is not required to prove criminal intent as a part of
its case. It is enough to prove that the defendant either did an act which
was prohibited, or failed to do an act which the defendant was legally
required to do.



      STRUCTURE.  That which is built or constructed or a portion
thereof.



      TENANT.  A person, corporation, partnership or group, whether or
not the legal owner of record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a
unit.



      TOILET ROOM.  A room containing a water closet or urinal, but
not a bathtub or shower.



      VENTILATION.  The natural or mechanical process of supplying
conditioned or unconditioned air to, or removing such air from, any space.



      WOODLAND AREA.  An area in its natural state populated by trees
and other forest growth.



      WORKMANLIKE.  Executed in a skilled manner, e.g. generally
plumb, level, square, in line, undamaged and without marring adjacent work.



      YARD.  An open space on the same lot with a structure.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



APPLICABILITY



§ 159.015 APPLICABILITY.



   The provisions of this code shall apply to all matters affecting or
relating to structures and premises, as set forth in §§ 159.001 through
159.004.  Where, in a specific case, different sections of this code specify
different requirements, the most restrictive shall govern.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.016  MAINTENANCE.



   Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by this code or a
previous regulation or code under which the structure or premises was
constructed, altered or repaired shall be maintained in good working order.
No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any service, facility, equipment
or utility which is required under this section to be removed from or shut
off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, except for such temporary
interruption as necessary while repairs or alterations are in progress.
Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner or the owner's designated
agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures and
premises.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.017  APPLICATION OF OTHER CODES.



   Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of
occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of
the Ohio and the Amberley Village Codes. Nothing in this code shall be
construed to cancel, modify or set aside any provision of the Amberley
Village Zoning Code.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.018  EXISTING REMEDIES.



   The provisions in this code shall not be construed to abolish or impair
existing remedies of the jurisdiction or its officers or agencies relating to
the removal or demolition of any structure which is dangerous, unsafe or
unsanitary.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.019  WORKMANSHIP.



   Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations which are
caused directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this code shall be
executed and installed in a workmanlike manner and installed in accordance
with the manufacture's installation instructions.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.020  REQUIREMENTS NOT COVERED BY CODE.



   Requirements necessary for the strength, stability or proper operation
of an existing fixture, structure or equipment, or for the public safety,
health and general welfare, not specifically covered by this code, shall be
determined by the Enforcement Officer.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



DUTIES AND POWERS OF ENFORCEMENT OFFICER



§ 159.030  ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.



   The Amberley Village Council shall assign the duties of administering
and enforcing this code to an Enforcement Officer.  An Enforcement Officer
may call upon any department, division or contractor of the village for
whatever assistance may be necessary in the enforcement of this code.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.031  RULE MAKING AUTHORITY.



   The Enforcement Officer shall have authority as necessary in the
interest of public health, safety and general welfare, to adopt and
promulgate rules and procedures; to interpret and implement the provisions of
this code; to secure the intent thereof; and to designate requirements
applicable because of local climatic or other conditions. Such rules shall
not have the effect of waiving structural or fire performance requirements
specifically provided for in this code, or of violating accepted engineering
methods involving public safety.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.032  INSPECTIONS.



   The Enforcement Officer shall make all of the required inspections, or
shall accept reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. All
reports of such inspections shall be in writing and be certified by a
responsible officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual.
The Enforcement Officer is authorized to engage such expert opinion as deemed
necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the
approval of the appointing authority.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.033  RIGHT OF ENTRY.



   The Enforcement Officer is authorized to enter the structure or
premises at reasonable times to inspect, subject to constitutional
restrictions on unreasonable searches and seizures. If entry is refused or
not obtained, the Enforcement Officer is authorized to pursue recourse as
provided by law.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.034  IDENTIFICATION.



   The Enforcement Officer shall carry proper identification when
inspecting structures or premises in the performance of duties under this
code.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.035  NOTICES AND ORDERS.



   The Enforcement Officer shall issue all necessary notices or orders to
ensure compliance with this code.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.036  DEPARTMENT RECORDS.



   The Enforcement Officer shall keep official records of all business and
activities of the department specified in the provisions of this code.  Such
records shall be retained as long as required by the public records retention
regulations of Ohio.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.037  COORDINATION OF INSPECTIONS.



   Whenever in the enforcement of this code or another code or ordinance,
the responsibility of more than one Enforcement Officer of the jurisdiction
is involved, it shall be the duty of the Enforcement Officers involved to
coordinate their inspections and administrative orders as fully as
practicable so that the owners and occupants of the structure shall not be
subjected to visits by numerous inspectors or multiple or conflicting orders.
Whenever an inspector from any agency or department observes an apparent or
actual violation of some provision of some law, ordinance or code not within
the inspector's authority to enforce, the inspector shall report the findings
to the Enforcement Officer having jurisdiction.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



APPROVAL



§ 159.050  MODIFICATIONS.



   Whenever there are practicable difficulties involved in carrying out
the provisions of this code, the Enforcement Officer shall have authority to
grant modifications for individual cases, provided the Enforcement Officer
shall first find that special individual reason makes the strict letter of
this code impracticable and the modification is in compliance with the intent
and purpose of this code and that such modification does not lessen health,
life and fire safety requirements. The details of action granting
modifications shall be recorded and entered in the department files.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.051  ALTERNATIVE MATERIALS; METHODS AND EQUIPMENT.



   The provisions of this code are not intended to prevent the
installation of any material or to prohibit any method of construction not
specifically prescribed by this code, provided that any such alternative has
been approved.  An alternative material or method of construction may be
approved where the Enforcement Officer finds that the proposed design is
satisfactory and complies with the intent of the provisions of this code.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.052  REQUIRED TESTING.



   Whenever there is insufficient evidence of compliance with the
provisions of this code, or evidence that a material or method does not
conform to the requirements of this code, or in order to substantiate claims
for alternative materials or methods, the Enforcement Officer shall have the
authority to require tests to be made as evidence of compliance at no expense
to the jurisdiction.



   (A)   Test methods. Test methods shall be as specified in this code
or by other recognized test standards. In the absence of recognized and
accepted test methods, the Enforcement Officer shall be permitted to approve
appropriate testing procedures by an approved agency.



   (B)   Test reports.  Reports of tests shall be retained by the
Enforcement Officer for the period required for retention of public records.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



VIOLATIONS



§ 159.060  UNLAWFUL ACTS.



   It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to be in
conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.061  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.



   The Enforcement Officer shall serve a notice of violation or order in
accordance with §§ 159.080 through 159.084.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.062  PROSECUTION OF VIOLATION.



   Any person failing to comply with a notice of violation or order served
in accordance with §§ 159.080 through 159.084 shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor, and the violation shall be deemed a strict liability offense. If
the notice of violation is not complied with, the Enforcement Officer shall
institute the appropriate proceeding at law or in equity to restrain, correct
or abate such violation, or to require the removal or termination of the
unlawful occupancy of the structure in violation of the provisions of this
code or of the order or direction made pursuant thereto. Any action taken by
the authority having jurisdiction on such premises shall be charged against
the real estate upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon
such real estate.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07; Am. Ord. 2008-15, passed 7-14-08)



§ 159.063  PENALTIES.



   (A)   Violation of chapter. Any person who shall violate a provision
of this chapter, or fail to comply therewith, or with any of the requirements
thereof, or with the orders or notices issued under this chapter, shall be
prosecuted within the limits provided by state or local laws. If due notice
has been served, each day that a violation continues after the time to remedy
the violation expires shall be deemed a separate offense.



   (B)   Repeat offender.  For each offense after the first violation
of this chapter in any calendar year, the property owner shall be cited and
fined $150 as a repeat offender. Each repeat offense may be a violation of a
new and separate provision of this chapter, or of the same provision as any
prior offense. For the purposes of this division, notwithstanding division
(A) of this section, a repeat offense shall not be deemed to occur each day
the violation exists. Instead, a repeat offense is deemed to occur upon each
additional notice issued by the village if the owner does not remedy the
violation within the time prescribed by the notice. This penalty supplements
and is in addition to any other penalty provided for in this code.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07; Am. Ord. 2013-02, passed 3-11-13)



§ 159.064  ABATEMENT OF VIOLATION.



   The imposition of the penalties herein prescribed shall not preclude
the legal officer of the jurisdiction from instituting appropriate action to
restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a
building, structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business
or utilization of the building, structure or premises.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



NOTICES AND ORDERS



§ 159.080  NOTICE TO PERSON RESPONSIBLE.



   Whenever the Enforcement Officer determines that there has been a
violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has
occurred, notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in §§ 159.081 and
159.082 to the person responsible for the violation as specified in this
code. Notices for condemnation procedures shall also comply with § 159.092.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.081  NOTICE.



   The notice prescribed in § 159.080 shall be in accordance with all of
the following:



   (A)   Be in writing.



   (B)   Include a description of the real estate sufficient for
identification.



   (C)   Include a statement of the violation or violations and why the
notice is being issued.



   (D)   Include a correction order allowing a reasonable time to make
the repairs and improvements required to bring the property into compliance
with the provisions of this code. Violations of § 159.164 shall be brought
into compliance within five days of service of notice.



   (E)   Inform the property owner of the right to appeal.



   (F)   Include a statement of the right to file a lien in accordance
with § 159.062.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07; Am. Ord. 2013-02, passed 3-11-13)



§ 159.082  METHOD OF SERVICE.



   (A)   Notice as provided in this chapter, including but not
necessarily limited to notices issued under §§ 159.035 or 159.080, shall be
deemed to be properly served if a copy thereof is delivered by one of the
following methods:



      (1)   Delivered personally;



      (2)   Sent by certified mail addressed to the subject
property; or



      (3)   Sent by regular first class mail to the subject property
and posted on the front door or other conspicuous place on or about the
structure.



   (B)   Notices sent by mail, regular or certified, are deemed to be
served three days after the mail is sent. If the mailing address indicated on
the County Auditor's website indicates a different address than the subject
property, duplicate notice shall be sent by regular first class mail to that
address, as well.



   (C)   If the owner of the subject property as shown on the records
of the County Auditor is not a resident of the village, in addition to the
notice required under divisions (A) and (B) above, notice shall also be sent
to the owner by regular mail to the record address. If the mailing address is
unknown, notice shall be published once in a newspaper of general circulation
in Hamilton County, with notice to be deemed served on the date of
publication.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07; Am. Ord. 2013-02, passed 3-11-13)



§ 159.083  ABATEMENT AND REMEDIATION.



   (A)   In addition to any other remedy provided for in this code,
upon a failure to comply with a notice of violation, a duly authorized
employee or contractor hired by the village shall be authorized to enter upon
the subject property to remedy the violation. The costs of such remediation
shall be paid by the owner of the property.



   (B)   A statement of the cost of remediation shall be delivered to
the owner in accordance with § 159.082. Remediation costs may include the
cost of personnel, including wages, benefits, and other compensation,
reasonable charges for equipment used, and reasonable administrative costs.
An administrative fee of 15% of the remediation costs, or $50, whichever is
greater, shall be added to the costs for which the owner is responsible.



   (C)   If the remediation costs are not paid within 30 days after
service of the statement, the village shall make a written return to the
County Auditor pursuant to R.C. § 731.54. Such amounts shall be entered upon
the tax duplicate, shall be a lien upon such lands from the date of the
entry, and shall be collected as other taxes and returned to village's
General Fund.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07; Am. Ord. 2013-02, passed 3-11-13)



§ 159.084  TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP.



   It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dwelling unit or structure
who has received a compliance order or upon whom a notice of violation has
been served, to sell, transfer, mortgage, lease or otherwise dispose of such
dwelling unit or structure to another until the provisions of the compliance
order or notice of violation have been complied with, or until such owner
shall first furnish the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee a true copy
of any compliance order or notice of violation issued by the Enforcement
Officer and shall furnish to the Enforcement Officer a signed and notarized
statement from the grantee, transferee, mortgagee or lessee, acknowledging
the receipt of such compliance order or notice of violation and fully
accepting the responsibility without condition for making the corrections or
repairs required by such compliance order or notice of violation.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



UNSAFE STRUCTURES AND EQUIPMENT



§ 159.090  GENERAL.



   When a structure or equipment is found by the Enforcement Officer to be
unsafe, or when a structure is found unfit for human occupancy, or is found
unlawful, such structure shall be condemned pursuant to the provisions of
this code.



   (A)   Unsafe structures.  An unsafe structure is one that is found
to be dangerous to the life, health, property or safety of the public or the
occupants of the structure by not providing minimum safeguards to protect or
warn occupants in the event of fire, or because such structure contains
unsafe equipment or is so damaged, decayed, dilapidated, structurally unsafe
or of such faulty construction or unstable foundation, that partial or
complete is collapse possible.



   (B)   Unsafe equipment.  Unsafe equipment includes any boiler,
heating equipment, elevator, moving stairway, electrical wiring or device,
flammable liquid containers or other equipment on the premises or within the
structure which is in such disrepair or condition that such equipment is a
hazard to life, health, property or safety of the public or occupants of the
premises or structure.



   (C)   Structure unfit for human occupancy.  A structure is unfit
for human occupancy whenever the Enforcement Officer finds that such
structure is unsafe, unlawful or, because of the degree to which the
structure is in disrepair or lacks maintenance, is unsanitary, vermin or rat
infested, contains filth and contamination, or lacks ventilation,
illumination, sanitary or heating facilities or other essential equipment
required by this code, or because the location of the structure constitutes a
hazard to the occupants of the structure or to the public.



   (D)   Unlawful structure.  An unlawful structure is one found in
whole or in part to be occupied by more persons than permitted under this
code, or was erected, altered or occupied contrary to law.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.091  CLOSING OF VACANT STRUCTURES.



   If the structure is vacant and unfit for human habitation and
occupancy, and is not in danger of structural collapse, the Enforcement
Officer is authorized to post a placard of condemnation on the premises and
order the structure closed up so as not to be an attractive nuisance. Upon
failure of the owner to close up the premises within the time specified in
the order, the Enforcement Officer shall cause the premises to be closed and
secured through any available public agency or by contract or arrangement by
private persons and the cost thereof shall be charged against the real estate
upon which the structure is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate
and may be collected by any other legal resource.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.092  NOTICE.



   Whenever the Enforcement Officer has condemned a structure or equipment
under the provisions of this section, notice shall be posted in a conspicuous
place in or about the structure affected by such notice and served on the
owner or the person or persons responsible for the structure or equipment in
accordance with § 159.082.  If the notice pertains to equipment, it shall
also be placed on the condemned equipment.  The notice shall be in the form
prescribed in § 159.081.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.093  PLACARDING.



   (A)   Placement.  Upon failure of the owner or person responsible
to comply with the notice provisions within the time given, the Enforcement
Officer shall post on the premises or on defective equipment a placard
bearing the word "Condemned" and a statement of the penalties provided for
occupying the premises, operating the equipment or removing the placard.



   (B)   Removal.  The Enforcement Officer shall remove the
condemnation placard whenever the defect or defects upon which the
condemnation and placarding action were based have been eliminated. Any
person who defaces or removes a condemnation placard without the approval of
the Enforcement Officer shall be subject to the penalties provided by this
code.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.094  PROHIBITED OCCUPANCY.



   Any occupied structure condemned and placarded by the Enforcement
Officer shall be vacated as ordered by the Enforcement Officer. Any person
who shall occupy a placarded premises or shall operate placarded equipment,
and any owner or any person responsible for the premises who shall let anyone
occupy a placarded premises or operate placarded equipment shall be liable
for the penalties provided by this code.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



EMERGENCY MEASURES



§ 159.100  IMMINENT DANGER.



   When, in the opinion of the Enforcement Officer, there is imminent
danger of failure or collapse of a building or structure which endangers
life, or when any structure or part of a structure has fallen and life is
endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is actual or
potential danger to the building occupants or those in the proximity of any
structure because of explosives, explosive fumes or vapors or the presence of
toxic fumes, gases or materials, or operation of defective or dangerous
equipment, the Enforcement Officer is hereby authorized and empowered to
order and require the occupants to vacate the premises forthwith. The
Enforcement Officer shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such
structure a notice reading as follows: "This Structure Is Unsafe and Its
Occupancy Has Been Prohibited by the Enforcement Officer." It shall be
unlawful for any person to enter such structure except for the purpose of
securing the structure, making the required repairs, removing the hazardous
condition or of demolishing the same.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.101  TEMPORARY SAFEGUARDS.



   Notwithstanding other provisions of this code, whenever, in the opinion
of the Enforcement Officer, there is imminent danger due to an unsafe
condition, the Enforcement Officer shall order the necessary work to be done,
including the boarding up of openings, to render such structure temporarily
safe whether or not the legal procedure herein described has been instituted;
and shall cause such other action to be taken as the Enforcement Officer
deems necessary to meet such emergency.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.102  EMERGENCY REPAIRS.



   For the purpose of this section, the Enforcement Officer shall employ
the necessary labor and materials to perform the required work as
expeditiously as possible.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.103  COSTS OF EMERGENCY REPAIRS.



   Costs incurred in the performance of emergency work shall be paid by
the village. The legal counsel of the village shall institute appropriate
action against the owner of the premises where the unsafe structure is or was
located for the recovery of such costs.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.104  HEARING.



   Any person ordered to take emergency measures shall comply with such
order forthwith. Any affected person shall thereafter, upon petition directed
to the appeals board, be afforded a hearing as described in this code.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



DEMOLITION



§ 159.115  GENERAL.



   The Enforcement Officer shall order the owner of any premises upon
which is located any structure, which in the Enforcement Officer's judgment
is, dilapidated or has become so out of repair as to be dangerous, unsafe,
unsanitary or otherwise unfit for human habitation or occupancy, and such
that it is unreasonable to repair the structure, to demolish and remove such
structure; or if such structure is capable of being made safe by repairs, to
repair and make safe and sanitary or to demolish and remove at the owner's
option; or where there has been a cessation of normal construction of any
structure for a period of more than one year, to demolish and remove such
structure.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.116  NOTICES AND ORDERS.



   All notices and orders shall comply with §§ 159.080 through 159.084.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.117  FAILURE TO COMPLY.



   If the owner of a premises fails to comply with a demolition order
within the time prescribed, the Enforcement Officer shall cause the structure
to be demolished and removed, either through an available public agency or by
contractor arrangement with private persons, and the cost of such demolition
and removal shall be charged against the real estate upon which the structure
is located and shall be a lien upon such real estate.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.118  SALVAGE MATERIALS.



   When any structure has been ordered demolished and removed, the
governing body or other designated officer under such contract or arrangement
aforesaid shall have the right to sell the salvage and valuable materials at
the highest price obtainable. The net proceeds of such sale, after deducting
the expenses of such demolition and removal, shall be promptly remitted with
a report of such sale or transaction including the items of expense and the
amounts deducted, for the person who is entitled thereto, subject to any
order of a court. If such a surplus does not remain to be turned over, the
report shall state so.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



MEANS OF APPEAL



§ 159.130  APPLICATION FOR APPEAL.



   Any person directly affected by a decision of the Enforcement Officer
or a notice or order issued under this code shall have the right to appeal to
the board of appeals, provided that a written application for appeal is filed
within the time prescribed for compliance with the order or 20 days after the
day the decision, notice or order was served, whichever is less. An
application for appeal shall be based on a claim that the true intent of this
code or the rules legally adopted thereunder have been incorrectly
interpreted, the provisions of this code do not fully apply, or the
requirements of this code are adequately satisfied by other means.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.131  MEMBERSHIP OF BOARD.



   The board of appeals shall consist of a minimum of three members who
are qualified by experience and training to pass on matters pertaining to
property maintenance and who are not employees of the village. The
Enforcement Officer shall be an ex-officio member but shall have no vote on
any matter before the board. The board shall be appointed by the Mayor, and
shall serve staggered and overlapping terms.



   (A)   Alternate members.  The Mayor shall appoint two or more
alternate members who shall be called by the board chairman to hear appeals
during the absence or disqualification of a member. Alternate members shall
possess the qualifications required for board membership.



   (B)   Chair. The board shall annually select one of its members to
serve as chairman.



   (C)   Disqualification of member.  A member shall not hear an
appeal in which that member has a personal, professional or financial
interest.



   (D)   Secretary.  The chief administrative officer shall designate
a qualified person to serve as secretary to the board. The secretary shall
file a detailed record of all proceedings in the office of the chief
administrative officer.



   (E)   Compensation of members.  Members shall serve without
compensation.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.132  NOTICE OF MEETING.



   The board shall meet upon notice from the chairman, within 20 days of
the filing of an appeal, or at stated periodic meetings.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.133  OPEN HEARING.



   (A)   Generally.  All hearings before the board shall be open to
the public. The appellant, the appellant's representative, the Enforcement
Officer and any person whose interests are affected shall be given an
opportunity to be heard. A quorum shall consist of not less than two-thirds
of the board membership.



   (B)   Procedure. The board shall adopt and make available to the
public through the secretary procedures under which a hearing will be
conducted. The procedures shall not require compliance with strict rules of
evidence, but shall mandate that only relevant information be received.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.134  BOARD DECISION.



   The board shall modify or reverse the decision of the Enforcement
Officer only by a concurring vote of a majority of the total number of
appointed board members.



   (A)   Records and copies.  The decision of the board shall be
recorded.  Copies shall be furnished to the appellant and to the Enforcement
Officer.



   (B)   Administration.  The Enforcement Officer shall take action in
accordance with the decision of the board.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.135  COURT REVIEW.



   Any person, whether or not a previous party of the appeal, shall have
the right to apply to the appropriate court for a writ of certiorari to
correct errors of law. Application for review shall be made in the manner and
time required by law following the filing of the decision in the office of
the chief administrative officer.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.136  STAYS OF ENFORCEMENT.



   Appeals of notice and orders (other than imminent danger notices) shall
stay the enforcement of all notices and orders with the exception of notices
and orders to cut grass until the appeal is heard by the appeals board. Any
notice and order to cut grass shall not be stayed by the filing of an appeal.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



GENERAL MAINTENANCE REQUIREMENTS



§ 159.145  SCOPE.



   The provisions of this chapter shall govern the minimum conditions and
the responsibilities of persons for maintenance of structures, equipment and
exterior property.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.146  RESPONSIBILITY.



   The owner of premises shall maintain the structures and exterior
property in compliance with these requirements, except as otherwise provided
for in this code.  A person shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit
another person to occupy premises which are not in a sanitary and safe
condition and which do not comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
Occupants of a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit are
responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition that part of
the dwelling unit, rooming unit, housekeeping unit or premises which they
occupy and control.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.147  VACANT STRUCTURES AND LAND.



   All vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall be
maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided herein
so as not to cause a blighting problem or adversely affect the public health
or safety.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS



§ 159.160  SANITATION.



   All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe
and sanitary condition. The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior
property which such occupant occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary
condition.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.161  GRADING AND DRAINAGE.



   All premises shall be graded and maintained to prevent the erosion of
soil and to prevent the accumulation of stagnant water thereon, or within any
structure located thereon.  Exception:  Approved retention areas and
reservoirs.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.162  DRAINAGE SWALES.



   Swales are to be maintained by the owners of the premises on which they
are located, and at no time will anyone plant shrubs and/or trees, or
discharge, empty, or place any material, fill or waste into any swale so as
to divert or impede drainage flow. Swales should be mowed as part of the
yard. In meadow situations the swales should be mowed less frequently in
order to allow grasses to grow taller to retard runoff and prevent erosion.
Swales in woodland areas should be left in their natural condition leaving
understory growth to retard runoff and prevent erosion.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.163  SIDEWALKS AND DRIVEWAYS.



   All sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, parking spaces and similar
areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair and maintained free from
hazardous conditions.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.164  WEEDS.



   Except for those areas which have been designated as meadowlands by the
Village Council, all premises and exterior property shall be maintained free
from weeds in excess of ten inches. All noxious weeds shall be prohibited.
Weeds shall be defined as all grasses, annual plants and vegetation, other
than trees or shrubs, provided however, this term shall not include
cultivated flowers, decorative grasses and gardens.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07; Am. Ord. 2011-11, passed 8-8-11; Am. Ord.
2013-02, passed 3-11-13)



§ 159.165  RODENT HARBORAGE.



   All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent
harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly
exterminated by approved processes which will not be injurious to human
health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to eliminate
rodent harborage and prevent re-infestation.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.166  EXHAUST VENTS.



   Pipes, ducts, conductors, fans or blowers shall not discharge gasses,
steam, vapor, hot air, grease, smoke, odors or other gaseous or particulate
wastes directly upon abutting or adjacent public or private property.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.167  ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.



   All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences and walls,
shall be maintained structurally sound and in good repair.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.168  MOTOR VEHICLES.



   (A)   Except as provided for in other regulations, no inoperative or
unlicensed motor vehicle shall be parked, kept or stored on any premises, and
no vehicle shall at any time be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair,
or in the process of being stripped or dismantled. Painting of vehicles is
prohibited unless conducted inside an approved spray booth.



   (B)   No motor vehicle shall be parked on the grass or any other
non-paved surface or any place not specifically designed for motor vehicle
traffic or parking at any time, except, motor vehicles may be parked on grass
for a period of time not to exceed six hours for parties, events or religious
observances in which case they may be parked on grass only for the duration
of the party, event or religious observance.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.169  CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT AND MATERIALS.



   No construction equipment or materials may be stored in the front yard
of any premises. Construction equipment and materials must be stored behind
the structure, within zoning setbacks and must not be visible from the
street. Exception: On any construction project for which a building permit
has been issued, construction equipment and materials may be stored in the
front yard of any premises for a period of time not to exceed 72 hours.
Provided, however, if a holiday occurs within said 72 hour period, equipment
may be stored in the front yard of any premises for a period of time not to
exceed 96 hours.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.170  LAWN AND GARDEN EQUIPMENT AND TRAILERS.



   No lawn or garden equipment or trailers of any kind may be stored in
the front or side yard of any premises, but must be stored behind the
structure and within zoning setbacks or in an enclosed outbuilding or
accessory structure.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.171  TRADE OR BUSINESS EQUIPMENT.



   No business equipment may be stored on premises.  Exception: Business
equipment, used in a properly licensed trade or business operated on the
premises, may be stored behind the structure provided that such equipment is
located within the zoning setbacks in an enclosed out building or accessory
structure.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.172  TOYS, RECREATIONAL AND SPORTS EQUIPMENT.



   No toys, recreational or sports equipment may be stored in the front
yard of any premises for a period in excess of 72 hours.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.173  DEFACEMENT OF PROPERTY.



   (A)   No person shall willfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or
deface any exterior surface of any structure or building on any private or
public property by placing thereon any marking, carving or graffiti.



   (B)   It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore said
surface to an approved state of maintenance and repair.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



SWIMMING POOLS, SPAS AND HOT TUBS



§ 159.180  SWIMMING POOLS.



   Swimming pools shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition,
and in good repair.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



EXTERIOR STRUCTURES



§ 159.190  GENERAL.



   The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair,
structurally sound and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public
health, safety or welfare.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.191  PROTECTIVE TREATMENT.



   All exterior surfaces, including but not limited to, doors, door and
window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks and fences shall be
maintained in good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than
decay-resistant woods, shall be protected from the elements and decay by
painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling, flaking and
chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces repainted. All siding and
masonry joints as well as those between the building envelope and the
perimeter of windows, doors, and skylights shall be maintained weather
resistant and water tight. All metal surfaces subject to rust or corrosion
shall be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion and all surfaces with rust
or corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and
corrosion. Oxidation stains shall be removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces
designed for stabilization by oxidation are exempt from this requirement.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.192  PREMISES IDENTIFICATION.



   Buildings shall have approved address numbers placed in a position to
be plainly legible and visible from the street or road fronting the property.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.193  STRUCTURAL MEMBERS.



   All structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration, and
shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.194  FOUNDATION WALLS.



   All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and free from open
cracks and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent the
entry of rodents and other pests.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.195  EXTERIOR WALLS.



   All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, and loose or
rotting materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated
where required to prevent deterioration.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.196  ROOFS AND DRAINAGE.



   The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects that
admit rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or
deterioration in the walls or interior portion of the structure. Roof drains,
gutters and down spouts shall be maintained in good repair and free from
obstructions. Roof water shall not be discharged in a manner that creates a
public nuisance.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.197  DECORATIVE FEATURES.



   All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and
similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper
anchorage and in a safe condition.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.198  OVERHANG EXTENSIONS.



   All overhang extensions including, but not limited to, canopies,
marquees, signs, metal awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts
shall be maintained in good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept
in a sound condition. When required, all exposed surfaces of metal or wood
shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic
application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface
treatment.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.199  STAIRWAYS, DECKS, PORCHES AND BALCONIES.



   Every exterior stairway, deck, porch and balcony, and all appurtenances
attached thereto, shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair,
with proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.200  CHIMNEYS AND TOWERS.



   All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, and similar appurtenances
shall be maintained structurally safe and sound, and in good repair. All
exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and
against decay or rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials,
such as paint or similar surface treatment.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.201  HANDRAILS AND GUARDS.



   Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of
supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.202  WINDOW, SKYLIGHT AND DOOR FRAMES.



   Every window, skylight, door and frame shall be kept in sound
condition, good repair and weather tight.



   (A)   Glazing.  All glazing materials shall be maintained free from
cracks and holes.



   (B)   Windows.  Every window, other than a fixed window, shall be
operable and capable of being held in position by window hardware.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.203  DOORS.



   All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware shall be maintained in
good condition. Locks at all entrances to dwelling units, rooming units and
guestrooms shall tightly secure the door.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.204  BASEMENT HATCHWAYS.



   (A)   Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to prevent the
entrance of rodents, rain and surface drainage water.



   (B)   Basement hatchways that provide access to a dwelling unit,
rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be
equipped with devises that secure the unit from unauthorized entry.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.205  GUARDS FOR BASEMENT WINDOWS.



   Every basement window, other than a fixed window, shall be supplied
with rodent shields, storm windows or other approved protection against the
entry of rodents.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.206  BUILDING SECURITY.



   Doors, windows or hatchways for dwelling units, room units or
housekeeping units shall be provided with devices designed to provide
security for the occupants and property within.



   (A)   Doors.  Doors providing access to a dwelling unit, rooming
unit or housekeeping unit that is rented, leased or let shall be equipped
with a deadbolt lock meeting specifications set forth herein. Such deadbolt
locks shall be operated only by the turning of a knob or a key and shall have
a lock throw of not less than one-inch. For the purpose of this section, a
sliding bolt shall not be considered an acceptable deadbolt lock. Such
deadbolt locks shall be installed according to manufacturer's specifications
and maintained in good working order. All deadbolt locks required by this
section shall be designed and installed in such a manner so as to be operable
inside of the dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit without the
use of a key, tool, combination thereof or any other special knowledge or
effort.



   (B)   Windows.  Operable windows located in whole or in part within
six feet (1828 mm) above ground level or walking surface below that provide
access to a dwelling unit, rooming unit or housekeeping unit that is rented,
leased or let shall be equipped with window sash locking devises.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



INTERIOR STRUCTURES



§ 159.215  GENERAL.



   The interior of a structure and equipment therein shall be maintained
in good repair, structurally sound and in a sanitary condition.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.216  STRUCTURAL MEMBERS.



   All structural members shall be maintained structurally sound, and be
capable of supporting the imposed loads.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.217  INTERIOR SURFACES.



   All interior surfaces, including windows and doors, shall be maintained
in good, clean and sanitary condition.  Peeling, chipping, flaking or
abraded paint shall be repaired, removed or covered. Cracked or loose
plaster, decayed wood and other defective surface conditions shall be
corrected.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.218  STAIRS AND WALKING SURFACES.



   Every stair, ramp, landing, balcony, porch, deck or other walking
surface shall be maintained in sound condition and good repair.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.219  HANDRAILS AND GUARDS.



   Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of
supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.220  INTERIOR DOORS.



   Every interior door shall fit reasonably well within its frame and
shall be capable of being opened and closed by being properly and securely
attached to jambs, headers or tracks as intended by the manufacturer of the
attachment hardware.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



RUBBISH AND GARBAGE



§ 159.230  ACCUMULATION OF RUBBISH OR GARBAGE.



   All exterior property and premises, and the interior of every
structure, shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.231  DISPOSAL OF RUBBISH.



   (A)   Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of all rubbish in
a clean and sanitary manner by placing such rubbish in containers which
enclose the material and prevent the intrusion of animals.



   (B)   Refrigerators.  Refrigerators and similar equipment not in
operation shall not be discarded without first removing the doors and
properly removing the refrigerant and tagging the unit to indicate the
removal.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.232  DISPOSAL OF GARBAGE.



   Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of garbage in a clean and
sanitary manner by placing such garbage in leakproof garbage containers which
enclose the material and prevent the intrusion of animals.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.233  STORAGE.



   No garbage or rubbish whether in a garbage container or otherwise shall
be kept in the front yard of any premises.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.234  CURBSIDE PICKUP.



   No rubbish or garbage shall be placed for curbside pickup more than 24
hours in advance of scheduled pickup. All rubbish and garbage containers must
be removed from the front of the premises within 24 hours after scheduled
pickup.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



EXTERMINATION



§ 159.245  INFESTATION.



   All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation.
All structures in which insects or rodents are found shall be promptly
exterminated by approved processes that will not be injurious to human
health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to prevent
re-infestation.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.246  MOSQUITO CONTROL.



   The owner of any premises on which pools of water stagnate shall not
permit such waters to become a breeding place for mosquitoes and such owner
shall fill or drain the depressions or otherwise abate the condition.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.247  OWNER.



   The owner of any structure shall be responsible for extermination
within the structure prior to renting or leasing the structure.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.248  SINGLE OCCUPANT.



   The occupant of a one-family dwelling or of a single-tenant
nonresidential structure shall be responsible for extermination on the
premises.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.249  MULTIPLE OCCUPANCY.



   The owner of a structure containing two or more dwelling units, a
multiple occupancy, a rooming house or a nonresidential structure shall be
responsible for extermination in the public or shared areas of the structure
and exterior property.  If infestation is caused by failure of an occupant
to prevent such infestation in the area occupied, the occupant shall be
responsible for extermination.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



§ 159.250  OCCUPANT.



   The occupant of any structure shall be responsible for the continued
rodent and pest-free condition of the structure. Exception: Where the
infestations are caused by defects in the structure, the owner shall be
responsible for extermination.



(Ord. 2007-16, passed 7-16-07)



TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES



      Table




         I.   ACCEPTANCES AND DEDICATIONS





         II.   ANNEXATIONS





         III.   APPROPRIATIONS





         IV.   EASEMENTS





         V.   FRANCHISES AND SPECIAL CONTRACTS





         VI.   REALTY





         VII.   RECIPROCAL AGREEMENTS





         VIII.   ZONING MAP CHANGES




TABLE I: ACCEPTANCES AND DEDICATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date
 
Description




28
 
10-6-41
 
Knoll Road and Verger Lane


32
 
12-8-41
 
Glen Acre Drive


75
 
10-14-46
 
Part of Hudson Parkway


90
 
7-6-48
 
Beechnut Drive


127
 
4-9-51
 
South Farmcrest Drive, North Farmcrest Drive and Kincaid Road


141
 
5-15-52
 
Winding Way


151
 
12-8-52
 
Widening part of Ridge and Section Roads


162
 
11-9-53
 
Lynnehaven Drive


163
 
11-9-53
 
Gardner Avenue and part of Sagamore Drive


164
 
11-9-53
 
Fontaine Court and Frontenac Avenue


168
 
3-8-54
 
Arborcrest Drive


C-35
 
12-12-55
 
Belkay Drive and Belkay Lane


C-43
 
12-12-55
 
Aracoma Forest Drive


C-78
 
4-8-57
 
Sewer and sewer easement


C-79
 
4-8-57
 
Sewer easement (Galbraith Road, North)


C-86
 
6-10-57
 
Part of Lamarque Drive


C-89
 
8-12-57
 
Aracoma Drive, E. & W., and Willowbrook Drive


C-90
 
9-9-57
 
Lynn Haven Court, Arborcrest Drive, Sorrento Avenue, and Arborcrest Court


C-92
 
10-14-57
 
Streets and improvements in Laurel Hill Subdivision


C-95
 
11-11-57
 
Acceptance of Lamarque Drive, Oakside Court, Coolwood Court, and Kentland
Court


C-100
 
1-13-58
 
Elbrook Avenue, Laurel-Oak Lane, and Royal Oak Court in Meadow Ridge
Subdivision


C-106
 
4-14-58
 
Ten-foot on Ridge Road


C-107
 
6-9-58
 
Spring Valley Drive, Fairhaven Lane


C-132
 
12-8-58
 
Easement over lot 45, Whitetree Estates Subdivision, Block A


C-133
 
12-8-58
 
Forty-foot strip on west side of Ridge Road


C-140
 
6-8-59
 
Rolling Knolls Estates Subdivision for streets and easements


C-145
 
8-10-59
 
North Whitetree Circle and part of Lamarque Drive


C-160
 
2-8-60
 
Bluegrass Lane, Elbrook Avenue, Meadow Ridge Lane, West Farm Acres Drive,
Farm Acres Drive


C-190
 
1-8-62
 
Meadow Ridge Third Subdivision, Block B for public improvements


C-19l
 
1-8-62
 
Portion of Section Road in Beechlands Subdivision, Block A


C-192
 
1-2-62
 
Beechlands Drive, East and West Beechlands Drive


C-204
 
11-12-62
 
Whitetree Estates Subdivision, Block C


C-210
 
2-10-62
 
Crestdale Court


C-213
 
4-8-63
 
Meadow Ridge Subdivision (Rights-of-way)


C-214
 
4-18-63
 
Meadow Ridge Subdivision, Block A (public improvements)


C-222
 
7-13-64
 
Parts of Elbrook Avenue and Lakefield Drive


C-288
 
11-11-68
 
Sanitary sewer right-of-way on west side of Dena Lane


C-289
 
11-11-68
 
Sanitary sewer easement on Dena Lane


C-290
 
11-11-68
 
Parts of Twigwood Lane and Willowbrook Lane and sewer easement in Meadowridge
Fourth Subdivision, Block "C"


C-304
 
9-8-69
 
Portion of Kincaid Road


C-338
 
7-12-71
 
Fair Acre Drive and sewer easements in Fair Acres Subdivision, Block "B"


C-523
 
9-14-81
 
Westridge Subdivision (public improvements)


C-675
 
2-12-90
 
Aracoma North Estates Subdivision and the public improvements contained
therein


C-697
 
12-10-90
 
Cambridge Subdivision and the public improvements contained therein


1999-18
 
11-8-99
 
Rollman Estates Subdivision and the public improvements contained therein


2000-19
 
12-11-00
 
Appleridge Subdivision and the public improvements contained therein


2008-14
 
7-14-08
 
Rollman Reserve Subdivision Phases I and II and the public improvements
contained therein


 




 



TABLE II: ANNEXATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date
 
Description


53
 
11-8-43
 
Legal description


54
 
11-8-43
 
Legal description


95
 
1-10-49
 
Sagamore Heights Subdivision


96
 
1-10-49
 
Ridgewood Subdivision


 



 



TABLE III: APPROPRIATIONS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date
 
Description




Res. 29
 
6-14-46
 
Appropriating property for park purposes


Res. C-75
 
7-14-58
 
Intent to appropriate property along Section Road for highway purposes


Res. C-578
 
10-9-84
 
Intent to appropriate property for the Ridge Road Culvert replacement project


Res. 1999-7
 
4-12-99
 
Intent to appropriate property for the repair and replacement of an existing
storm water sewer


2016-17
 
11-14-16
 
Amending appropriations for the fiscal year 2016


2016-18
 
12-12-16
 
Amending appropriations for the fiscal year 2016


2016-19
 
12-12-16
 
Making appropriations for the expenses of the village for the fiscal year 2017


2017-4
 
2-13-17
 
Amending appropriations for the fiscal year 2017


2017-12
 
11-13-17
 
Amending appropriations for the fiscal year 2017


2017-16
 
12-11-17
 
Amending appropriations for the fiscal year 2017


2017-17
 
12-11-17
 
Making appropriations for the expenses of the village for fiscal year 2018


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE IV: EASEMENTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date
 
Description




108
 
9-12-49
 
Purchase for sewer purposes from Charles Bird


C-47
 
2-13-56
 
Purchase for sewer purposes from Adrian and Dorothy B. Diamond


C-226
 
11-12-64
 
Tap into sewers #26 and 27


C-251
 
3-14-66
 
Sanitary sewer improvements agreement with Edward Lipson


Res. 1997-30
 
6-9-97
 
Purchase of permanent and temporary easements from William A. Bailey and
Karla G. Bailey at a cost to the village of $8,500


Res. 2009-11
 
10-13-09
 
Approving proposed roadway, utility and landscape easement for Amberley Green


Res. 2017-26
 
8-14-17
 
Authorizing an easement to Duke Energy to enable utility connection to Mercy
Development at North Site


Res. 2017-30
 
9-11-17
 
Authorizing easements to Duke Energy and DBS Ridge Road LLC to enable utility
connection to Mercy Development at North Site


Res. 2018-3
 
1-8-18
 
Authorizing an easement to GCWW for water main on North Site


 
 
 
 
 




 



Cross-reference:



   Acceptance of sewer easements, see Table I, Acceptances and Dedications



TABLE V: FRANCHISES AND SPECIAL CONTRACTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date
 
Description




19
 
5-5-41
 
Telephone contract


22
 
7-7-41
 
Franchise to lay pipes and lines for 5 years - Cincinnati Gas & Electric Co.
(CG&E)


23
 
7-7-41
 
Electric rates - CG&E


83
 
10-14-46
 
Electrical service


87
 
5-10-48
 
Twenty-five year franchise


88
 
5-10-48
 
Electric rates - CG&E


89
 
7-6-48
 
Gas rates - CG&E


93
 
11-8-48
 
Sewage disposal contract with the City of Cincinnati


124
 
3-12-51
 
Gas rates - CG&E


152
 
1-12-53
 
Civil defense agreement


160
 
11-9-53
 
Gas rates - CG&E


C-16
 
2-14-55
 
Electric rates


C-33
 
11-21-55
 
Gas rates - CG&E


C-76
 
4-8-57
 
Electrical rates - CG&E


C-170
 
1-9-61
 
Gas rates - CG&E


C-179
 
10-9-61
 
Right to erect poles and lay cables - CG&E


C-196
 
7-9-62
 
Electric rates - CG&E


C-249
 
2-14-66
 
Gas rates - CG&E


C-285
 
8-12-68
 
Right to construct sanitary sewer line-Adath Israel Congregation, Inc.


C-287
 
9-9-68
 
Electrical rates - CG&E


C-328
 
2-9-71
 
Gas rates - CG&E


C-354
 
10-13-72
 
Right to install lighting units - CG&E


C-362
 
4-9-73
 
Right to occupy streets and lay gas pipes - CG&E


C-395
 
7-8-74
 
Electrical rates - CG&E


C-485
 
6-11-79
 
Cable television franchise with Warner Cable Corporation


C-570
 
8-13-84
 
Garbage and trash disposal contract with Rumpke Waste, Inc. for 5 years.


C-579
 
10-9-84
 
Right to update annually for 5 years the Village Code of Ordinances -
American Legal Publishing Co.


Res. C-620
 
9-9-85
 
Engineering services for the village - CDS Associates


Res. C-625
 
11-26-85
 
Provision of insurance coverage for the village - Dempsey-Siders Agency


Res. C-634
 
12-9-85
 
Requisition of 50% ownership of cable television franchise by Warner Amex
Cable Communications


Res. C-654
 
1-9-87
 
Provision of insurance coverage for the village - Dempsey-Siders Agency


Res. C-660
 
4-16-87
 
Increase in public officials and employees liability insurance coverage -
Walter P. Dolle, Inc.


Res. C-661
 
4-16-87
 
Equipment and installation of two position Public Safety Answering Point and
equipment maintenance - Cincinnati Bell Telephone Co.


Res. C-675
 
8-10-87
 
Engineering services for the village - CDS Associates


C-679
 
9-14-87
 
Water services contract with the City of Cincinnati


C-693
 
1-11-88
 
Provision of insurance coverage for the village - Dempsey-Siders Agency


C-704
 
5-9-88
 
Removal of asbestos insulation located within Village Hall - I & F Insulation
Company


C-707
 
7-11-88
 
Repairs to various streets and curbs - L.P. Cavett Company


C-708
 
7-11-88
 
Renewal of medical insurance for village employees - Community Mutual
Insurance Company


C-714
 
9-14-88
 
Salt for snow and ice control purposes - Domtar Industries, Inc.


C-716
 
10-12-88
 
Uniforms for Maintenance Department - Cintas Corporation


C-725
 
12-12-88
 
Expert professional service to the Village Planning Commission - Pflum,
Klausmeier and Gehrum Consultants


C-726
 
12-12-88
 
Engineering services for the village - DS Associates, Inc.


C-649
 
2-18-89
 
Director of Transportation to Construct improvements to Cross-County Highway


C-661
 
6-12-89
 
Director of Transportation to construct improvements of Cross-County Highway


Res. C-729
 
1-9-89
 
Provision of insurance coverage for the village - Dempsey-Siders Agency


Res. C-733
 
3-13-89
 
Agreement with Barrett Paving Materials, Inc. for street repairs and
resurfacing


Res. C-735
 
4-10-89
 
Consent to merger of Time, Inc. and Warner Communications, Inc.


Res. C-736
 
4-10-89
 
Contract with British Petroleum, Inc. to sell fuel to the village


Res. C-738
 
6-20-89
 
Contract with the City of Cincinnati to replace storm sewer pipe


Res. C-745
 
8-14-89
 
Garbage and trash disposal contract with Rumpke Waste, Inc. for 5 years


Res. C-746
 
8-14-89
 
Salt for snow and ice control purposes - Domtar Industries, Inc.


Res. C-748
 
9-11-89
 
Contract with Wagner-Smith Co. to install traffic signal loop detectors


Res. C-749
 
9-11-89
 
Right to update annually for 5 years the Village Code of Ordinances -
American Legal Publishing Co.


Res. C-752
 
10-10-89
 
Contract with Beacon Construction Co. for resurfacing Village Tennis Courts


Res. C-760
 
1-8-90
 
Extending contract with CDS Associates through December 31, 1990


Res. C-762
 
2-12-90
 
Designating Fifth Third Bank as depository for active funds


Res. C-763
 
2-12-90
 
Designating Central Trust Company, Fifth Third Bank and Star Bank as
depositories for interim funds and inactive funds


Res. C-764
 
2-12-90
 
Contract with Dan McCluskey Cheverolet, Inc. to provide vehicles


Res. C-768
 
3-12-90
 
Contract with the L.P. Cavett Company for the 1990 road program for street
repairs and resurfacing


Res. C-769
 
3-12-90
 
Contract with the L.P. Cavett Company for the resurfacing of Section Rd. -
Issue II project


Res. C-771
 
3-14-90
 
Contract with Dempsey-Siders for insurance coverage


Res. C-773
 
4-16-90
 
Contract with Limbocker Oil Co. to sell fuel to the village


Res. C-777
 
7-9-90
 
Contract with Rumpke Waste, Inc. for furnishing a recycling pickup program
for village residents


Res. C-780
 
8-13-90
 
Contract with Sangeo Corporation to correct hillside slippage on Section Rd.


Res. C-781
 
8-13-90
 
Contract with the W.G. Fairfield Company for the Section Road and Elbrook
Avenue traffic signal project


Res. C-782
 
8-13-90
 
Contract with Domtar Industries, Inc., Sifto Division, for furnishing salt
for snow and ice control


Res. C-783
 
9-10-90
 
Contract with the Ohio Public Works Commission for Issue II funds


Res. C-788
 
11-12-90
 
Contract with the provision of uniforms for the Maintenance Department


Res. C-794
 
12-10-90
 
Contract with CDS Associates, Inc. for the provision of engineering services
to the village


Res. C-795
 
12-10-90
 
Contract with McCluskey Cheverolet, Inc. to equip and furnish a new pick-up
truck to the village


Res. C-800
 
2-12-91
 
Contract with the L.P. Cavett Company for road resurfacing and curb
replacement


Res. C-801
 
2-12-91
 
Contract with McCluskey Chevrolet, Inc. to equip and furnish new police
vehicles


Res. C-802
 
2-12-91
 
Contract with Dempsey-Siders and Walter P. Dolle for insurance coverage


Res. C-805
 
4-8-91
 
Contract with Buchanon Construction Company for curb replacement on Elbrook
Ave


Res. C-807
 
4-8-91
 
Contract with Limbocker Oil Company to sell fuel to the village


Res. C-812
 
7-8-91
 
Contract with the City of Cincinnati for submission of a joint application
for Issue II funds


Res. C-815
 
8-12-91
 
Contract with John Davis Construction Company for furnishing labor and
materials for road resurfacing and curb replacement for Galbraith Rd.


Res. C-817
 
8-12-91
 
Contract with Morton for furnishing salt for snow and ice removal


Res. C-818
 
9-10-91
 
Extending existing contract with Rumpke Waste, Inc. for furnishing a
recycling pick-up program


Res. C-820
 
11-11-91
 
Contract with Rumpke Waste, Inc. for furnishing a recycling pick-up program


Res. C-822
 
11-11-91
 
Contract for the replacement of traffic signals


Res. C-827
 
1-13-92
 
Contract with CDS Associates, Inc. for the provision of engineering services
to the village


Res. C-831
 
2-10-92
 
Contract with Barrett Construction Company for road resurfacing


Res. C-832
 
2-10-92
 
Contract with Ford Development Company for curb replacement


Res. C-833
 
2-10-92
 
Contract with Dempsey-Siders Agency to provide general insurance and public
official liability insurance


Res. C-836
 
4-13-92
 
Contract for constructing additional curb replacement


Res. C-837
 
4-13-92
 
Contract for the village to participate in Ohio's Cooperative Purchasing
Program


Res. C-841
 
5-11-92
 
Contract to Adleta Inc., for furnishing labor and materials for South Ridge
Road improvements


Res. C-846
 
6-8-92
 
Contract with Miami Valley Internation Harvester to furnish a new dump truck


Res. C-847
 
6-8-92
 
Contract with Heil Motors to furnish a new riding mower


Res. C-853
 
9-14-92
 
Contract to Morton International, Inc. for snow and ice control purposes


Res. C-858
 
10-13-92
 
Contract with Cintas Corporation for provision of uniforms for service
department


Res. C-859
 
10-13-92
 
Contract for the village to participate in Ohio's Cooperative Purchasing
Program


Res. C-866
 
12-14-92
 
Contract with CDS Associates, Inc. for engineering services


Res. C-867
 
12-14-92
 
Contract for emergency medical services with Village of Golf Manor


Res. C-868
 
12-14-92
 
Contract to purchase a new chipper unit from Able Equipment


Res. C-872
 
2-8-93
 
Contract with Dempsey & Siders Agency for general insurance and public
official insurance


Res. C-873
 
2-8-93
 
Contract with L.P. Cavett Company for road resurfacing and curb replacement


Res. C-875
 
2-8-93
 
Contract for purchase of equipment from Southeastern Equipment Company, Inc.


Res. C-878
 
2-8-93
 
Contract to purchase two vehicles from Superior Chevrolet, Inc.


Res. C-880
 
3-8-93
 
Contract to Don Cisle Contractors, Inc. for North Ridge Road Improvements


Res. C-881
 
3-8-93
 
Contract with Miami Village International Trucks to furnish a new dump truck


Res. C-882
 
3-8-93
 
Contract with Center for Local Government, providing for fire arms training
of village police officers


Res. C-884
 
4-12-93
 
Contract accepting bid of ABS Contractor Supply to furnish a tar buggy


Res. C-886
 
4-12-93
 
Contract to Limbocker Oil Company to sell fuel to the village


Res. C-892
 
6-14-93
 
Contract with Scot Business Systems to furnish new copier


Res. C-895
 
7-12-93
 
Contract for the repair of the salt storage bin


Res. C-897
 
8-9-93
 
Contract to Morton International for furnishing salt for snow and ice control


Res. C-899
 
9-13-93
 
Agreement with Hamilton County, authorizing construction of a service road
from Ridge Road to the village's yard waste disposal site


Res. C-900
 
9-13-93
 
Contract with the Ohio Public Works Commission for state capital improvement
program funds


Res. C-901
 
9-13-93
 
Contract with AT&T for the provision of a telephone system


Res. C-908
 
1-10-94
 
Contract with CDS Associates, Inc. for the provision of engineering service
to the village


Res. C-909
 
2-14-94
 
Contract with Hirlinger Motors, Inc. to provide vehicles to the village


Res. C-913
 
3-14-94
 
Contract to L.P. Cavett Company for the 1994 road resurfacing and curb
replacement


Res. C-916
 
4-11-94
 
Contract with Southeastern Equipment Company to furnish vibratory asphalt
roller


Res. C-917
 
4-20-94
 
Contract for insurance coverage through the Dempsey & Siders Agency, Inc.


Res. C-919
 
6-13-94
 
Contract with Adleta, Inc. to correct the drainage problem at 7530 Sagamore
Drive


Res. C-922
 
7-11-94
 
Agreement with Warner Cable Communications for an extension of the existing
franchise


Res. C-923
 
7-11-94
 
Agreement for continued participation by the village in a regional council of
governments known as the Intercommunity Cable Regulatory Commission


Res. C-924
 
7-11-94
 
Contract with Southeastern Equipment Company to furnish leaf vacuum


Res. C-929
 
9-12-94
 
Contract with Morton International to furnish salt for snow and ice purposes


Res. C-930
 
9-12-94
 
Contract with Rumpke Waste, Inc. to furnish solid waste and recycling
collection


Res. C-936
 
10-11-94
 
Contract with Cintas Corp. to furnish service uniforms


Res. C-938
 
11-14-94
 
Contract with Warner Cable Communications for 15-year cable television
franchise


Res. C-941
 
11-14-94
 
Amending contract with Rumpke Waste, Inc. in Res. C-930


Res. C-946
 
1-17-95
 
Contract with American Legal Publishing Corp. to update Code of Ordinances


Res. C-947
 
1-17-95
 
Contract with CDS Associates, Inc. to furnish engineering services


Res. C-948
 
1-17-95
 
Contract with McClusky Chevrolet to equip and furnish two police cruisers and
a vehicle for the village manager


Res. C-951
 
3-13-95
 
Contract with L.P. Cavett Co. for 1995 road resurfacing and curb replacement


Res. C-957
 
4-17-95
 
Contract with Dempsey & Siders Agency to furnish insurance


Res. C-959
 
5-8-95
 
Contract with West Chester Lawn & Garden Equipment to furnish a front deck
finish mower


Res. C-961
 
6-12-95
 
Amending contract with McClusky Chevrolet in Res. C-948


Res. C-962
 
6-12-95
 
Agreement with Cincinnati Bell Telephone Co. as to tax refund request
litigation


Res. C-963
 
6-12-95
 
Awarding a contract to Columbia Oil Company to sell fuel to the village


Res. C-964
 
7-10-95
 
An agreement to purchase through the Ohio Cooperative Purchasing Program, for
use by the Police Department, a dictaphone 16 channel 2 deck Guardian Digital
Communications recording system


Res. C-971
 
8-14-95
 
Awarding a contract to Morton International, Morton Salt Division, for
furnishing salt for snow and ice control purposes


Res. C-983
 
2-12-96
 
Designating the Fifth Third Bank as the depository for active funds


Res. C-984
 
2-12-96
 
Designating the Star Bank, the Fifth Third Bank, the PNC Bank, the Society
Bank, and Provident Bank as the depositories for interim and inactive funds


Res. C-986
 
2-12-96
 
A contract with 32 Ford, Inc. to provide two police cruisers


Res. C-987
 
3-11-96
 
Authorizing an agreement with CDS Associates, Inc.


Res. C-990
 
5-13-96
 
A contract for insurance coverage for the village through Dempsey and Siders
Agency


Res. C-991
 
5-13-96
 
Awarding a contract for Section Road improvements to Barrett Paving
Materials, Inc.


Res. C-992
 
5-13-96
 
Awarding a contract to Barrett Paving Materials, Inc. for the 1996 road
resurfacing and curb replacement


Res. C-994
 
6-10-96
 
Awarding contracts for the construction of a new service building


Res. C-995
 
6-10-96
 
A contract with Barrett Paving Material, Inc. for additional improvements for
Section Road


Res. C-1002
 
9-9-96
 
Awarding a contract to Morton International, Inc., Morton Salt Division, for
furnishing salt for snow and ice control purposes


Res. C-1003
 
10-3-96
 
Authorizing an agreement with Cole and Russell Architects for professional
design services


Res. C-1010
 
10-15-96
 
A contract with Cintas Corporation for the provision of uniforms for the
Service Department


Res. C-1011
 
11-11-96
 
A contract with MicroLogic Corporation to furnish a netserver


Res. C-1012
 
11-11-96
 
A contract with Miami Valley International Truck, Inc. to furnish a dump truck


Res. 1997-1
 
1-13-97
 
A contract with Cole and Russell Architects for the provision of additional
professional design services


Res. 1997-3
 
1-13-97
 
A contract with CDS Associates, Inc. for engineering services


Res. 1997-13
 
2-10-97
 
A contract with MicroLogic Corporation to furnish a netserver system


Res. 1997-14
 
2-10-97
 
An agreement with Bud Herbert Motors for the purchase of a John Deere Model
F-1145 riding mower


Res. 1997-19
 
3-12-97
 
A contract with CDS Associates, Inc. for the provision of engineering services


Res. 1997-20
 
3-12-97
 
Contracts with Woody Sander Ford and with 32 Ford to provide vehicles


Res. 1997-22
 
3-12-97
 
A contract with Mobilcomm, Inc. to furnish a fire band radio


Res. 1997-24
 
3-12-97
 
A contract with L.P. Cavett Co for the 1997 street program


Res. 1997-26
 
5-12-97
 
Awarding a contract to Columbia Oil Co. to sell fuel to the village


Res. 1997-32
 
6-18-97
 
Approving contract obtained by Village Manager for 90- day extension of
insurance coverage


Res. 1997-33
 
7-15-97
 
Awarding contract to Fred A. Nemann Co. to construct storm water improvement


Res. 1997-34
 
7-15-97
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter a contract with MVM, Inc. to remove
existing underground fuel tanks and provide new above ground fuel tanks


Res. 1997-41
 
8-11-97
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to award a contract to the Kelly Creswell Co.
to furnish a new paint linestriper to the village


Res. 1997-42
 
8-11-97
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to award a contract to the North American
Salt Company for furnishing salt for snow and ice control purposes


Res. 1997-45
 
8-27-97
 
Awarding contract to L.P. Cavett Co.


Res. 1997-46
 
9-8-97
 
Awarding a contract to Cole + Russell Architects, Inc. to provide the village
with architectural services for a new village hall


Res. 1997-48
 
9-8-97
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with Miami Valley
International Truck, Inc.


Res. 1997-49
 
9-8-97
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into contracts for insurance
coverage through Thomas E. Wood, Inc.


Res. 1997-51
 
10-14-97
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into an agreement with Modern Office
Methods, Inc.


Res. 1998-3
 
1-12-98
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to contract for removal of contaminated soil
on village property


Res. 1998-4
 
1-12-98
 
Giving permission to Crest Hills Country Club to install water line through
village property


Res. 1998-9
 
3-9-98
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with Williams
Scotsman, Inc.


Res. 1998-11
 
3-9-98
 
Awarding contract to L.P. Cavett Co.


Res. 1998-12
 
3-25-98
 
Awarding contract to Stenger Ford, Inc.


Res. 1998-16
 
4-13-98
 
Approving the schematic phase of the Village Hall Building Project as
presented by Cole+Russell Architects, and approving the revised cost estimate


Res. 1998-18
 
4-13-98
 
Designating The Fifth Third Bank as depository for the village's active
funds, and Star Bank, The Fifth Third Bank, the PNC Bank, and the Provident
Bank as the depositories for the village's interim and inactive funds


Res. 1998-19
 
4-13-98
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to make expenditure in the amount of $3,393
for the purchase of a new walk-behind mower for the village's service
department


Res. 1998-20
 
5-11-98
 
Awarding contract to Rafgem Construction Company, Inc. for the constructing
of an equipment storage building


Res. 1998-21
 
5-11-98
 
Awarding a contract to Planex Company, Inc. for the construction of a salt
storage building


Res. 1998-22
 
5-11-98
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to make expenditure in the amount of $6,500
to pay for the services of the Commission on Accreditation of Law Enforcement
Agencies, Inc. to perform an on-site inspection of the village's police
department


Res. 1998-23
 
5-11-98
 
Awarding a contract to Cincinnati Bell for an upgrade to the village's
emergency 911 telephone system


Res. 1998-26
 
5-22-98
 
Approving work on the Lynnehaven Court Stormwater Project for an amount of
not more than $10,000


Res. 1998-28
 
6-8-98
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to contract for software upgrades for the
Income Tax Department


Res. 1998-29
 
6-8-98
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to contract for software upgrades for the
Finance Department


Res. 1998-30
 
7-14-98
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to purchase two defibrillators from Physio
Controls, Inc.


Res. 1998-31
 
7-14-98
 
Authorizing expenditure for transferring equipment from one police cruiser
being taken out of service to a new police cruiser and new equipment for a
second new police cruiser


Res. 1998-33
 
7-14-98
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter a contract with ESI, Inc. to provide
a new generator set for the North Service Department Facility


Res. 1998-36
 
7-14-98
 
Approving change orders on the salt storage building for an amount not to
exceed $4,305


Res. 1998-37
 
8-10-98
 
Approving change orders on the Lynnhaven Court Storm Water Project for an
amount not to exceed $8,000


Res. 1998-38
 
8-10-98
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to award a contract to the Morton Salt
Company for furnishing salt for snow and ice control purposes


Res. 1998-39
 
8-10-98
 
Authorizing Cole+Russell Architects to begin preparation of bid
specifications for demolition of the existing village hall and construction
of a new village hall


Res. 1998-42
 
9-14-98
 
Authorizing and directing the Village Manager to enter into a mutual aid
contract with other municipality parties to the Valley Band Radio System


Res. 1998-43
 
9-14-98
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to submit an application to and to enter into
a contract with the Ohio Public Works Commission for state capital
improvement program funds


Res. 1998-46
 
10-15-98
 
Approving construction of a loading dock for the equipment storage building
for an amount not to exceed $9,999.99


Res. 1998-49
 
10-22-98
 
Awarding a contract to Warm Construction Company, Inc. for the construction
of a new village hall


Res. 1998-50
 
10-22-98
 
Awarding a contract to Steve Hattersley Company, Inc. for the provision of
the plumbing system in the new village hall


Res. 1998-51
 
10-22-98
 
Awarding a contract to Scioto Industries for the provision of the heating,
ventilation, and air conditioning systems in the new village hall


Res. 1998-52
 
10-22-98
 
Awarding a contract to Quality Electric Company, Inc. for the provision of
the electrical system in the new village hall


Res. 1998-53
 
10-22-98
 
Awarding a contract to Industrial Communications, Inc. for the provision of
the telecommunications system in the new village hall


Res. 1998-54
 
10-22-98
 
Authorizing expenditure of up to $25,000 to promote interest in Gibson
Property of prospective tenants


Res. 1998-55
 
11-9-98
 
Giving Village Manager limited authority with respect to potential change
orders on the new village hall


Res. 1998-56
 
12-14-98
 
Accepting the bid of Hylant MacLean, Inc. to provide insurance coverage for
the village


Res. 1998-57
 
12-14-98
 
Awarding a contract to Dalmatian Fire, Inc. for the provision of the fire
suppression system in the new village hall


Res. 1998-58
 
12-23-98
 
Increasing extended insurance coverage for the village to $15,000,000


Res. 1999-2
 
1-22-99
 
Approving change orders on the village hall construction project for an
amount not to exceed $30,000


Res. 1999-5
 
3-8-99
 
Accepting the bid of 32 Ford, Inc. to equip and furnish to the village two
police cruisers


Res. 1999-9
 
5-10-99
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract for the provision of
uniforms for the service department


Res. 1999-11
 
6-30-99
 
Awarding contracts to Interior Services, Inc. and Code+Russell Architects,
Inc. to provide the village with the design, planning and procurement of
furnishings for the new village hall


Res. 1999-15
 
8-9-99
 
Approving change orders on the village hall construction project for an
amount not to exceed $37,000


Res. 1999-16
 
8-9-99
 
Authorizing and directing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with
American Legal Publishing Corporation to review the village code of
ordinances and to update the village code of ordinances annually for a
five-year period


Res. 1999-18
 
8-9-99
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to award a contract to Rumpke Waste, Inc. for
furnishing solid waste and recycling collection and disposal for the village


Res. 2004-08
 
6-14-04
 
Authorizing and directing the Village Manager to contract with Bob McDorman
Chevrolet, Inc. for the purchase of a 2004 Chevrolet Tahoe 4WD vehicle


Res. 2004-09
 
7-12-04
 
Authorizing and directing the Village Manager to contract with Rumpke Waste,
Inc. for furnishing solid waste and recycling collection and disposal for the
village


Res. 2004-11
 
7-12-04
 
Authorizing and directing the Village Manager to contract with Adleta
Construction for 2004 road resurfacing and repair program


Res. 2004-13
 
7-12-04
 
Authorizing and directing the Village Manager to contract with Fred A. Nemann
Co. for 2004 water main improvements


Res. 2004-19
 
9-13-04
 
Authorizing and directing the Village Manger to contract with Morton Salt
Company for furnishing salt for snow and ice control purposes


Res. 2004-22
 
9-13-04
 
Authorizing and directing the Village Manger to contract with Adleta
Construction for restoration of Bluegrass Lane, to be reimbursed by Rumpke
Waste Collection


Res. 2004-26
 
12-13-04
 
Approving and adopting amended contract with CDS Associates, Inc.


Res. 2004-30
 
12-13-04
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to purchase lightning protection equipment
from Tuner Lightning Protection Company


Res. 2004-31
 
12-13-04
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to contract with Sunesis Construction for the
demolition of the swim club


Res. 2004-32
 
12-22-04
 
Awarding a contract to Schiff, Kreidler, Shell Insurance Risk Services for
insurance coverage for the village


Res. 2005-04
 
7-11-05
 
Awarding a contract to Barrett Paving Materials, Inc. for the 2005 Road
Resurfacing and Repair Program


Res. 2005-06
 
7-11-05
 
Authorizing the Village Manger to enter into an agreement with Cross and
Associates for reimbursement for employee health insurance


Res. 2005-10
 
8-8-05
 
Authorizing the Village Manger to contract through the state bidding program
to purchase two new police cruisers and one administrative vehicle


Res. 2005-11
 
9-11-05
 
Awarding a contract to the Morton Salt Company for furnishing salt for snow
and ice control purposes


Res. 2005-16
 
11-14-05
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to contract for the purchase of computer
system upgrades and an email server


Res. 2005-19
 
12-12-05
 
Contracting with Schiff, Kreidler, Shell Insurance and Risk Services to
provide insurance coverage


Res. 2006-01
 
3-13-06
 
Authorizing the Village Manger to contract through the state bidding program
to purchase a dump truck, snowplow and salt spreader for the Service
Department


Res. 2006-02
 
3-13-06
 
Authorizing the Village Manger to contract through the state bidding program
to purchase a pick-up truck with snowplow for the Service Department


Res. 2006-07
 
7-10-06
 
Authorizing the Village Manger to contract through the state bidding program
to purchase a self-contained leaf vacuum for the Service Department


Res. 2006-08
 
7-10-06
 
Authorizing the Village Manger to contract through the state bidding program
to purchase a chipper box for the Service Department


Res. 2006-10
 
8-14-06
 
Authorizing the Village Manger to contract through the State of Ohio Bidding
program for the purchase of two new police cruisers through the state bidding
program


Res. 2006-13
 
9-11-06
 
Entering into a contract with Edwareds and Kelcey for traffic engineering and
land planning services at the village's North Site


Res. 2006-14
 
9-11-06
 
Awarding a renewal contract to the Morton Salt Company for furnishing salt
for snow and ice control purposes


Res. 2006-21
 
12-11-06
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to contract with a provider of cost recovery
services


Res. 2006-22
 
12-11-06
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with Travelers
Insurance


Res. 2007-07
 
5-14-07
 
Awarding a contract to Evans Landscaping for the removal of the North Site
wood and leaf debris


Res. 2007-19
 
9-10-07
 
Awarding a contract to Trend Construction for stormwater improvement projects
on Lamarque Drive and Aracoma East Drive


Res. 2007-21
 
9-10-07
 
Awarding a renewal contract to the North American Company for furnishing salt
for snow and ice control purposes


Res. 2007-24
 
11-1-07
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to contract with Hummel Restoration to
correct installation of cornice stones on Village Hall


Res. 2007-27
 
10-10-07
 
Authorizing the Village Manger to enter into a contract with Prime/VFIS


Res. 2008-02
 
3-10-08
 
Awarding a contract to Mt. Pleasant Blacktopping the 2008 Road Resurfacing
and Repair Program


Res. 2008-04
 
5-12-08
 
Authorizing the Village Manger to award Barrett Paving the 2008 Road
Resurfacing and Repair Program


Res. 2008-05
 
9-9-08
 
Designating Fifth Third Bank as the public depository for the village's
active funds and Fifth Third Bank, Huntington Bank and US Bank as the public
depositories fot he village's interim and inactive funds


Res. 2008-11
 
7-14-08
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to contract with American Legal Publishing
Company to review and update the village code of ordinances


2008-21
 
10-14-08
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to contract with Evans Landscaping, Inc. for
highway salt


Res. 2008-17
 
12-15-08
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with PRIME/VFIS for
property and casualty insurance for the year commencing December 27, 2008


Res. 2009-04
 
5-11-09
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract through Hamilton
County, Ohio for furnishing to the village of road salt for the 2009-2010
winter season


Res. 2009-06
 
7-13-09
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to award a contract to Sunesis Construction
for a storm sewer replacement project on Aracoma Forest Drive


Res. 2009-07
 
7-13-09
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to award Prus Construction Company the 2009
Road Resurfacing and Repair Program


Res. 2009-12
 
10-13-09
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to award a contract to Rumpke of Ohio, Inc.,
for furnishing solid waste removal and recycling collection and disposal for
the village


Res. 2009-14
 
11-9-09
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with PRIME/VFIS and
McGowan/American Alternative for the provision of property and casualty
insurance for the year commencing December 27, 2009


Res. 2010-03
 
2-8-10
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to approve change orders by Sunesis
Construction for a storm sewer replacement project on Aracoma Forest Drive


Res. 2010-05
 
5-10-10
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to contract with Sunesis Construction for
restoration on Aracoma Forest Drive as it relates to the storm water
replacement project


Res. 2010-07
 
5-10-10
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to award a contract to Broshear Contractors
for storm water drainage improvements


Res. 2010-08
 
6-14-10
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with the City of
Cincinnati for furnishing salt for snow and ice control purposes


Res. 2010-13
 
10-12-10
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with the City of
Cincinnati to extend the county water area contract for 30 years through the
year 2047


Res. 2010-15
 
11-8-10
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with PRIME/VFIS and
McGowan/American Alternative for property and casualty insurance


Res. 2011-03
 
5-9-11
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to award a contract to Site Worx, LLC for
2011 Village Stormwater Improvements


Res. 2011-04
 
5-9-11
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to award a contract to Jeffrey Allen
Corporation for 2011 Village Channel Improvements


Res. 2011-05
 
5-9-11
 
Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contract with David Krings and/or Slavin
Management Consultants to assist with the search and recruitment of a Village
Manager


Res. 2011-07
 
6-13-11
 
Authorizing the Mayor to execute a contract with Scot Lahrmer as Interim
Village Manager


Res. 2011-10
 
6-13-11
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with the City of
Cincinnati for furnishing salt for snow and ice control purposes


Res. 2011-13
 
9-12-11
 
Authorizing the Interim Village Manager to enter into a contract with
American Legal Publishing Company to review and update the village Code of
Ordinances


2011-14
 
10-11-11
 
Authorizing the Mayor to execute an employment contract with Scot Lahrmer as
Village Manager


Res. 2011-19
 
11-14-11
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to execute a contract with Paycor for village
payroll and tax filing services


Res. 2011-21
 
11-14-11
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to execute a contract with Hummel Restoration
to repair Village Hall columns


Res. 2011-23
 
12-12-11
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with Argonaut for
property and casualty insurance


Res. 2012-24
 
2-13-12
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with Assured NL
Insurance Agency, Inc., for professional services related to property and
casualty insurance


Res. 2012-26
 
2-13-12
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with DPL Energy
Resources, Inc., to facilitate energy aggregation for residents


Res. 2012-29
 
3-12-12
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with Direct Energy
to provide electricity to the village


Res. 2012-31
 
3-12-12
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract for mowing services
for Amberley Green


Res. 2012-33
 
4-9-12
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with the Auditor of
the state for a Uniform Accounting Network Agreement


2012-03
 
5-14-12
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract to purchase a new
computer server


Res. 2012-40
 
6-11-12
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to execute a contract with Management Partners


Res. 2012-42
 
7-9-12
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to award Prus Construction the contract for
the Amberley Village 2012 Road Program


Res. 2012-44
 
7-9-12
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with IGS to provide
natural gas to the village and its residents under the Natural Gas
Aggregation Program


Res. 2012-48
 
9-10-12
 
Consenting to the execution of an agreement between the Board of
Commissioners of Hamilton County and TOPICZ, providing for a project to
create employment opportunities within an enterprise zone


Res. 2012-53
 
11-12-12
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with Rumpke Waste,
Inc., for Waste Collection and Recycling Services


Res. 2012-54
 
11-12-12
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with Barrett Paving
for the improvement of Ridge Road


Res. 2012-55
 
11-12-12
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with to purchase
police cruisers


Res. 2012-56
 
11-12-12
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with the Hamilton
County Board of County Commissioners for the replacement and repair of fire
hydrants


Res. 2012-57
 
12-10-12
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with Argonaut for
property and casualty insurance


Res. 2012-58
 
12-10-12
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to execute a contract with Municipal Income
Tax Solutions, LLC


Res. 2012-59
 
12-10-12
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to execute a contract with the Village of
Silverton to provide dispatch services


Res. 2013-03
 
3-11-13
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract for mowing services


Res. 2013-04
 
3-11-13
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to execute a contract with Pamet Software, LLC


Res. 2013-05
 
4-8-13
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to award Mt. Pleasant Blacktopping Co. Inc.
the contract for the village 2013 Road Program


Res. 2013-06
 
4-8-13
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to award Electric Line Builders, Inc. the
contract for the village Ridge and Section Road Signal Modification Upgrade


Res. 2013-07
 
4-8-13
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to award Ohio Heavy Equipment Leasing the
contract for the village 2013 Storm Water Projects


Res. 2013-19
 
6-10-13
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to award American Pavement Inc. the contract
for the village portion of the jointly bid 2013 Bituminous Black Mat
Surfacing Program


Res. 2013-21
 
8-12-13
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with the City of
Cincinnati for furnishing salt for snow and ice control purposes


Res. 2013-24
 
9-9-13
 
Authorizing Village Manager to enter into contract with CDS Associates, Inc.
for professional engineering services for modifications to the Amberley Green
dam


Res. 2013-25
 
9-9-13
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract to purchase dump
truck


Res. 2013-26
 
9-9-13
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract to purchase brush
chipper


2013-19
 
10-15-13
 
Approving employment contract with Village Manager


Res. 2013-28
 
10-15-13
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract to purchase radios
for police and fire dispatch


Res. 2013-30
 
11-11-13
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract for alternative
supply of electric energy


Res. 2013-32
 
11-11-13
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract to purchase new
police cruisers


Res. 2013-32
 
12-9-13
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with Argonaut for
property and casualty insurance


Res. 2014-03
 
1-13-14
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract to purchase
equipment for police cruisers


Res. 2014-04
 
1-13-14
 
Approving and adopting proposal of CDS Associates, Inc., to amend its
schedule of fees and continue contract


Res. 2014-05
 
2-10-14
 
Authorizing Village Manager to enter into contract with ServPro for
restoration work on Municipal Building


Res. 2014-06
 
2-10-14
 
Authorizing Village Manager to enter into contract with CBS Construction for
restoration work on Municipal Building


Res. 2014-07
 
2-10-14
 
Authorizing Village Manager to enter into contract with Carpetland for
restoration work on Municipal Building


Res. 2014-08
 
2-10-14
 
Authorizing Village Manager to enter into contract with Kramig Insulation for
restoration work on Municipal Building


Res. 2014-09
 
3-10-14
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into contracts for mowing services


Res. 2014-10
 
3-10-14
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract to purchase dump
truck


Res. 2014-13
 
5-12-14
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with Adleta
Construction for the 2014 Road Program


Res. 2014-14
 
5-12-14
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract for improvements to
Amberley Green dam


Res. 2014-17
 
5-12-14
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with the supplier of
electricity to residents under aggregation program


Res. 2014-18
 
6-9-14
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with CDS Associates,
Inc. and Thelen Associates for professional engineering services including
for Amberley Green dam modifications


Res. 2014-20
 
7-14-14
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to execute an amendment to terminate the
contract with the Village of Silverton for dispatch services


Res. 2014-21
 
8-14-14
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into agreement with the Ohio
Department of Transportation to consent to sign upgrades along SR 126


Res. 2014-22
 
8-11-14
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with Southeastern
Equipment to purchase a back hoe


Res. 2014-23
 
8-11-14
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with the City of
Cincinnati for furnishing salt for snow and ice control purposes


Res. 2014-24
 
8-14-14
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with IGS to provide
natural gas to village residents under the energy aggregation program


Res. 2014-27
 
10-13-14
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with WatchGuard
Video to purchase camera equipment for police cruisers


Res. 2014-29
 
10-13-14
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with ESP Media for
Council meeting recording services


Res. 2014-31
 
11-10-14
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract to perform
televising of storm water facilities


Res. 2014-32
 
12-8-14
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with Jeffrey Allen
for the 2014 Storm Water Rehabilitation Program


Res. 2014-33
 
12-8-14
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with Argonaut for
property and casualty insurance


Res. 2014-34
 
12-8-14
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with Assured Neace
Lukens for professional services related to property and casualty insurance


Res. 2015-1
 
1-12-15
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with the Baldwin
Group, Inc. to purchase software for Mayor’s Court


Res. 2015-2
 
2-9-15
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with Jones Lang
LaSalle to market the North Site


Res. 2015-4
 
3-9-15
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract to purchase camera
equipment for two police cruisers


Res. 2015-5
 
3-9-15
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract to purchase license
plate readers


Res. 2015-6
 
3-9-15
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract to purchase two new
police cruisers under the State of Ohio Purchasing Contract.


Res. 2015-9
 
4-13-15
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract for mowing services
for 2015


Res. 2015-10
 
4-13-15
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract for roof replacement
for the maintenance and storage buildings at the North Site


Res. 2015-16
 
6-8-15
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract to purchase
equipment for police cruisers


Res. 2015-20
 
8-10-15
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with the City of
Cincinnati for furnishing salt for snow and ice control purposes


Res. 2015-26
 
12-14-15
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with Argonaut for
property and casualty insurance


Res. 2016-5
 
1-4-16
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract to purchase two new
police cruisers


Res. 2016-11
 
3-14-16
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with Smith
Construction for the 2016 Storm Water Rehabilitation Program


2016-12
 
8-8-16
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with IGS Energy for
the supply of natural gas to the village


Res. 2016-16
 
5-9-16
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract for the 2016 Street
Rehabilitation Program


Res. 2016-17
 
5-9-16
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with Municipal &
Contractor Sealing Products to perform storm water work on Lamarque Drive


Res. 2016-19
 
5-9-16
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract to purchase
equipment for police cruisers


Res. 2016-23
 
6-14-16
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with Smith
Construction to perform storm water infrastructure repairs at the
intersection of Section Road and Farm Acres Drive


Res. 2016-26
 
7-11-16
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with Cincinnati
Concrete Polishing for firehouse floor maintenance


Res. 2016-27
 
7-11-16
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract to purchase license
plate readers


Res. 2016-30
 
8-8-16
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract extension with the
City of Cincinnati for furnishing salt for snow and ice control purposes


Res. 2016-31
 
8-8-16
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with Adleta
Construction to perform repairs on catch basins as part of the storm water
system


Res. 2016-33
 
8-8-16
 
Authorizing a contract with Harry Ewers and Sons for the resurfacing of
tennis courts at the municipal building


Res. 2016-38
 
10-10-16
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract to perform
televising of storm water facilities


Res. 2016-40
 
10-10-16
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract to purchase alarm
monitoring system


2016-16
 
11-14-16
 
Authorizing the directing the Village Manager to execute an addendum to the
contract with Rumpke to extend contract through 2017


Res. 2016-45
 
11-14-16
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with Hamilton County
and its vendor for furnishing salt for snow and ice control purposes


Res. 2016-46
 
11-14-16
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with Capital
Electric to repair warning lights at Section and Knoll Roads


Res. 2016-47
 
11-14-16
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into an addendum to renew the
contract with ESP Media for Council meeting recording services


Res. 2016-49
 
12-12-16
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with Argonaut for
property and casualty insurance


Res. 2016-51
 
12-12-16
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract for paramedic and
EMS services with Golf Manor and Deer Park-Silverton Joint Fire District


Res. 2017-1
 
2-13-17
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into contracts for mowing services
for 2017


Res. 2017-03
 
3-13-17
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into contracts for the 2017 Storm
Water Rehabilitation Program


Res. 2017-04
 
3-13-17
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with Stanley
Aluminum Boats/Connor Industries to purchase a dive boat


Res. 2017-05
 
3-13-17
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract to purchase used
detective vehicle


Res. 2017-09
 
4-13-17
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract for the 2017 Street
Rehabilitation Program


Res. 2017-10
 
4-13-17
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with CLG Consortium
for supply of electricity under aggregation program


Res. 2017-13
 
5-8-17
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with SWS
Environmental Services to perform televising of storm water facilities


Res. 2017-16
 
5-8-17
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with JK Meurer for
the repaving of the North Site parking lot


Res. 2017-20
 
6-12-17
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with The Plug Hug to
purchase fire hydrant paint removal system


Res. 2017-21
 
6-12-17
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with Lebanon Ford to
purchase one new police cruiser


Res. 2017-22
 
6-12-17
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with Camp Safety
Equipment to purchase equipment for police cruiser


Res. 2017-25
 
8-14-17
 
Authorizing a contract with MKSK Landscape Architecture for the planning of
Amberley Green


2017-27
 
9-11-17
 
Authorizing contract with Rumpke for solid waste disposal and recycling
services


Res. 2017-31
 
10-9-17
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with Team All Sports
to repair ballfield


Res. 2017-34
 
10-9-17
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with Capital
Electric to install signalization at Ridge and Ronald Reagan Highway


Res. 2017-34
 
10-9-17
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with Capital
Electric to install signalization at Ridge and Ronald Reagan Highway


Res. 2017-36
 
12-11-17
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with Argonaut for
property and casualty insurance


Res. 2017-38
 
12-11-17
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract to purchase energy
efficient lighting for the municipal building


Res. 2017-39
 
12-11-17
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with Alarmnet to
enable mobile alarm services for residents


Res. 2017-40
 
12-11-17
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract to purchase police
cruiser


2018-1
 
3-12-18
 
Authorizing a contract with Cost Recovery Corp for the collection and
reimbursement of certain public safety expenses


2018-2
 
1-8-18
 
Authorizing addendum to Village Manager’s employment contract


Res. 2018-2
 
1-8-18
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract for asbestos removal
at Amberley Green Clubhouse


Res. 2018-5
 
3-12-18
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract to purchase
replacement dump truck and sell existing vehicle


Res. 2018-6
 
3-12-18
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract to purchase
equipment for dump truck


Res. 2018-7
 
5-14-18
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with Adleta
Construction for the 2018 Road Program


Res. 2018-10
 
5-14-18
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract to purchase used
vehicle for Police Department


2018-9
 
6-11-18
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to execute a second amendment to the master
agreement in order to enter into a contract with Natural Gas Aggregator for a
specific time period


Res. 2018-13
 
6-11-18
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract to lease mobile data
computers and equipment to connect to CLEAR system for Police Department


Res. 2018-17
 
8-13-18
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into contracts for the 2018 Storm
Water Rehabilitation Program


Res. 2018-19
 
9-6-18
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with Hamilton County
and its vendor for furnishing salt for snow and ice control purposes


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE VI: REALTY



 

Ord. No.
 
Date
 
Description




C-19
 
3-21-55
 
Purchase land from A. V. Gerdsen (ten-foot strip on Kincaid Road)


R-C-133
 
12-30-63
 
Amberley Swim Country Club


C-247
 
12-13-65
 
Adjustment of boundary lines with City of Cincinnati


C-504
 
6-9-80
 
Authorizing purchase of Wigser property at 7217 Ridge Road containing 3.11
acres


Res. 1998-17
 
4-13-98
 
Purchasing the real property of the Amberley Village Swim & Tennis Club, Inc.


Res. 1998-24
 
5-11-98
 
Granting lease of a portion of village property located north of the Cross
County Highway to the Amberley Village Swim & Tennis Club, Inc.


2002-15
 
9-9-02
 
Establishing method of sale for village real property known as the North Site
- located north of the Cross County Highway.


Res. 2006-19
 
10-25-06
 
Authorizing the purchase of property located at 8597 Ridge Road from Faith
Garner.


Res. 2008-08
 
6-9-08
 
Retaining an appraiser to provide an appraisal of the property formerly known
as the Crest Hills Country Club.


Res. 2008-09
 
7-14-08
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to sign an environmental covenant with State
Fire Marshal restricting residential use by village of property located at
Village Hall.


2015-11
 
8-10-15
 
Authorizing and directing the Village Manager to execute a contract for the
sale of a portion of the North Site property.


2015-14
 
11-9-15
 
Authorizing and directing the Village Manager to execute a contract for the
purchase of .568 acres and consisting of Parcels 526-0040-0061-00,
526-0040-0060-00 and 526-0040-0028- 90.


2016-20
 
12-12-16
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into an agreement with Schuermann
Properties Acquisitions, LLC for a ground lease on a portion of the North
Site.


2017-1
 
1-9-17
 
Authorizing changes to ground lease with Schuermann Properties Acquisitions,
LLC.


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE VII: RECIPROCAL AGREEMENTS



 

Ord. No.
 
Date
 
Description




Res. 21
 
1-5-42
 
Emergency fire assistance contract with Village of Deer Park


C-72
 
2-20-57
 
Agreement with Village of Golf Manor for sewer tap in at Fair Oaks Drive


Res. C-77
 
9-8-58
 
Radio quadrant system considered


Res. C-90
 
11-9-59
 
Authorizing police to enter into a police quadrant contract


Res. C-112
 
9-11-61
 
Teletype contract


Res. C-127
 
10-14-63
 
Renewal of teletype contract with Hamilton County Commissioners


C-256
 
8-17-66
 
Mutual fire assistance contract with various communities in Hamilton County


C-341
 
11-8-71
 
Agreement with Hamilton County Commissioners to improve Galbraith Road


C-376
 
7-9-73
 
Agreement with Hamilton County Commissioners to improve Section Road


C-393
 
4-8-74
 
Agreement with Hamilton County Commissioners to improve Galbraith Road


Res. C-515
 
3-14-83
 
Accepting terms of Police Department mutual assistance agreement between
political subdivisions in Hamilton County


Res. C-527
 
8-8-83
 
A firefighting mutual assistance contract proposed by the Hamilton County
Fire Chiefs Association


C-582
 
6-10-85
 
Agreement with Hamilton County Commissioners to improve Section Road


C-583
 
6-10-85
 
Agreement with Hamilton County Commissioners for repair and rehabilitation of
Galbraith Road


Res. C-614
 
8-26-85
 
Agreement with Village of Golf Manor for the provision of paramedic services
and supporting medical services


C-648
 
2-18-89
 
Agreement with Hamilton County Commissioners for access to Village Landfill


Res. C-754
 
12-11-89
 
Agreement with Village of Golf Manor and Golf Manor Fire Department for the
provision of emergency medical services


C-685
 
5-14-90
 
Agreement with the village and the Board of Hamilton County Commissioners for
the improvement of the Elbrook Avenue and Section Road intersection


C-686
 
5-14-90
 
Agreement with the village and the Board of Hamilton County Commissioners for
the improvement of the Ridge and Section Road intersection


C-723
 
2-10-92
 
Agreement relative to the improvement of Ridge Road between Amberley Village
and the Board of Hamilton County Commissioners


C-724
 
2-10-92
 
Agreement relative to the improvement of Ridge Road between Amberley Village
and the Board of Hamilton County Commissioners


C-840
 
5-11-92
 
Agreement for participation by the village in a regional council of
governments to administer any cable television franchise awarded by the
village


C-845
 
6-8-92
 
Agreement to participate in the 1993 Ohio Municipal League Village Workers'
Compensation group rating plan


C-851
 
9-14-92
 
Agreement for law enforcement between political subdivisions within Hamilton
County


C-855
 
9-14-92
 
Agreement by which the village agrees to be subject to rules and regulations
of Hamilton County Solid Waste Management District


C-856
 
9-14-92
 
Agreement with Deer Park for continued provision to village of life squad
services


Res. C-932
 
9-12-94
 
Application for agreement relative to the repair and improvement of Section
Road between Amberley Village and the Ohio Public Works Commission


Res. C-935
 
10-11-94
 
Agreement of the Director of Transportation regarding the cost of improvement
to Ronald Reagan Highway


Res. C-943
 
12-12-94
 
Agreement with Deer Park for continued provision to village of life squad
services


Res. C-972
 
8-14-95
 
A contract with the Ohio Public Works Commission for State Capital
Improvement Program funds


Res. C-976
 
11-13-95
 
A contract for emergency medical services by the Village of Golf Manor and
the Golf Manor Fire Department


Res. C-985
 
2-12-96
 
An addendum to the existing Hamilton County Local Government Mutual Aid
Agreement for law enforcement


C-827
 
5-13-96
 
An agreement relative to the improvement of Section Road between the village
and the Board of Hamilton County Commissioners


1997-15
 
7-15-97
 
An agreement relative to the improvement of Section Road between the village
and the Board of Hamilton County Commissioners


Res. 1997-27
 
5-12-97
 
Authorizing and directing the Village Manager to enter into successive annual
agreement for participation in the Ohio Municipal League Villages Workers'
Compensation Group Rating Plan


Res. 1997-47
 
9-8-97
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to submit an application to, and to enter
into a contract with the Ohio Public Works Commission for state capital
improvement program funds


Res. 1997-54
 
11-10-97
 
Authorizing participation in ODOT Cooperative Purchasing Program


Res. 1998-8
 
3-2-98
 
Authorizing and directing the Village Manager to enter into an agreement with
Deer Park, Ohio for the continued provision to the village of life squad
services


Res. 1998-17
 
4-13-98
 
Authorizing the directing the Village Manager to enter into an agreement for
the purchase of the real property of the Amberley Village Swim & Tennis Club,
Inc.


Res. 1998-48
 
10-15-98
 
Authorizing the execution of the specialized County Arson Task Force Mutual
Aid Agreement


Res. 1999-10
 
5-10-99
 
Authorizing and directing the Village Manager to enter into an agreement with
the Deer Park-Silverton Joint Fire District for the continued provision to
the village of life squad services


Res. 1999-13
 
7-12-99
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a feasibility study agreement
with the City of Cincinnati and the City of Reading for a study by the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers of flood prone areas within these communities


2000-15
 
11-13-00
 
Agreement relative to the improvement of Section Road between the village and
the Board of Hamilton County Commissioners.


2002-12
 
7-15-02
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to execute the Linked Deposit Loan Program
Agreement.


2002-13
 
7-15-02
 
An agreement relative to the improvement of Galbraith Road between the
village and the Board of Hamilton County Commissioners.


Res. 2004-10
 
7-12-04
 
Adopting the bylaws of the First Suburbs Consortium of Southwest Ohio and
becoming a member of the same.


Res. 2004-14
 
7-12-04
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into agreement with the Center for
Local Government to establish the village as a member of the Benefits
Cooperative.


Res. 2004-17
 
8-9-04
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract with Ohio Public
Works Commission for Galbraith Road project.


Res. 2004-23
 
9-13-04
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to contract with Hamilton County Stormwater
District for stormwater service fees.


2005-11
 
5-9-05
 
An agreement relative to the improvement of Ridge Road from Section Road to
Ronald Reagan Highway between the village and the Board of Hamilton County
Commissioners.


2005-11
 
5-9-05
 
Agreement between the village and the Board of Hamilton County Commissioners
relative to the Improvement of Ridge Road from Section Road to Ronald Reagan
Highway


Res. 2007-26
 
10-10-07
 
Authorizing an agreement with the Village of Golf Manor and the Deer
Park-Silverton Joint Fire District for the provision of Paramedic and
Emergency Services


2008-17
 
8-25-08
 
Authorizing the Mayor to execute purchase agreement, settlement agreement,
and consent decree and final judgment entry as they pertain to the
acquisition of the property located in the village south and west of the
intersection of Galbraith Road and Ridge Road, consisting of approximately
133.14 acres, and formerly known as the Crest Hills Country Club


Res. 2008-15
 
10-14-08
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to submit an application to, and to enter a
contract with, the Ohio Public Works Commission for State Capital Improvement
Program Funds, and to enter into joint agreements with the City of Deer Park
and with the Board of Commissioners of Hamilton County for resurfacing and
improvements to Galbraith Road


Res. 2009-05
 
6-8-09
 
Authorizing and directing the Village Manager to continue to participate in
the Center for Local Government's investigation of the possible conversion of
local governments to a self-insurance pool for employees' healthcare


Res. 2010-02
 
2-8-10
 
Authorizing the village to enter into a contract with the state, and the
Village Manager is authorized to execute said contract for the Galbraith Road
Project


Res. 2011-20
 
11-14-11
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to execute a mutual aid agreement with
Hamilton County and participating agencies for law enforcement


Res. 2012-45
 
8-13-12
 
Supporting a grant partnership with the City of Deer Park and the Village of
Silverton


2013-03
 
1-29-13
 
Approving a Joint Economic Development Zone and authorizing the Manager to
execute a contract with Sycamore Township for the creation and operation of
such zone


Res. 2013-22
 
8-12-13
 
Approving contract with the Sycamore Township JEDZ Kenwood-Southwest Joint
Economic Development Zone Board for income tax administration, collection,
and enforcement


Res. 2013-29
 
10-15-13
 
Authorizing a second amended agreement with the Center for Local Government
joint self-insurance benefits pool


Res. 2013-31
 
11-11-13
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to execute a mutual aid agreement with
Hamilton County and participating agencies for law enforcement


Res. 2013-33
 
12-9-13
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a contract for paramedic and
EMS services with Golf Manor and Deer Park-Silverton Joint Fire Department


Res. 2015-3
 
3-9-15
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into a mutual aid agreement for the
Fire Department


Res. 2016-28
 
7-11-16
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into an agreement of cooperation
with Hamilton County, Ohio


Res. 2016-29
 
8-8-16
 
Authorizing an agreement between the village and the Board of Hamilton County
Commissioners


Res. 2016-41
 
10-10-16
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into an agreement with the
Cincinnati Port Authority


Res. 2016-52
 
12-12-16
 
Authorizing the Village Manager to enter into an agreement with Hamilton
County for the placement of a monument sign on Ridge Road


Res. 2017-29
 
9-11-17
 
Authorizing agreement with the Center for Local Government to participate in
public works mutual aid pact


Res. 2017-41
 
12-11-17
 
Authorizing the assignment of agreement with Golf Manor Fire Department to
the Little Miami Joint Fire District


 
 
 
 
 




 



TABLE VIII: ZONING MAP CHANGES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date
 
Description


C-463
 
7-27-78
 
Rezoning properties at 6520, 6545, and 6550 Wiehe Road and at 2100
Losantiville Avenue, from Residence A to Industrial B.


2008-13
 
7-10-08
 
Changing zoning of real property formerly known as Crest Hills Country Club
from a "Park P District" to a "Residence A District."


2012-11
 
4-8-13
 
Changing the zoning classification of the North Site to the “North Site
(NS)” District.


2016-13
 
9-12-16
 
Rezoning 17.6 acres located at 2100 Section Road from Residential A and B to
Industrial A.


 
 
 
 
 



 



PARALLEL REFERENCES




References to Ohio Revised Code





References to 1969 Code





References to Resolutions





References to Ordinances




REFERENCES TO OHIO REVISED CODE



 

R.C. Section
 
Code Section




1.01
 
10.01


1.02
 
10.02


1.05
 
10.02


1.14
 
10.03


1.15
 
10.03


1.23
 
10.05


1.42
 
10.03


1.43
 
10.03


1.44
 
10.02


1.45
 
10.03


1.55
 
10.05


1.57
 
10.04


1.58
 
10.04


1.59
 
10.02


9.481
 
30.06


125.30
 
101.03


128.01(A)
 
136.16


128.32(E) - (G)
 
136.16


128.99(A), (B)
 
136.16


701.01
 
10.02


709.023
 
101.03


715.47
 
95.31


715.67
 
130.99


715.691
 
101.03, 101.08


715.70
 
101.03, 101.08


715.71
 
101.03, 101.08


715.72
 
101.08


715.74
 
101.03


Ch. 718
 
101.01 - 101.03, 101.14, 101.18


718.01
 
101.03, 101.05


718.01(L)
 
101.03


718.011
 
101.05


718.012
 
101.04


718.021
 
101.08


718.03
 
101.03, 101.05


718.031
 
101.07


718.04
 
101.01, 101.02


718.05
 
101.09


718.051
 
101.09


718.052
 
101.09


718.08
 
101.07


718.11
 
101.03, 101.18


718.11(A)(4)
 
101.18


718.12
 
101.03, 101.09, 101.19


718.12(B)
 
93.99


718.12(D)
 
93.11


718.13
 
101.14


718.16
 
101.08


718.18
 
101.17


718.19
 
101.03, 101.09


718.23
 
101.03, 101.13


718.24
 
101.13


718.25
 
101.12


718.26
 
101.13


718.28
 
101.10, 101.13


718.30
 
101.20


718.36
 
101.03, 101.11


718.37
 
101.03


718.38
 
101.03, 101.16


718.41
 
101.09


718.99
 
101.99


718.121
 
101.08


718.151
 
101.06


718.335
 
101.15


733.23
 
30.01


901.51
 
131.21


901.99
 
131.21


951.02
 
90.02


951.10
 
90.02


951.99
 
90.02


955.22
 
90.02


955.222
 
90.02


955.99(E) - (H), (J), (L) - (N), (P), (Q)
 
90.02


959.01
 
90.15


959.02
 
90.17


959.03
 
90.18


959.13
 
90.19


959.131
 
90.19


959.15
 
90.20


959.17
 
90.21


959.21
 
90.24


959.99(A)
 
90.99


959.99(B)
 
90.17


959.99(C)
 
90.18, 90.20, 90.21


959.99(D)
 
90.19, 90.24


959.99(E)
 
90.19


959.99(E)(2)
 
90.15


959.99(E)(7)
 
90.24


959.99(I)
 
90.20


1533.171(A)
 
131.24, 135.041


1533.99(C)
 
131.24, 135.041


Ch. 1705
 
101.03


1905.01
 
32.01


1905.05
 
32.04


1905.20
 
32.02


1905.201
 
32.06


1905.21
 
32.03


2901.01
 
130.02


2901.02
 
130.03


2901.03
 
130.04


2901.04
 
130.05


2901.09
 
130.16


2901.11
 
130.14


2901.13
 
130.06


2901.21
 
130.07


2901.22
 
130.08


2901.23
 
130.09


2901.24
 
130.10


2903.05
 
135.01


2903.06
 
135.02


2903.13
 
135.03


2903.14
 
135.04


2903.21
 
135.05


2903.211
 
135.061


2903.22
 
135.06


2903.31
 
135.09


2905.03
 
135.07


2905.12
 
135.08


2907.01
 
133.01


2907.04
 
133.02


2907.06
 
133.03


2907.08
 
133.05


2907.09
 
133.04


2907.10
 
133.06


2907.23
 
133.07


2907.24(A), (C)(1), (D), (E)
 
133.08


2907.241
 
133.08


2907.25
 
133.09


2907.31
 
133.10


2907.311
 
133.11


2907.33
 
133.12


2907.35
 
133.13


2907.38
 
133.14


2907.39
 
133.15


2907.40
 
133.16


2909.01
 
131.01


2909.03
 
131.02


2909.06
 
131.03


2909.07
 
131.04


2909.08(A)-(E)
 
131.23


2909.09
 
131.03


2909.11(B)-(D)
 
131.05


2909.31
 
136.18


2911.21
 
131.06


2911.211
 
131.061


2911.23
 
131.06


2911.32
 
131.07


2913.01
 
131.01


2913.02
 
131.08


2913.03
 
131.09


2913.04
 
131.10


2913.07
 
131.25


2913.11
 
131.11


2913.21
 
131.12


2913.33
 
131.13


2913.41
 
131.14


2913.42
 
131.15


2913.43
 
131.16


2913.44
 
136.13


2913.441
 
136.14


2913.45
 
131.17


2913.51
 
131.18


2913.61(B)-(E)
 
131.19


2913.71
 
131.20


2915.01
 
134.01


2915.02(A) - (G), (K)
 
134.02


2915.03
 
134.03


2915.04
 
134.04


2915.05
 
134.05


2915.06
 
134.14


2915.09
 
134.06


2915.091
 
134.10


2915.092
 
134.11


2915.093
 
134.12


2915.094
 
134.13


2915.10
 
134.07


2915.11
 
134.08


2915.12
 
134.09


2915.13
 
134.12


2917.03
 
132.01


2917.031
 
132.01


2917.04
 
132.02


2917.05
 
132.03


2917.11
 
132.04


2917.12
 
132.05


2917.13
 
132.06


2917.21
 
132.07


2917.31
 
132.08


2917.32
 
132.09


2919.01
 
135.10


2919.21
 
135.13


2919.22(A) - (E), (H)
 
135.14


2919.23
 
135.15


2919.231
 
135.151


2919.24
 
135.16


2919.25
 
135.12


2921.01
 
136.01


2921.13
 
136.02


2921.21
 
136.03


2921.22
 
136.04


2921.23
 
136.05


2921.24
 
136.19


2921.25
 
136.19


2921.29
 
136.18


2921.31
 
136.06


2921.32
 
136.07


2921.321
 
136.17


2921.33
 
136.08


2921.331(A) - (C), (E), (F)
 
70.03


2921.42
 
136.09


2921.43
 
136.10


2921.44
 
136.11


2921.45
 
136.12


2921.51
 
136.15


2923.02
 
130.11


2923.03
 
130.12


2923.11
 
137.01


2923.11(M)
 
92.30


2923.12
 
137.02


2923.126
 
137.09


2923.1211(B), (C)
 
137.09


2923.1212
 
137.09


2923.15
 
137.03


2923.16
 
137.04


2923.19
 
137.06


2923.20
 
137.07


2923.201
 
137.10


2923.211
 
137.08


2925.01
 
138.01


2925.03(A) - (C)
 
138.02


2925.11
 
138.03


2925.12
 
138.04


2925.13(A) - (C), (F)
 
138.05


2925.14
 
138.13


2925.141
 
138.13


2925.31
 
138.07


2925.32(B)(4),(D)(2),(F),(G)
 
138.10


2925.33
 
138.10


2925.36(A) - (C)
 
138.08


2925.37(A), (G)
 
138.12


2925.50
 
138.09


2925.51
 
138.11


2925.511
 
138.11


2925.55
 
138.14


2925.56
 
138.14


2925.57
 
138.14


2925.58
 
138.14


2927.15
 
135.093


2927.17
 
133.17


2929.22
 
130.13


2929.23
 
133.99


2929.24
 
130.99


2929.25
 
130.99


2929.26
 
130.99


2929.27
 
130.99


2929.28
 
130.99


2929.31
 
130.99


2935.041
 
131.22


2935.28
 
70.12


2935.36(E)
 
130.02


2981.07
 
131.26


2981.11
 
130.15


2981.12
 
130.15


2981.13
 
130.15


3501.28
 
101.03


3501.36
 
101.03


3701.82
 
96.01


3701.99(B)
 
96.01


3715.05
 
138.14


3715.06
 
138.14


3719.01
 
138.01


3719.011
 
138.01


3719.013
 
138.01


3737.14(B)
 
92.21


3743.01
 
92.30


3743.54
 
92.32


3743.65(A)-(E)
 
92.31


3767.16
 
95.24


3767.18
 
95.25


3767.29
 
96.02


3767.32
 
95.29


3767.99(B)
 
96.02


3767.99(C)
 
95.29


3767.99(D)
 
95.24, 95.25


3781.55
 
133.04


4301.01
 
94.01


4301.20
 
94.02


4301.21
 
94.03


4301.22
 
94.04


4301.244
 
94.01


4301.58
 
94.05


4301.60
 
94.06


4301.62
 
94.07


4301.63
 
94.08


4301.631
 
94.09


4301.633
 
94.11


4301.634
 
94.12


4301.637
 
94.16


4301.638
 
94.04, 94.22


4301.639(A),(C)
 
94.17


4301.64
 
94.18


4301.65
 
94.10


4301.66
 
94.19


4301.67
 
94.20


4301.68
 
94.21


4301.69
 
94.22


4301.70
 
94.99


4301.99(A)
 
94.07, 94.10, 94.99


4301.99(B)
 
94.04, 94.09, 94.18, 94.20


4301.99(C)
 
94.03, 94.05, 94.06, 94.11, 94.19, 94.21, 94.22


4301.99(D)
 
94.04


4301.99(E)
 
94.08, 94.09


4301.99(F)
 
94.12


4301.99(H)
 
94.04


4301.99(I)
 
94.22


4301.99(J)
 
94.10


4303.202(D)(2)
 
94.13


4303.208(C)
 
94.13


4303.25
 
94.05


4303.99(D)
 
94.13


4313.02
 
101.03


4399.09
 
94.23


4399.10
 
94.24


4399.14
 
94.25


4399.15
 
94.26


4399.16
 
94.27


4399.99(A)
 
94.27


4399.99(B)
 
94.23


4399.99(C)
 
94.24


4399.99(D)
 
94.25


4399.99(E)
 
94.26


4501.01(LL)
 
70.02


4501.01(TT)
 
72.44


4503.11(A), (D)
 
71.07


4503.111
 
71.07


4503.21
 
71.01


4505.18
 
71.10


4507.02(A)
 
71.20


4507.03
 
71.20, 71.21


4507.04
 
71.20, 71.21


4507.05(F), (I)
 
71.22


4507.071(B)-(J)
 
71.22


4507.30
 
71.23


4507.31(A), (B)
 
71.22


4507.321
 
71.26


4507.35
 
71.30


4507.36
 
71.31


4509.102
 
136.02


4509.74
 
73.24


4510.037(J)
 
71.28


4510.04
 
71.28, 71.32 - 71.34


4510.05
 
71.35


4510.11
 
71.28


4510.111
 
71.28


4510.12
 
71.29


4510.14
 
71.32


4510.15
 
71.35


4510.16
 
71.33


4510.21
 
71.34


4510.44
 
73.04


4511.01
 
70.02


4511.03
 
70.07


4511.031
 
70.27


4511.04
 
70.05


4511.041
 
70.051


4511.042
 
70.051


4511.05
 
70.08


4511.051
 
70.09


4511.08
 
70.10


4511.12
 
70.21


4511.121
 
70.21


4511.13
 
70.22


4511.131
 
70.24


4511.132
 
70.221


4511.14
 
70.23


4511.16
 
70.25


4511.17
 
70.26


4511.181
 
73.01


4511.19(A) - (M)
 
73.01


4511.191(A), (D)
 
73.02


4511.192
 
73.02


4511.194
 
73.05


4511.20
 
73.06


4511.201
 
73.07


4511.202
 
73.08


4511.203
 
71.27


4511.204
 
72.743


4511.205
 
72.744


4511.21(A) - (G), (O), (P)
 
73.10


4511.211
 
73.10


4511.214
 
73.09


4511.215
 
73.09


4511.22
 
73.11


4511.24
 
73.12


4511.25
 
72.01


4511.251
 
73.13


4511.26
 
72.02


4511.27
 
72.03


4511.28
 
72.04


4511.29
 
72.05


4511.30
 
72.06


4511.31
 
72.07


4511.32
 
72.08


4511.33
 
72.09


4511.34
 
72.10


4511.35
 
72.11


4511.36
 
72.12


4511.37
 
72.13


4511.38
 
72.14


4511.39
 
72.15


4511.40
 
72.16


4511.41
 
72.20


4511.42
 
72.22


4511.43
 
72.23


4511.431
 
72.24


4511.44
 
72.25


4511.441
 
72.26


4511.45
 
72.27


4511.451
 
72.28


4511.452
 
72.29


4511.454
 
72.27


4511.46
 
72.30


4511.47
 
72.31


4511.48
 
72.32


4511.481
 
72.33


4511.49
 
72.40


4511.50
 
72.41


4511.51
 
72.42


4511.511
 
72.43


4511.512
 
72.44


4511.513
 
72.45


4511.52
 
75.01


4511.521
 
75.02


4511.53
 
75.03


4511.54
 
75.04


4511.55
 
75.05


4511.56
 
75.06


4511.61
 
72.50


4511.62
 
72.51


4511.63
 
72.52


4511.64
 
72.53


4511.65
 
72.60


4511.66
 
76.01


4511.661
 
76.03


4511.67
 
76.04


4511.68
 
76.05


4511.69(A) - (J)(3)(a), (K)
 
76.06


4511.70
 
72.65


4511.701
 
72.66


4511.71
 
72.67


4511.711
 
72.68


4511.712
 
72.69


4511.713
 
72.68


4511.714
 
72.67


4511.72
 
72.70


4511.73
 
72.71


4511.74
 
72.72


4511.75
 
72.75


4511.751
 
72.76


4511.76(C), (E), (F)
 
72.77


4511.761
 
72.78


4511.762
 
72.79


4511.763
 
72.80


4511.764
 
72.81


4511.77
 
72.82


4511.771
 
72.83


4511.772
 
72.84


4511.79
 
73.03


4511.82(A) - (D)
 
72.72


4511.84
 
72.742


4511.99
 
70.99


4511.991
 
70.99


4513.02(A), (H)
 
74.01


4513.021
 
74.02


4513.03
 
74.03


4513.04
 
74.04


4513.05
 
74.05


4513.06
 
74.06


4513.07
 
74.07


4513.071
 
74.08


4513.08
 
74.09


4513.09
 
74.10


4513.10
 
74.11


4513.11
 
74.12


4513.111
 
74.12


4513.12
 
74.13


4513.13
 
74.14


4513.14
 
74.15


4513.15
 
74.16


4513.16
 
74.17


4513.17
 
74.18


4513.171
 
74.18


4513.18
 
74.19


4513.181
 
74.20


4513.182
 
74.21


4513.19
 
74.22


4513.20
 
74.23


4513.201
 
74.24


4513.202
 
74.25


4513.21
 
74.26


4513.22
 
74.27


4513.23
 
74.28


4513.24
 
74.29


4513.241(C) - (K)
 
74.31


4513.25
 
74.30


4513.26
 
74.31


4513.261
 
74.32


4513.262
 
74.33


4513.2633(A) - (F)
 
72.74


4513.27
 
74.34


4513.28
 
74.35


4513.29
 
74.36


4513.30
 
74.42


4513.31
 
74.43


4513.32
 
74.44


4513.34
 
74.40


4513.36
 
73.15


4513.361
 
73.16


4513.66
 
70.13


4513.68
 
70.13


4513.99
 
74.11, 74.21, 74.23 - 74.25, 74.30, 74.31, 74.34, 74.36, 74.40, 74.42 - 74.44


4519.01
 
75.25


4519.02
 
75.34


4519.20
 
75.26


4519.22
 
75.26


4519.40
 
75.27


4519.401
 
73.09


4519.41
 
75.28


4519.44
 
75.29


4519.45
 
75.30


4519.46
 
75.31


4519.47
 
75.32


4519.48
 
75.33


4519.66
 
75.35


4549.02
 
73.20


4549.021
 
73.21


4549.03
 
73.22


4549.05
 
73.31


4549.08
 
71.03


4549.081(B), (C)
 
70.21


4549.10
 
71.04


4549.11
 
71.05


4549.12(A)
 
71.06


4549.20
 
74.39


4729.01
 
138.01


4927.01
 
101.06


5577.05
 
74.38


5577.06
 
74.38


5577.11
 
74.37


5577.15
 
74.44


5589.08
 
74.41


5589.12
 
131.10


5589.99(B)
 
74.41, 131.10


Title LVII
 
101.03


5701 et seq.
 
101.03


5703.056
 
101.03, 101.17


5717.03
 
101.03


5717.011
 
101.03, 101.18


5727.01
 
101.06


5727.24
 
101.03


5727.30
 
101.03


Ch. 5745
 
101.03, 101.06


5747.01
 
101.03


5747.08(G)
 
101.07, 101.09


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO 1969 CODE



 

1969 Code Section
 
2000 Code Section




1.01
 
10.01


1.03
 
10.01


1.04
 
10.02, 10.03


1.05
 
10.07


1.06
 
10.05


1.07
 
10.08


1.08
 
10.09


1.09
 
10.03


1.10
 
10.03


1.11
 
10.13


2.01
 
10.99


30.01
 
31.10, 33.03


30.02
 
31.11


30.03
 
31.20 - 31.32


30.04
 
31.40


31.01
 
36.01, 36.03


31.02
 
36.04


31.03
 
36.05


32.01
 
35.01


32.02
 
35.04


32.03
 
35.03


32.04
 
35.11


32.05
 
35.10


34.01
 
37.01


34.02
 
37.02


34.03
 
37.03


34.04
 
37.04


34.05
 
37.06


34.06
 
37.05


34.07
 
37.07


34.08
 
37.08


34.09
 
37.09


34.99
 
37.99


35.01
 
34.01


35.02
 
34.02


35.03
 
34.03


35.04
 
34.04


35.05
 
34.05


35.06
 
34.06


35.07
 
34.07 - 34.10


50.01
 
50.01


50.02
 
50.10


50.03
 
50.11


50.04
 
50.02


50.05
 
50.14


50.06
 
50.12


50.07
 
50.13


50.08
 
50.16


50.09
 
50.15


50.10
 
50.30


50.11
 
50.31


50.12
 
50.32


50.13
 
50.40


50.14
 
50.41


50.15
 
50.42


50.16
 
50.42


50.17
 
50.44


50.18
 
50.17


50.19
 
50.18


50.20
 
50.19


50.21
 
50.20


50.22
 
50.21


50.23
 
50.22


50.24
 
50.23


50.99
 
50.99


51.01
 
51.01


51.02
 
51.02


51.03
 
51.03


51.04
 
51.04


51.05
 
51.05


51.99
 
51.99


70.01
 
70.01


70.02
 
70.02


70.03
 
70.08


70.04
 
70.05


70.05
 
70.04


70.07
 
70.06


70.11
 
70.11


70.12
 
70.20


70.13
 
70.21


70.14
 
70.22


70.16
 
70.25


70.17
 
70.26


70.24
 
73.15


71.02
 
74.01


71.08
 
74.09


71.10
 
74.11


71.11
 
74.12


71.12
 
74.13


71.13
 
74.14


71.14
 
74.15


71.15
 
74.16


71.16
 
74.17


71.17
 
74.18


71.18
 
74.22


71.19
 
74.23


71.20
 
74.26


71.21
 
74.27


71.22
 
74.28


71.23
 
74.29


71.24
 
74.30


71.25
 
74.31


71.26
 
74.36


71.27
 
74.37


71.28
 
74.35


71.34
 
74.43


71.36
 
74.44


71.37
 
74.40


71.38
 
74.41


72.01
 
72.42


72.02
 
70.02, 72.65


72.03
 
72.65


72.04
 
72.14


72.07
 
73.03


72.08(A)
 
73.06


72.08(B)
 
73.07


72.10
 
71.21


72.11
 
71.21


72.12
 
71.22


72.13
 
71.23


72.14
 
71.23


72.15
 
71.23


72.16
 
71.23


72.17
 
71.23


72.21
 
71.30


72.23
 
71.01


72.25
 
71.03


72.26
 
71.04


72.27
 
71.05


72.28
 
71.07


72.29
 
71.07


72.30
 
71.08


72.31
 
71.09


72.32
 
71.10


72.33
 
76.03


72.38
 
73.20


72.39
 
73.21


72.40
 
73.22


72.41
 
73.23


72.42
 
76.04


72.99
 
73.24


73.01
 
73.10


73.02
 
73.10


73.03
 
73.13


73.04(A)
 
73.11


73.04(B)
 
73.11


73.10
 
72.01


73.11
 
72.02


73.12
 
72.03


73.13
 
72.04


73.14
 
72.05


73.15
 
72.06


73.16
 
72.07


73.17
 
72.08


73.18
 
72.09


73.19
 
72.10


73.20
 
72.11


73.21
 
72.12


73.22
 
72.13


73.23
 
72.14


73.24
 
72.14


73.25
 
72.15


73.26
 
72.16


73.27
 
72.21


73.28
 
72.20


73.29
 
72.22


73.30
 
72.23


73.31
 
72.23


73.32
 
72.25


73.33
 
72.69


73.34
 
72.67


73.41
 
70.07


73.43
 
72.70


73.46
 
72.71


73.47
 
72.28


73.50
 
72.30


73.51
 
72.30


73.52
 
72.31


73.53
 
72.32


73.54
 
72.40


73.56
 
72.41


73.60
 
72.50


73.61
 
72.51


73.63
 
72.53


73.70
 
72.75


73.71
 
72.75


73.72
 
72.77


73.73
 
72.78


73.74
 
72.79


73.75
 
72.82


75.01
 
76.05


75.02
 
76.03


75.03
 
76.02


75.04
 
76.01


75.05
 
76.04


75.06(B)
 
76.06


75.06(C)
 
76.06


75.07
 
76.07


75.09
 
76.08


75.10
 
76.09


75.99
 
76.99


Ch. 76, Sch. I
 
77.01


Ch. 76, Sch. II
 
77.02


Ch. 76, Sch. II
 
77.02


Ch. 76, Sch. III
 
77.03


Ch. 76, Sch. IV
 
77.04


90.01
 
90.01


90.04
 
90.22


90.08
 
90.19


90.09
 
90.16


90.10
 
90.18


90.11
 
90.40


90.12
 
90.41


90.13
 
90.42


90.14
 
90.43


90.15
 
90.44


91.01
 
92.01


91.02
 
92.02


91.03
 
92.03


91.04
 
92.04


91.05
 
92.05


91.06
 
92.06


91.07
 
92.07


91.08
 
92.08


91.09
 
92.09


91.10
 
92.10


91.11
 
92.11


91.13
 
92.13


91.14
 
92.14


91.15
 
92.15


91.17
 
92.17


91.18
 
92.18


91.19
 
92.19


91.20
 
92.20


91.22
 
92.99


92.01
 
90.23


93.01
 
95.51


93.02
 
95.22


93.03
 
95.27


95.01
 
98.02


96.01
 
95.40


96.02
 
95.41


97.01
 
93.01


97.02
 
93.02


97.03
 
93.03


97.04
 
93.04


97.05
 
93.05


97.06
 
93.06


97.07
 
93.07


97.08
 
93.08


97.09
 
93.09


97.10
 
93.10


97.11
 
93.11


97.12
 
93.12


97.13
 
93.13


97.14
 
93.14


97.15
 
93.15


97.99
 
93.99


98.02
 
91.01


98.03
 
91.02


98.04
 
91.03


98.05
 
91.04


98.06
 
91.05


98.07
 
91.08


98.08
 
91.07


98.09
 
91.09


98.10
 
91.05


98.11
 
91.12


98.12
 
91.11


98.13
 
91.10


98.14
 
91.06


98.99
 
91.99


110.01
 
110.01


110.02
 
110.02


110.03
 
110.03


112.02
 
112.15


130.01
 
130.02


130.02
 
130.03


130.03
 
130.04


130.04
 
130.05


130.05
 
130.06


130.06
 
130.07


130.07
 
130.08


130.08
 
130.09


130.09
 
130.10


130.11
 
130.11


130.12
 
130.12


130.13
 
130.13


131.01
 
135.01


131.02
 
135.02


131.03
 
135.03


131.04
 
135.04


131.05
 
135.05


131.06
 
135.06


131.07
 
135.07


131.09
 
135.08


132.01
 
131.01


132.03
 
131.02


132.04
 
131.03


132.05
 
131.04


132.06
 
131.06


132.07
 
131.08


132.08
 
131.09


132.09
 
131.10


132.10
 
131.11


132.11
 
131.12


132.12
 
131.13


132.13
 
131.14


132.14
 
131.15


132.15
 
131.16


132.16
 
131.17


132.17
 
131.18


132.18
 
131.07


132.19
 
131.19


132.20
 
131.20


132.21
 
131.21


133.01
 
132.01


133.02
 
132.02


133.03
 
132.04


133.04
 
132.05


133.05
 
132.06


133.06
 
132.07


133.07
 
132.08


133.08
 
132.09


133.09
 
94.20


133.10
 
94.18


133.11
 
94.07


133.13
 
94.21


133.14
 
94.22


133.15
 
94.08


133.16
 
94.12


133.17
 
94.19


133.18
 
138.03


134.08
 
96.01


134.08(D)
 
96.99


134.09
 
96.02


134.12
 
96.04, 96.99


135.01
 
136.03


135.02
 
136.04


135.03
 
136.05


135.04
 
136.06


135.05
 
136.07


135.06
 
136.08


135.07
 
136.13


136.01
 
133.01


136.02
 
133.02


136.03
 
133.03


136.05
 
133.05


136.07
 
133.07


136.08
 
133.08


136.09
 
133.09


136.10
 
133.10


136.12
 
133.12


136.13
 
133.13


137.01
 
134.01


137.04
 
134.03


137.05
 
134.04


137.06
 
134.05


138.01
 
131.30


138.02
 
131.31


138.03
 
131.32


138.04
 
131.33


138.05
 
131.34


138.06
 
131.35


138.07
 
131.36


138.08
 
131.37


138.09
 
131.38


138.10
 
131.39


138.11
 
131.40


138.12
 
131.41


138.13
 
131.42


139.01
 
135.10


139.02
 
135.13


139.03
 
135.14


139.04
 
135.15


140.01
 
136.01


140.02
 
136.02


140.04
 
136.10


140.05
 
136.11


140.06
 
136.12


150.01
 
150.01


150.02
 
150.02


150.03
 
150.03


151.01
 
154.01


151.02
 
154.02


151.05
 
154.05


151.06
 
154.06


151.07
 
154.07


151.08
 
154.08


151.10
 
154.10


151.11
 
154.11


151.12
 
154.12


151.13
 
154.13


151.14
 
154.14


151.15
 
154.15


151.16
 
154.16


151.17
 
154.17


151.20
 
154.20


151.21
 
154.21


151.22
 
154.22


151.25
 
154.25


151.26
 
154.26


151.27
 
154.27


151.28
 
154.28


151.30
 
154.30


151.31
 
154.31


151.32
 
154.32


151.33
 
154.33


151.35
 
154.35


151.36
 
154.36


151.37
 
154.37


151.38
 
154.38


151.40
 
154.40


151.41
 
154.41


151.42
 
154.42


151.43
 
154.43


151.45
 
154.45


151.46
 
154.46


151.47
 
154.47


151.48
 
154.48


151.50
 
154.50


151.51
 
154.51


151.52
 
154.52


151.53
 
154.53


151.55
 
154.55


151.56
 
154.56


151.57
 
154.57


151.58
 
154.58


151.59
 
154.59


151.60
 
154.60


151.62
 
154.62


151.63
 
154.63


151.64
 
154.64


151.65
 
154.65


151.66
 
154.66


151.67
 
154.67


151.68
 
154.68


151.69
 
154.69


151.70
 
154.70


151.72
 
154.72


151.73
 
154.73


151.74
 
154.74


151.99
 
154.99


152.01
 
155.01


152.02
 
155.05, 155.07


152.03
 
155.02, 155.12


152.04(B)
 
155.14


152.04(C)
 
155.03


152.05
 
155.08


152.06(C)
 
155.08


152.06(D)
 
155.08


152.07
 
155.10


Ch. 152, Exhibit I
 
155.08


Ch. 152 Exhibit III
 
155.09


Ch. 152. Exhibit V
 
155.11


153.01
 
150.20


153.02
 
150.21


153.03
 
150.22


154.01
 
151.01


154.02
 
151.02


154.03
 
151.03


154.04
 
151.04


154.05
 
151.05


154.06
 
151.06


154.07
 
151.07


154.08
 
151.08


154.09
 
151.09


154.10
 
151.10


154.11
 
151.11


154.12
 
151.12


154.13
 
151.13


154.14
 
151.14


154.15
 
151.15


154.16
 
151.16


154.17
 
151.17


154.18
 
151.18


154.19
 
151.19


154.20
 
151.99


Appendix - Exhibits I, II
 
155.20


Appendix - Exhibit III
 
155.20


Appendix - Exhibit VI
 
155.20


 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS



 

Res. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




21
 
1-5-42
 
T.S.O. VI


29
 
6-14-46
 
T.S.O. III


C-1
 
11-22-54
 
31.40


C-33
 
3-12-56
 
31.40


C-75
 
5-12-58
 
36.04, T.S.O. III


C-77
 
9-8-58
 
T.S.O. VI


C-90
 
11-9-59
 
T.S.O. VI


C-112
 
9-11-61
 
T.S.O. VI


C-127
 
10-14-63
 
T.S.O. VI


R-C-133
 
12-30-63
 
T.S.O. VI


C-388
 
10-9-79
 
35.05


C-515
 
3-14-83
 
T.S.O. VI


C-527
 
8-8-83
 
T.S.O. VI


C-562
 
6-11-84
 
35.05


C-578
 
10-9-84
 
T.S.O. III


C-614
 
8-26-85
 
T.S.O. VI


C-620
 
9-9-85
 
T.S.O. V


C-625
 
11-26-85
 
T.S.O. V


C-634
 
12-9-85
 
T.S.O. V


C-649
 
8-11-86
 
52.01


C-654
 
1-9-87
 
T.S.O. V


C-660
 
4-16-87
 
T.S.O. V


C-661
 
4-16-87
 
T.S.O. V


C-675
 
8-10-87
 
T.S.O. V


C-729
 
1-9-89
 
T.S.O. V


C-733
 
3-13-89
 
T.S.O. V


C-734
 
3-13-89
 
98.11


C-735
 
4-10-89
 
T.S.O. V


C-736
 
4-10-89
 
T.S.O. V


C-738
 
6-20-89
 
T.S.O. V


C-741
 
7-10-89
 
35.03


C-745
 
8-14-89
 
T.S.O. V


C-746
 
8-14-89
 
T.S.O. V


C-748
 
9-11-89
 
T.S.O. V


C-749
 
9-11-89
 
T.S.O. V


C-752
 
10-10-89
 
T.S.O. V


C-754
 
12-11-89
 
T.S.O. VI


C-760
 
1-8-90
 
T.S.O. V


C-762
 
2-12-90
 
T.S.O. V


C-763
 
2-12-90
 
T.S.O. V


C-764
 
2-12-90
 
T.S.O. V


C-768
 
3-12-90
 
T.S.O. V


C-769
 
3-12-90
 
T.S.O. V


C-771
 
3-14-90
 
T.S.O. V


C-773
 
4-16-90
 
T.S.O. V


C-777
 
7-9-90
 
T.S.O. V


C-780
 
8-13-90
 
T.S.O. V


C-781
 
8-13-90
 
T.S.O. V


C-782
 
8-13-90
 
T.S.O. V


C-783
 
9-10-90
 
T.S.O. V


C-788
 
11-12-90
 
T.S.O. V


C-794
 
12-10-90
 
T.S.O. V


C-795
 
12-10-90
 
T.S.O. V


C-800
 
2-12-91
 
T.S.O. V


C-801
 
2-12-91
 
T.S.O. V


C-802
 
2-12-91
 
T.S.O. V


C-804
 
3-11-91
 
98.11


C-805
 
4-8-91
 
T.S.O. V


C-807
 
4-8-91
 
T.S.O. V


C-812
 
7-8-91
 
T.S.O. V


C-815
 
8-12-91
 
T.S.O. V


C-817
 
8-12-91
 
T.S.O. V


C-818
 
9-10-91
 
T.S.O. V


C-820
 
11-11-91
 
T.S.O. V


C-822
 
11-11-91
 
T.S.O. V


C-827
 
1-13-92
 
T.S.O. V


C-831
 
2-10-92
 
T.S.O. V


C-832
 
2-10-92
 
T.S.O. V


C-833
 
2-10-92
 
T.S.O. V


C-836
 
4-13-92
 
T.S.O. V


C-837
 
4-13-92
 
T.S.O. V


C-841
 
5-11-92
 
T.S.O. V


C-846
 
6-8-92
 
T.S.O. V


C-847
 
6-8-92
 
T.S.O. V


C-853
 
9-14-92
 
T.S.O. V


C-858
 
10-13-92
 
T.S.O. V


C-859
 
10-13-92
 
T.S.O. V


C-866
 
12-14-92
 
T.S.O. V


C-867
 
12-14-92
 
T.S.O. V


C-868
 
12-14-92
 
T.S.O. V


C-872
 
2-8-93
 
T.S.O. V


C-873
 
2-8-93
 
T.S.O. V


C-875
 
2-8-93
 
T.S.O. V


C-878
 
2-8-93
 
T.S.O. V


C-880
 
3-8-93
 
T.S.O. V


C-881
 
3-8-93
 
T.S.O. V


C-882
 
3-8-93
 
T.S.O. V


C-884
 
4-12-93
 
T.S.O. V


C-886
 
4-12-93
 
T.S.O. V


C-892
 
6-14-93
 
T.S.O. V


C-895
 
7-12-93
 
T.S.O. V


C-897
 
8-9-93
 
T.S.O. V


C-899
 
9-13-93
 
T.S.O. V


C-900
 
9-13-93
 
T.S.O. V


C-901
 
9-13-93
 
T.S.O. V


C-908
 
1-10-94
 
T.S.O. V


C-909
 
2-14-94
 
T.S.O. V


C-913
 
3-14-94
 
T.S.O. V


C-916
 
4-11-94
 
T.S.O. V


C-917
 
4-20-94
 
T.S.O. V


C-919
 
6-13-94
 
T.S.O. V


C-922
 
7-11-94
 
T.S.O. V


C-923
 
7-11-94
 
T.S.O. V


C-924
 
7-11-94
 
T.S.O. V


C-929
 
9-12-94
 
T.S.O. V


C-930
 
9-12-94
 
T.S.O. V


C-932
 
9-12-94
 
T.S.O. VI


C-935
 
10-11-94
 
T.S.O. VI


C-936
 
10-11-94
 
T.S.O. V


C-938
 
11-14-94
 
T.S.O. V


C-941
 
11-14-94
 
T.S.O. V


C-943
 
12-12-94
 
T.S.O. VI


C-946
 
1-17-95
 
T.S.O. V


C-947
 
1-17-95
 
T.S.O. V


C-948
 
1-17-95
 
T.S.O. V


C-951
 
3-13-95
 
T.S.O. V


C-957
 
4-17-95
 
T.S.O. V


C-959
 
5-8-95
 
T.S.O. V


C-961
 
6-12-95
 
T.S.O. V


C-962
 
6-12-95
 
T.S.O. V


C-963
 
6-12-95
 
T.S.O. V


C-964
 
7-10-95
 
T.S.O. V


C-971
 
8-14-95
 
T.S.O. V


C-972
 
8-14-95
 
T.S.O. VI


C-976
 
11-13-95
 
T.S.O. VI


C-983
 
2-12-96
 
T.S.O. V


C-984
 
2-12-96
 
T.S.O. V


C-985
 
2-12-96
 
T.S.O. VI


C-986
 
2-12-96
 
T.S.O. V


C-987
 
3-11-96
 
T.S.O. V


C-990
 
5-13-96
 
T.S.O. V


C-991
 
5-13-96
 
T.S.O. V


C-992
 
5-13-96
 
T.S.O. V


C-994
 
6-10-96
 
T.S.O. V


C-995
 
6-10-96
 
T.S.O. V


C-1001
 
9-9-96
 
38.01


C-1002
 
9-9-96
 
T.S.O. V


C-1003
 
10-3-96
 
T.S.O. V


C-1004
 
10-15-96
 
38.02


C-1010
 
10-15-96
 
T.S.O. V


C-1011
 
11-11-96
 
T.S.O. V


C-1012
 
11-11-96
 
T.S.O. V


1997-1
 
1-13-97
 
T.S.O. V


1997-3
 
1-13-97
 
T.S.O. V


1997-13
 
2-10-97
 
T.S.O. V


1997-14
 
2-10-97
 
T.S.O. V


1997-19
 
3-12-97
 
T.S.O. V


1997-20
 
3-12-97
 
T.S.O. V


1997-22
 
3-12-97
 
T.S.O. V


1997-24
 
3-12-97
 
T.S.O. V


1997-26
 
5-12-97
 
T.S.O. V


1997-27
 
5-12-97
 
T.S.O. VI


1997-28
 
5-12-97
 
98.11


1997-30
 
6-9-97
 
T.S.O. IV


1997-32
 
6-18-97
 
T.S.O. V


1997-33
 
7-15-97
 
T.S.O. V


1997-34
 
7-15-97
 
T.S.O. V


1997-37
 
7-15-97
 
33.04


1997-41
 
8-11-97
 
T.S.O. V


1997-42
 
8-11-97
 
T.S.O. V


1997-45
 
8-27-97
 
T.S.O. V


1997-46
 
9-8-97
 
T.S.O. V


1997-47
 
9-8-97
 
T.S.O. VI


1997-48
 
9-8-97
 
T.S.O. V


1997-49
 
9-8-97
 
T.S.O. V


1997-51
 
10-14-97
 
T.S.O. V


1997-54
 
11-10-97
 
T.S.O. VI


1998-3
 
1-12-98
 
T.S.O. V


1998-4
 
1-12-98
 
T.S.O. V


1998-5
 
2-9-98
 
33.04


1998-8
 
3-2-98
 
T.S.O. VI


1998-9
 
3-9-98
 
T.S.O. V


1998-11
 
3-9-98
 
T.S.O. V


1998-12
 
3-25-98
 
T.S.O. V


1998-16
 
4-13-98
 
T.S.O. V


1998-17
 
4-13-98
 
T.S.O. VI


1998-18
 
4-13-98
 
T.S.O. V


1998-19
 
4-13-98
 
T.S.O. V


1998-20
 
5-11-98
 
T.S.O. V


1998-21
 
5-11-98
 
T.S.O. V


1998-22
 
5-11-98
 
T.S.O. V


1998-23
 
5-11-98
 
T.S.O. V


1998-24
 
5-11-98
 
T.S.O. VI


1998-26
 
5-22-98
 
T.S.O. V


1998-28
 
6-8-98
 
T.S.O. V


1998-29
 
6-8-98
 
T.S.O. V


1998-30
 
7-14-98
 
T.S.O. V


1998-31
 
7-14-98
 
T.S.O. V


1998-33
 
7-14-98
 
T.S.O. V


1998-36
 
7-14-98
 
T.S.O. V


1998-37
 
8-10-98
 
T.S.O. V


1998-38
 
8-10-98
 
T.S.O. V


1998-39
 
8-10-98
 
T.S.O. V


1998-42
 
9-14-98
 
T.S.O. V


1998-43
 
9-14-98
 
T.S.O. V


1998-46
 
10-15-98
 
T.S.O. V


1998-48
 
10-15-98
 
T.S.O. VI


1998-49
 
10-22-98
 
T.S.O. V


1998-50
 
10-22-98
 
T.S.O. V


1998-51
 
10-22-98
 
T.S.O. V


1998-52
 
10-22-98
 
T.S.O. V


1998-53
 
10-22-98
 
T.S.O. V


1998-54
 
10-22-98
 
T.S.O. V


1998-55
 
11-9-98
 
T.S.O. V


1998-56
 
12-14-98
 
T.S.O. V


1998-57
 
12-14-98
 
T.S.O. V


1998-58
 
12-23-98
 
T.S.O. V


1999-2
 
1-22-99
 
T.S.O. V


1999-5
 
3-8-99
 
T.S.O. V


1999-7
 
4-12-99
 
T.S.O. III


1999-9
 
5-10-99
 
T.S.O. V


1999-10
 
5-10-99
 
T.S.O. VI


1999-11
 
6-30-99
 
T.S.O. V


1999-13
 
7-12-99
 
T.S.O. VI


1999-15
 
8-9-99
 
T.S.O. V


1999-16
 
8-9-99
 
T.S.O. V


1999-18
 
8-9-99
 
T.S.O. V


2001-13
 
6-11-01
 
35.10


2003-12
 
4-14-03
 
98.11


2004-05
 
5-10-04
 
54.10


2004-08
 
6-14-04
 
T.S.O. V


2004-09
 
7-12-04
 
T.S.O. V


2004-10
 
7-12-04
 
T.S.O. VII


2004-11
 
7-12-04
 
T.S.O. V


2004-13
 
7-12-04
 
T.S.O. V


2004-14
 
7-12-04
 
T.S.O. VII


2004-17
 
8-9-04
 
T.S.O. VII


2004-19
 
9-13-04
 
T.S.O. V


2004-22
 
9-13-04
 
T.S.O. V


2004-23
 
9-13-04
 
T.S.O. VII


2004-26
 
12-13-04
 
T.S.O. V


2004-30
 
12-13-04
 
T.S.O. V


2004-31
 
12-13-04
 
T.S.O. V


2004-32
 
12-22-04
 
T.S.O. V


2005-02
 
4-11-05
 
98.11


2005-04
 
7-11-05
 
T.S.O. V


2005-06
 
7-11-05
 
T.S.O. V


2005-10
 
8-8-05
 
T.S.O. V


2005-11
 
9-12-05
 
T.S.O. V


2005-15
 
11-14-05
 
37.10


2006-16
 
11-14-05
 
T.S.O. V


2006-19
 
12-12-05
 
T.S.O. V


2006-01
 
3-13-06
 
T.S.O. V


2006-02
 
3-13-06
 
T.S.O. V


2006-07
 
7-10-06
 
T.S.O. V


2006-08
 
7-10-06
 
T.S.O. V


2006-10
 
8-14-06
 
T.S.O. V


2006-13
 
9-11-06
 
T.S.O. V


2006-14
 
9-11-06
 
T.S.O. V


2006-15
 
9-11-06
 
36.10


2006-19
 
10-25-06
 
T.S.O. VI


2006-21
 
12-11-06
 
T.S.O. V


2006-22
 
12-11-06
 
T.S.O. V


2007-05
 
4-9-07
 
98.11


2007-07
 
5-14-07
 
T.S.O. V


2007-08
 
5-14-07
 
97.10


2007-10
 
6-11-07
 
37.11


2007-19
 
9-10-07
 
T.S.O. V


2007-21
 
9-10-07
 
T.S.O. V


2007-24
 
11-1-07
 
T.S.O. V


2007-26
 
12-10-07
 
T.S.O. VII


2007-27
 
12-10-07
 
T.S.O. V


2008-02
 
3-10-08
 
T.S.O. V


2008-04
 
5-12-08
 
T.S.O. V


2008-05
 
6-9-08
 
T.S.O. V


2008-08
 
6-9-08
 
T.S.O. VI


2008-09
 
7-14-08
 
T.S.O. VI   


2008-11
 
7-14-08
 
T.S.O. V


2008-14
 
7-14-08
 
T.S.O. I


2008-15
 
10-14-08
 
T.S.O. VII


2008-17
 
12-15-08
 
T.S.O. V


2009-03
 
4-13-09
 
98.11


2009-04
 
5-11-09
 
T.S.O. V


2009-05
 
6-8-09
 
T.S.O. VII


2009-06
 
7-13-09
 
T.S.O. V


2009-07
 
7-13-09
 
T.S.O. V


2009-11
 
10-13-09
 
T.S.O. IV


2009-12
 
10-13-09
 
T.S.O. V


2009-14
 
11-9-09
 
T.S.O. V


2010-02
 
2-8-10
 
T.S.O. VII


2010-03
 
2-8-10
 
T.S.O. V


2010-05
 
5-10-10
 
T.S.O. V


2010-07
 
5-10-10
 
T.S.O. V


2010-08
 
6-14-10
 
T.S.O. V


2010-13
 
10-12-10
 
T.S.O. V


2010-15
 
11-8-10
 
T.S.O. V


2011-02
 
4-11-11
 
98.11


2011-03
 
5-9-11
 
T.S.O. V


2011-04
 
5-9-11
 
T.S.O. V


2011-05
 
5-9-11
 
T.S.O. V


2011-07
 
6-13-11
 
T.S.O. V


2011-10
 
6-13-11
 
T.S.O. V


2011-13
 
9-12-11
 
T.S.O. V


2011-19
 
11-14-11
 
T.S.O. V


2011-20
 
11-14-11
 
T.S.O. VII


2011-21
 
11-14-11
 
T.S.O. V


2011-23
 
12-12-11
 
T.S.O. V


2012-24
 
2-13-12
 
T.S.O. V


2012-26
 
2-13-12
 
T.S.O. V


2012-29
 
3-12-12
 
T.S.O. V


2012-31
 
3-12-12
 
T.S.O. V


2012-33
 
4-9-12
 
T.S.O. V


2012-40
 
6-11-12
 
T.S.O. V


2012-42
 
7-9-12
 
T.S.O. V


2012-44
 
7-9-12
 
T.S.O. V


2012-45
 
8-13-12
 
T.S.O. VII


2012-48
 
9-10-12
 
T.S.O. V


2012-53
 
11-12-12
 
T.S.O. V


2012-54
 
11-12-12
 
T.S.O. V


2012-55
 
11-12-12
 
T.S.O. V


2012-56
 
11-12-12
 
T.S.O. V


2012-57
 
12-10-12
 
T.S.O. V


2012-58
 
12-10-12
 
T.S.O. V


2012-59
 
12-10-12
 
T.S.O. V


2013-03
 
3-11-13
 
T.S.O. V


2013-04
 
3-11-13
 
T.S.O. V


2013-05
 
4-8-13
 
T.S.O. V


2013-06
 
4-8-13
 
T.S.O. V


2013-07
 
4-8-13
 
T.S.O. V


2013-19
 
6-10-13
 
T.S.O. V


2013-21
 
8-12-13
 
T.S.O. V


2013-22
 
8-12-13
 
T.S.O. VII


2013-24
 
9-9-13
 
T.S.O. V


2013-25
 
9-9-13
 
T.S.O. V


2013-26
 
9-9-13
 
T.S.O. V


2013-28
 
10-15-13
 
T.S.O. V


2013-29
 
10-15-13
 
T.S.O. VII


2013-30
 
11-11-13
 
T.S.O. V


2013-31
 
11-11-13
 
T.S.O. VII


2013-32
 
11-11-13
 
T.S.O. V


2013-32
 
12-9-13
 
T.S.O. V


2013-33
 
12-9-13
 
T.S.O. VII


2014-02
 
1-13-14
 
37.11


2014-03
 
1-13-14
 
T.S.O. V


2014-04
 
1-13-14
 
T.S.O. V


2014-05
 
2-10-14
 
T.S.O. V


2014-06
 
2-10-14
 
T.S.O. V


2014-07
 
2-10-14
 
T.S.O. V


2014-08
 
2-10-14
 
T.S.O. V


2014-09
 
3-10-14
 
T.S.O. V


2014-10
 
3-10-14
 
T.S.O. V


2014-13
 
5-12-14
 
T.S.O. V


2014-14
 
5-12-14
 
T.S.O. V


2014-17
 
5-12-14
 
T.S.O. V


2014-18
 
6-9-14
 
T.S.O. V


2014-20
 
7-14-14
 
T.S.O. V


2014-21
 
8-14-14
 
T.S.O. V


2014-22
 
8-11-14
 
T.S.O. V


2014-23
 
8-11-14
 
T.S.O. V


2014-24
 
8-14-14
 
T.S.O. V


2014-27
 
10-13-14
 
T.S.O. V


2014-29
 
10-13-14
 
T.S.O. V


2014-31
 
11-10-14
 
T.S.O. V


2014-32
 
12-8-14
 
T.S.O. V


2014-33
 
12-8-14
 
T.S.O. V


2014-34
 
12-8-14
 
T.S.O. V


2015-1
 
1-12-15
 
T.S.O. V


2015-2
 
2-9-15
 
T.S.O. V


2015-3
 
3-9-15
 
T.S.O. VII


2015-4
 
3-9-15
 
T.S.O. V


2015-5
 
3-9-15
 
T.S.O. V


2015-6
 
3-9-15
 
T.S.O. V


2015-7
 
3-9-15
 
98.11


2015-9
 
4-13-15
 
T.S.O. V


2015-10
 
4-13-15
 
T.S.O. V


2015-16
 
6-8-15
 
T.S.O. V


2015-20
 
8-10-15
 
T.S.O. V


2015-26
 
12-14-15
 
T.S.O. V


2016-5
 
1-4-16
 
T.S.O. V


2016-11
 
3-14-16
 
T.S.O. V


2016-16
 
5-9-16
 
T.S.O. V


2016-17
 
5-9-16
 
T.S.O. V


2016-19
 
5-9-16
 
T.S.O. V


2016-23
 
6-14-16
 
T.S.O. V


2016-26
 
7-11-16
 
T.S.O. V


2016-27
 
7-11-16
 
T.S.O. V


2016-28
 
7-11-16
 
T.S.O. VII


2016-29
 
8-8-16
 
T.S.O. VII


2016-30
 
8-8-16
 
T.S.O. V


2016-31
 
8-8-16
 
T.S.O. V


2016-33
 
8-8-16
 
T.S.O. V


2016-38
 
10-10-16
 
T.S.O. V


2016-40
 
10-10-16
 
T.S.O. V


2016-41
 
10-10-16
 
T.S.O. VII


2016-45
 
11-14-16
 
T.S.O. V


2016-46
 
11-14-16
 
T.S.O. V


2016-47
 
11-14-16
 
T.S.O. V


2016-49
 
12-12-16
 
T.S.O. V


2016-51
 
12-12-16
 
T.S.O. V


2016-52
 
12-12-16
 
T.S.O. VII


2017-1
 
2-13-17
 
T.S.O. V


2017-03
 
3-13-17
 
T.S.O. V


2017-04
 
3-13-17
 
T.S.O. V


2017-05
 
3-13-17
 
T.S.O. V


2017-09
 
4-13-17
 
T.S.O. V


2017-10
 
4-13-17
 
T.S.O. V


2017-13
 
5-8-17
 
T.S.O. V


2017-16
 
5-8-17
 
T.S.O. V


2017-20
 
6-12-17
 
T.S.O. V


2017-21
 
6-12-17
 
T.S.O. V


2017-22
 
6-12-17
 
T.S.O. V


2017-25
 
8-14-17
 
T.S.O. V


2017-26
 
8-14-17
 
T.S.O. IV


2017-29
 
9-11-17
 
T.S.O. VII


2017-30
 
9-11-17
 
T.S.O. IV


2017-31
 
10-9-17
 
T.S.O. V


2017-34
 
10-9-17
 
T.S.O. V


2017-35
 
10-9-17
 
90.50


2017-36
 
12-11-17
 
T.S.O. V


2017-38
 
12-11-17
 
T.S.O. V


2017-39
 
12-11-17
 
T.S.O. V


2017-40
 
12-11-17
 
T.S.O. V


2017-41
 
12-11-17
 
T.S.O. VII


2018-2
 
1-8-18
 
T.S.O. V


2018-3
 
1-8-18
 
T.S.O. IV


2018-5
 
3-12-18
 
T.S.O. V


2018-6
 
3-12-18
 
T.S.O. V


2018-7
 
5-14-18
 
T.S.O. V


2018-10
 
5-14-18
 
T.S.O. V


2018-13
 
6-11-18
 
T.S.O. V


2018-17
 
8-13-18
 
T.S.O. V


2018-19
 
9-6-18
 
T.S.O. V


 
 
 
 
 




 



REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES



 

Ord. No.
 
Date Passed
 
Code Section




11
 
2-3-41
 
31.11


19
 
5-5-41
 
T.S.O. V


22
 
7-7-41
 
T.S.O. V


23
 
7-7-41
 
T.S.O. V


28
 
10-6-41
 
T.S.O. I


32
 
12-8-41
 
T.S.O. I


48
 
5-3-43
 
110.01 - 110.03


53
 
11-8-43
 
T.S.O. II


54
 
11-8-43
 
T.S.O. II


75
 
10-14-46
 
T.S.O. I


83
 
10-14-46
 
T.S.O. V


87
 
5-10-48
 
T.S.O. V


88
 
5-10-48
 
T.S.O. V


89
 
7-6-48
 
T.S.O. V


90
 
7-6-48
 
T.S.O. I


93
 
11-8-48
 
T.S.O. V


95
 
1-10-49
 
T.S.O. II


96
 
1-10-49
 
T.S.O. II


102
 
6-13-49
 
95.22


104
 
6-13-49
 
95.27


108
 
9-12-49
 
T.S.O. IV


124
 
3-12-51
 
T.S.O. V


127
 
4-9-51
 
T.S.O. I


141
 
5-15-52
 
T.S.O. I


151
 
12-8-52
 
T.S.O. I


152
 
1-12-53
 
T.S.O. V


160
 
11-9-53
 
T.S.O. V


162
 
11-9-53
 
T.S.O. I


163
 
11-9-53
 
T.S.O. I


164
 
11-9-53
 
T.S.O. I


167
 
1-11-54
 
36.05


168
 
3-8-54
 
T.S.O. I


–
 
9-13-54
 
155.01, 155.02, 155.07, 155.08, 155.10, 155.12, 155.14


C-7
 
12-13-54
 
33.03


C-16
 
2-14-55
 
T.S.O. V


C-18
 
2-14-55
 
95.40, 95.41


C-19
 
3-21-55
 
T.S.O. VI


C-33
 
11-21-55
 
T.S.O. V


C-35
 
12-12-55
 
T.S.O. I


C-43
 
12-12-55
 
T.S.O. I


C-47
 
2-13-56
 
T.S.O. IV


138
 
4-15-56
 
50.01, 50.02, 50.10 - 50.23, 50.30 - 50.32, 50.40 - 50.44, 50.99


C-63
 
5-8-56
 
98.02


C-68
 
12-10-56
 
98.02


C-69
 
12-10-56
 
112.15


C-72
 
2-20-57
 
T.S.O. VII


C-76
 
4-8-57
 
T.S.O. V


C-78
 
4-8-57
 
T.S.O. I


C-79
 
4-8-57
 
T.S.O. I


C-86
 
6-10-57
 
T.S.O. I


C-89
 
8-12-57
 
T.S.O. I


C-90
 
9-9-57
 
T.S.O. I


C-92
 
10-14-57
 
T.S.O. I


C-95
 
11-11-57
 
T.S.O. I


C-100
 
1-13-58
 
T.S.O. I


–
 
4-14-58
 
155.01, 155.02, 155.07, 155.08, 155.10, 155.12, 155.14


C-106
 
4-14-58
 
T.S.O. I


C-107
 
6-9-58
 
T.S.O. I


C-118
 
9-8-58
 
51.01 - 51.05, 51.99


C-123
 
12-8-58
 
72.09, 72.12, 72.13, 72.20, 72.22, 72.23, 72.30, 72.71, 73.10, 73.20, 73.23,
74.41, 76.01, 76.04, 76.05, 77.03


C-124
 
12-8-58
 
90.23


C-132
 
12-8-58
 
T.S.O. I


C-133
 
12-8-58
 
T.S.O. I


C-138
 
3-5-59
 
95.41


C-137
 
3-9-59
 
150.20 - 150.22


C-138
 
3-9-59
 
95.40


C-139
 
4-13-59
 
90.16, 90.18, 90.19, 90.22, 90.40


C-140
 
6-8-59
 
T.S.O. I


C-141
 
6-8-59
 
95.51


C-197
 
7-9-59
 
77.02


C-145
 
8-10-59
 
T.S.O. I


C-146
 
9-14-59
 
70.21, 77.02


C-158
 
2-8-60
 
90.41 - 90.44


C-160
 
2-8-60
 
T.S.O. I


C-163
 
8-11-60
 
92.02, 92.07 - 92.10


C-164
 
9-12-60
 
71.01, 71.05, 71.07, 71.08, 76.03


C-165
 
11-14-60
 
90.01


C-170
 
1-9-61
 
T.S.O. V


C-172
 
3-13-61
 
71.01, 70.22, 72.07, 72.21, 72.67, 72.75, 73.10, 73.13, 73.21, 77.01


C-174
 
4-10-61
 
35.11


C-179
 
10-9-61
 
T.S.O. V


C-192
 
1-2-62
 
T.S.O. I


C-190
 
1-8-62
 
T.S.O. I


C-19l
 
1-8-62
 
T.S.O. I


C-210
 
2-10-62
 
T.S.O. I


C-196
 
7-9-62
 
T.S.O. V


C-204
 
11-12-62
 
T.S.O. I


C-213
 
4-8-63
 
T.S.O. I


C-214
 
4-18-63
 
T.S.O. I


C-221
 
3-30-64
 
77.04


C-222
 
7-13-64
 
T.S.O. I


C-226
 
11-12-64
 
T.S.O. IV


C-235
 
3-8-65
 
36.01, 36.03


C-247
 
12-13-65
 
T.S.O. VI


C-249
 
2-14-66
 
T.S.O. V


C-251
 
3-14-66
 
T.S.O. IV


C-256
 
8-17-66
 
T.S.O. VII


C-285
 
7-8-68
 
154.01, 154.02, 154.05 - 154.08, 154.10 - 154.17, 154.20 - 154.22, 154.25 -
154.28, 154.30 - 154.33, 154.35 - 154.38, 154.40 - 154.43, 154.45 - 154.48,
154.50 - 154.53, 154.55 - 154.60, 154.62 - 154.70, 154.72 - 154.74, 154.99


C-285
 
8-12-68
 
T.S.O. V


C-286
 
8-21-68
 
37.01 - 37.09, 37.99


C-287
 
9-9-68
 
T.S.O. V


C-288
 
11-11-68
 
T.S.O. I


C-289
 
11-11-68
 
T.S.O. I


C-290
 
11-11-68
 
T.S.O. I


C-293
 
2-10-69
 
150.01 - 150.03


C-303
 
8-11-69
 
154.25


C-304
 
9-8-69
 
T.S.O. I


C-307
 
4-13-70
 
76.08, 76.09, 76.99


C-320
 
10-12-70
 
93.01 - 93.15, 93.99


C-328
 
2-9-71
 
T.S.O. V


C-338
 
7-12-71
 
T.S.O. I


C-341
 
11-8-71
 
T.S.O. VII


C-351
 
7-10-72
 
154.33


C-352
 
8-14-72
 
91.02 - 91.07, 91.09 - 91.12


C-354
 
10-13-72
 
T.S.O. V


C-360
 
2-12-73
 
91.05


C-362
 
4-9-73
 
T.S.O. V


C-376
 
7-9-73
 
T.S.O. VII


C-393
 
4-8-74
 
T.S.O. VII


C-395
 
7-8-74
 
T.S.O. V


C-416
 
1-12-76
 
34.01 - 34.06, 34.09


C-417
 
1-12-76
 
94.07, 94.08, 94.12, 94.19, 94.21, 96.01, 96.02, 96.04, 130.02 - 130.13,
131.01 - 131.04, 131.06 - 131.21, 131.30 - 131.42, 131.99, 132.01, 132.02,
132.04 - 132.09, 133.01 - 133.03, 133.05, 133.07 - 133.10, 133.12, 133.13,
134.01, 134.03 - 134.05, 135.01 - 135.08, 135.10, 135.13 - 135.15, 136.01 -
136.08, 136.10 - 136.13


C-424
 
5-10-76
 
98.05 - 98.10


C-428
 
5-10-76
 
33.01


C-431
 
10-11-76
 
154.25


C-445
 
8-8-77
 
111.01 - 111.04, 111.99


C-447
 
10-10-77
 
153.01 - 153.04, 153.99


C-449
 
11-14-77
 
35.04


C-453
 
2-13-78
 
77.01


C-459
 
4-10-78
 
35.03


C-460
 
4-10-78
 
35.02


C-462
 
7-10-78
 
36.06


C-463
 
7-27-78
 
T.S.O. VIII


C-467
 
9-11-78
 
138.03


C-469
 
9-11-78
 
10.99


C-474
 
1-8-79
 
151.01 - 151.19, 151.99


C-482
 
4-9-79
 
35.02


C-483
 
4-9-79
 
155.08


C-485
 
6-11-79
 
T.S.O. V


C-487
 
7-9-79
 
131.99


C-489
 
9-10-79
 
10.99


C-490
 
11-12-79
 
138.03


C-491
 
11-12-79
 
76.04


C-496
 
3-10-80
 
154.25


C-504
 
6-9-80
 
T.S.O. VI


C-517
 
4-13-81
 
35.03


C-518
 
4-13-81
 
35.10


C-520
 
6-8-81
 
154.38, 154.43


C-521
 
7-13-81
 
35.10


C-523
 
9-14-81
 
T.S.O. I


C-525
 
11-9-81
 
92.01 - 92.11, 92.13 - 92.15, 92.17 - 92.20, 92.99


C-530
 
2-8-82
 
150.03


C-531
 
2-8-82
 
150.01, 150.02


C-532
 
2-8-82
 
150.01


C-535
 
4-13-82
 
36.03


C-539
 
4-13-82
 
35.03


C-540
 
6-14-82
 
95.52


C-550
 
4-11-83
 
35.06


C-551
 
4-11-83
 
35.02


C-557
 
2-13-84
 
154.02, 154.20, 154.67


C-560
 
4-9-84
 
35.07


C-562
 
4-9-84
 
36.03


C-563
 
4-9-84
 
35.02


C-567
 
6-11-84
 
36.05


C-570
 
8-13-84
 
T.S.O. V


C-568
 
10-9-84
 
111.99


C-569
 
10-9-84
 
35.06


C-579
 
10-9-84
 
T.S.O. V


C-578
 
4-8-85
 
35.06


C-581
 
4-8-85
 
36.03


C-582
 
6-10-85
 
T.S.O. VII


C-583
 
6-10-85
 
T.S.O. VII


C-584
 
6-10-85
 
35.07, 36.05


C-589
 
11-11-85
 
35.03


C-592
 
3-10-86
 
35.07, 36.05


C-597
 
4-14-86
 
36.03


C-600
 
5-12-86
 
131.43, 131.99


C-604
 
9-8-86
 
155.20, 156.02 - 156.13, 156.25 - 156.31


C-608
 
12-8-86
 
94.14, 94.15


C-609
 
1-12-87
 
94.99


C-611
 
2-9-87
 
155.01 - 155.20


C-613
 
4-16-87
 
35.06


C-617
 
4-16-87
 
35.02


C-620
 
5-11-87
 
94.14, 94.15


C-624
 
9-14-87
 
155.09


C-679
 
9-14-87
 
T.S.O. V


C-625
 
11-9-87
 
93.02, 93.03, 93.05, 93.08, 93.10, 93.14


C-693
 
1-11-88
 
T.S.O. V


C-636
 
5-9-88
 
98.01, 98.02


C-704
 
5-9-88
 
T.S.O. V


C-687
 
6-28-88
 
71.11


C-641
 
7-11-88
 
93.03


C-707
 
7-11-88
 
T.S.O. V


C-708
 
7-11-88
 
T.S.O. V


C-714
 
9-14-88
 
T.S.O. V


C-716
 
10-12-88
 
T.S.O. V


C-725
 
12-12-88
 
T.S.O. V


C-726
 
12-12-88
 
T.S.O. V


C-648
 
2-18-89
 
T.S.O. VII


C-649
 
2-18-89
 
T.S.O. V


C-655
 
5-8-89
 
53.01, 53.02


C-656
 
5-8-89
 
154.74


C-659
 
6-12-89
 
94.14


C-660
 
6-12-89
 
35.02, 35.03


C-661
 
6-12-89
 
T.S.O. V


C-663
 
7-10-89
 
95.41, 95.44


C-665
 
8-14-89
 
35.03


C-666
 
10-10-89
 
154.01, 154.02, 154.05 - 154.08, 154.10 - 154.17, 154.20 - 154.22, 154.25 -
154.28, 154.30 - 154.33, 154.35 - 154.38, 154.40 - 154.43, 154.45 - 154.48,
154.50 - 154.53, 154.55 - 154.60, 154.62 - 154.70, 154.72, 154.73, 154.99


C-675
 
2-12-90
 
T.S.O. I


C-681
 
4-16-90
 
35.07


C-685
 
5-14-90
 
T.S.O. VII


C-686
 
5-14-90
 
T.S.O. VII


C-691
 
9-10-90
 
154.67


C-692
 
10-9-90
 
154.01, 154.02, 154.05 - 154.08, 154.10 - 154.17, 154.20 - 154.22, 154.25 -
154.28, 154.30 - 154.33, 154.35 - 154.38, 154.40 - 154.43, 154.45 - 154.48,
154.50 - 154.53, 154.55 - 154.60, 154.62 - 154.70, 154.72 - 154.74, 154.99


C-693
 
11-12-90
 
95.26


C-697
 
12-10-90
 
T.S.O. I


C-698
 
12-10-90
 
35.10


C-730
 
4-13-91
 
35.02


C-709
 
7-8-91
 
35.02


C-710
 
7-8-91
 
36.02


C-711
 
7-8-91
 
35.07


C-712
 
7-8-91
 
95.41


C-714
 
11-11-91
 
35.011


C-723
 
2-10-92
 
T.S.O. VII


C-724
 
2-10-92
 
T.S.O. VII


C-732
 
4-13-92
 
154.51


C-734
 
5-11-92
 
36.06


C-840
 
5-11-92
 
T.S.O. VII


C-843
 
6-8-92
 
36.08


C-845
 
6-8-92
 
T.S.O. VII


C-737
 
9-14-92
 
36.02


C-738
 
9-14-92
 
35.08


C-851
 
9-14-92
 
T.S.O. VII


C-855
 
9-14-92
 
T.S.O. VII


C-856
 
9-14-92
 
T.S.O. VII


C-743
 
12-14-92
 
93.08


C-749
 
4-12-93
 
35.09


C-754
 
6-14-93
 
36.09


C-756
 
7-12-93
 
30.14


C-758
 
9-13-93
 
36.05


C-767
 
12-13-93
 
99.01 - 99.04


C-772
 
4-11-94
 
35.04


C-776
 
4-11-94
 
35.07


C-780
 
4-11-94
 
93.99


C-781
 
6-13-94
 
95.53, 95.54


C-782
 
7-11-94
 
154.01, 154.02, 154.73, 154.74


C-789
 
12-12-94
 
93.16


C-791
 
4-10-95
 
36.02


C-803
 
5-8-95
 
31.10


C-808
 
11-13-95
 
154.02, 154.25


C-817
 
4-8-96
 
35.03


C-827
 
5-13-96
 
T.S.O. VII


C-828
 
9-9-96
 
30.11


C-829
 
9-9-96
 
36.07


C-832
 
10-15-96
 
30.14


1997-3
 
4-14-97
 
30.15


1997-11
 
5-12-97
 
36.02


1997-15
 
7-15-97
 
T.S.O. VII


1997-22
 
12-8-97
 
157.01 - 157.09, 157.99


1998-1
 
1-12-98
 
35.02


1998-12
 
5-11-98
 
35.07, 36.02, 36.05


1998-18
 
9-14-98
 
95.60, 95.61


1998-19
 
10-15-98
 
93.06


1999-4
 
3-8-99
 
95.70, 95.71


1999-13
 
5-10-99
 
93.02, 93.03


1999-18
 
11-8-99
 
T.S.O. I


2000-8
 
5-8-00
 
35.04


2000-11
 
7-10-00
 
154.19


2000-12
 
7-10-00
 
36.02


2000-15
 
11-13-00
 
T.S.O. VII


2000-19
 
12-11-00
 
T.S.O. I


2001-2
 
1-8-01
 
Adopting Ordinance


2001-3
 
1-8-01
 
154.17


2001-4
 
2-12-01
 
38.03


2001-5
 
4-9-01
 
154.27


2001-13
 
5-14-01
 
35.06


2001-14
 
6-11-01
 
154.25


2001-15
 
8-13-01
 
73.10


2001-16
 
10-9-01
 
95.53


2001-20
 
10-9-01
 
93.02


2001-21
 
11-12-01
 
35.04


2002-03
 
3-11-02
 
Adopting Ordinance


2002-11
 
3-10-03
 
54.01 - 54.02, 54.10 - 54.20, 54.30 - 54.38, 54.50 - 54.51, 54.60 - 54.63,
54.70, 54.98, 54.99


2002-12
 
7-15-02
 
T.S.O. VII


2002-13
 
7-15-02
 
T.S.O. VII


2002-15
 
9-9-02
 
T.S.O. VI


2003-02
 
4-14-03
 
Adopting Ordinance


2003-10
 
4-14-03
 
36.02


2003-13
 
7-14-03
 
98.01


2003-16
 
11-10-03
 
35.04


2003-17
 
11-10-03
 
154.85 - 154.91


2003-18
 
11-10-03
 
35.11


2004-02
 
1-12-04
 
36.09


2004-03
 
4-12-04
 
152.001 - 152.010, 152.020 - 152.031, 152.045 - 152.054, 152.065 - 152.070,
152.080, 152.081, 152.999


2004-04
 
1-12-04
 
35.11


2004-12
 
6-14-04
 
36.09


2004-13
 
7-12–04
 
Adopting Ordinance


2004-16
 
9-13-04
 
33.05


2004-17
 
7-12-04
 
54.99, 90.02, 91.99, 96.99, 154.99


2004-19
 
11-8-04
 
100.01 - 100.13, 100.99


2004-25
 
10-12-04
 
36.02


2005-11
 
5-9-05
 
T.S.O. VII


2005-11
 
5-9-05
 
T.S.O. VII


2005-15
 
9-12-05
 
93.05


2005-16
 
7-11-05
 
38.04


2005-17
 
7-11-05
 
35.10


2005-18
 
7-11-05
 
35.011


2005-20
 
9-12-05
 
Adopting Ordinance


2006-11
 
6-12-06
 
35.04


2006-13
 
8-14-06
 
36.02


2006-17
 
11-13-06
 
35.12


2007-02
 
4-9-07
 
93.02


2007-03
 
4-9-07
 
97.01 - 97.09, 97.99


2007-04
 
5-14-07
 
36.02


2007-15
 
5-14-07
 
32.05


2007-16
 
7-16-07
 
159.001 - 159.005, 159.015 - 159.020, 159.030 - 159.037, 159.050 - 159.052,
159.060 - 159.064, 159.080 - 159.084, 159.090 - 159.094, 159.100 - 159.104,
159.115 - 159.118, 159.130 - 159.136, 159.145 - 159.147, 159.160 - 159.173,
159.180, 159.190 - 159.206, 159.215 - 159.220, 159.230 - 159.234, 159.245 -
159.250


2007-17
 
7-16-07
 
36.02


2007-22
 
11-12-07
 
Charter


2008-02
 
1-14-08
 
99.05


2008-13
 
7-10-08
 
T.S.O. VIII


2008-15
 
7-14-08
 
159.062


2008-17
 
8-25-08
 
T.S.O. VII


2008-21
 
10-14-08
 
T.S.O. V


2008-22
 
11-11-08
 
Adopting Ordinance


2009-02
 
4-13-09
 
93.02, 93.05, 93.06, 93.07, 93.14, 93.16


2009-14
 
7-28-09
 
154.25


2009-15
 
9-14-09
 
75.27, 76.05, 98.05, 98.09


2009-19
 
11-9-09
 
93.10


2010-04
 
1-11-10
 
72.73


2010-15
 
7-12-10
 
35.03


2010-16
 
7-12-10
 
35.011


2010-20
 
11-8-10
 
158.01 - 158.07, 158.15 - 158.18, 158.30 - 158.32, 158.40 - 158.45


2010-22
 
12-13-10
 
52.02


2011-06
 
3-14-11
 
35.11


2011-07
 
5-9-11
 
31.33


2011-11
 
8-8-11
 
95.40, 95.41, 159.164


2011-14
 
10-11-11
 
T.S.O. V


2011-17
 
12-12-11
 
32.07, 70.99, 72.70, 72.74, 74.37, 76.06, 76.10, 76.99


2011-21
 
12-12-11
 
31.10


2012-01
 
1-9-12
 
Adopting Ordinance


2012-02
 
5-14-12
 
154.54


2012-03
 
5-14-12
 
T.S.O. V


2012-04
 
7-9-12
 
76.05


2012-05
 
8-13-12
 
154.662, 154.75 - 154.83


2012-11
 
4-8-13
 
T.S.O. VIII


2012-15
 
12-10-12
 
Adopting Ordinance


2013-01
 
1-14-13
 
52.02


2013-02
 
3-11-13
 
95.40 - 95.42, 95.44, 154.02, 154.16, 159.063, 159.081, 159.082, 159.083,
159.164


2013-03
 
1-29-13
 
T.S.O. VII


2013-04
 
4-8-13
 
35.04


2013-05
 
4-8-13
 
35.06


2013-06
 
4-8-13
 
154.77, 154.662


2013-07
 
4-8-13
 
154.02, 154.14


2013-10
 
5-13-13
 
38.01


2013-14
 
8-12-13
 
38.05


2013-17
 
1-13-14
 
154.02, 154.15


2013-18
 
10-15-13
 
31.33


2013-19
 
10-15-13
 
T.S.O. V


2013-27
 
12-9-13
 
38.06


2014-01
 
1-13-14
 
90.23, 137.05


2014-02
 
1-13-14
 
Adopting Ordinance


2014-03
 
2-10-14
 
76.05


2014-05
 
3-10-14
 
35.02


2014-11
 
8-11-14
 
30.15


2014-14
 
11-10-14
 
Adopting Ordinance


2015-1
 
2-9-15
 
31.10


2015-3
 
5-11-15
 
39.01


2015-5
 
7-6-15
 
54.35


2015-8
 
8-10-15
 
112.01, 112.16, 112.17, 112.99


2015-11
 
8-10-15
 
T.S.O. VI


2015-12
 
11-9-15
 
93.04, 101.01 - 101.21, 101.97 - 101.99


2015-14
 
11-9-15
 
T.S.O. VI


2015-20
 
12-14-15
 
52.02


2016-4
 
2-8-16
 
36.02


2016-6
 
2-8-16
 
Adopting Ordinance


2016-10
 
5-9-16
 
131.44, 131.99


2016-11
 
7-11-16
 
33.05


2016-12
 
8-8-16
 
T.S.O. V


2016-13
 
9-12-16
 
T.S.O. VIII


2016-16
 
11-14-16
 
T.S.O. V


2016-17
 
11-14-16
 
T.S.O. III


2016-18
 
12-12-16
 
T.S.O. III


2016-19
 
12-12-16
 
T.S.O. III


2016-20
 
12-12-16
 
T.S.O. VI


2017-1
 
1-9-17
 
T.S.O. VI


2017-2
 
1-9-17
 
Adopting Ordinance


2017-4
 
2-13-17
 
T.S.O. III


2017-06
 
4-13-17
 
150.01, 150.03, Repeals 150.04 - 150.08


2017-07
 
5-8-17
 
Repeals 90.24


2017-08
 
6-12-17
 
150.01, 150.03


2017-09
 
11-13-17
 
36.11


2017-11
 
10-9-17
 
36.12


2017-12
 
11-13-17
 
T.S.O. III


2017-16
 
12-11-17
 
T.S.O. III


2017-17
 
12-11-17
 
T.S.O. III


2017-27
 
9-11-17
 
T.S.O. V


2018-1
 
3-12-18
 
T.S.O. V


2018-2
 
1-8-18
 
T.S.O. V


2018-3
 
2-12-18
 
101.0680 - 101.0695


2018-4
 
4-9-18
 
102.01 - 102.09, 135.091, 135.092


2018-5
 
2-12-18
 
Adopting Ordinance


2018-6
 
3-12-18
 
101.03, 101.05, 101.06, 101.07, 101.10


2018-8
 
3-12-18
 
35.04


2018-9
 
6-11-18
 
T.S.O. V


 
 
 
 
 




 


