ANDERSON TOWNSHIP, OHIO
ZONING RESOLUTION
As Amended: May 19, 2016 Effective: November 3, 1987
ZONING RESOLUTION
for the
UNINCORPORATED TERRITORY
of
ANDERSON TOWNSHIP, HAMILTON COUNTY, OHIO
A RESOLUTION to provide for dividing the unincorporated territory of Anderson Township into districts (zones) and in such
districts to regulate the location, use, height, number of stories and size of buildings and other structures, the percentage of
lot areas which may be occupied, set back building lines, sizes of yards and other spaces, the density of population; to provide
for the making of amendments or supplements to such regulations and the boundaries of the districts or zones; to provide for
a Township Board of Zoning Appeals; to provide to enforcement of and to prescribe penalties for violation of the provisions
hereof.
Whereas, by the provisions of Section 519.01 et seq. of the Ohio Revised Code, the Board of Township Trustees of Anderson
Township is empowered to establish districts (zones) within the unincorporated territory of Anderson Township and to provide
regulations therein for the purpose of promoting public health, safety, morals, comfort or general welfare; to conserve and
protect property and property values; to secure the most appropriate use of land; and to facilitate adequate but economical
provision of public improvements, all in accordance with the comprehensive plan, and
Whereas, the Board of Township Trustees before availing itself of the powers conferred upon it by said sections, passed a
resolution declaring its intention to proceed under the provisions thereof, and
Whereas, a Township Zoning Commission has been created and established in accordance with the provisions of said
sections, to submit a plan, including both text and maps, representing its recommendations for the carrying out by the Board of
Township Trustees of the powers, purposes and provisions set forth therein, and
Whereas, the Township Zoning Commission, after a comprehensive study and mapping of present land uses and the zoning in
contiguous incorporated areas, the neighborhood and community boundaries and population trends, the limits of sewerable
areas and the major thoroughfares; has prepared and recommended districts (zones), and appropriate regulations to be
enforced therein, and public hearings thereon have been held at which all owners of property in the township affected were
given ample opportunity, after public notice as required by law, to file their protest or criticisms, if any, and;
Whereas, said districting or zone plan has been before the Regional Planning Commission for study and recommendations,
and its recommendations have been submitted to the Township Zoning Commission for consideration and hearings, prior to
certification to the Board of Township Trustees are required by law, and
Whereas, after certification, a public hearing was held, on the districting or zone plan by the Board of Township Trustees;
notice of which hearing was given by publication in a newspaper of general circulation as required by law;
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED BY THE BOARD OF TOWNSHIP TRUSTEES OF ANDERSON
TOWNSHIP, HAMILTON COUNTY, OHIO, AS FOLLOWS:
ORIGINAL GRAPHICS AND RESOLUTION LAYOUT © 2015 RATIO ARCHITECTS INC.
Article 1: General
1.1 Purpose, Jurisdiction, and Interpretation..... 03
1.2 How to Use This Document.............................. 04
1.3 Districts and Boundaries.................................. 05
1.4 Non Conforming Uses........................................ 06
1.5 General Provisions............................................. 07
Article 2: Administration
2.1 Zoning Certificates............................................. 10
2.2 Plats....................................................................... 11
2.3 Boundaries of Districts..................................... 11
2.4 Interpretation, Purpose and Conflict.............. 11
2.5 Amendments........................................................ 12
2.6 Repeal................................................................... 12
2.7 Enforcement......................................................... 12
2.8 Applicable Provisions....................................... 13
2.9 Validity.................................................................. 13
2.10 Violations and Penalties................................... 13
2.11 Remedies.............................................................. 13
2.12 Township Board of Zoning Appeals............... 13
2.13 When Effective.................................................... 17
Article 3: Zoning Districts
3.1 “AA” Residence District Regulations........... 19
3.2 “A-30” Residence District Regulations........ 23
3.3 “A” Residence District Regulations.............. 24
3.4 ”A-2” Residence District Regulations.......... 25
3.5 “B” Residence District Regulations.............. 26
3.6 “B-2” Residence District Regulations.......... 27
3.7 “C” Residence District Regulations.............. 28
3.8 “D” Residence District Regulations.............. 29
3.9 “DD” Planned Multiple Residence District Reg..32
3.10 “O” Office District Regulations...................... 34
3.11 “O-1” Limited Office District........................... 36
3.12 “OO” Planned Office District Regulations.... 38
3.13 “MHP” Mobile Home Park District Regulations. 40
3.14 “E” Retail Business District Regulations..... 44
3.15 “EE” Planned Business District Regulations....... 46
3.16 “ID” Industrial Development District............ 48
3.17 “FF” Planned Light Industrial District Reg... 58
3.18 “GG” Planned Heavy Industrial District Reg........ 60
3.19 “EF” Excavation and Landfill District........... 62
3.20 “H” Riverfront District Regulations................ 64
3.21 District Lot Standards ....................................... 66
Article 4: Overlay And Special Districts
4.1 Planned Unit Developments............................. 71
4.2 Community Unit Plan......................................... 76
4.3 “HD” Historic District........................................ 77
4.4 “FPM” Flood Plain Management.................... 80
4.5 Sexually Oriented Businesses........................ 81
Article 5: Development Standards
5.1 General Development Plan Provisions.......... 87
5.2 Additional Use, Height
and Area Regulations and Exceptions.......... 89
5.3 Parking and Loading Regulations................... 99
5.4 Conditional Uses in Single
and Multi Family Res. Dist.............................. 120
5.5 Signage............................................................... 128
Article 6: Definitions
6.1 Definitions............................................................... 140
Table of Contents
PAGE # PAGE #
iv | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 1
ARTICLE 1
General
1.1 Purpose, Jurisdiction, and Interpretation..... 03
1.2 How to Use This Document.............................. 04
1.3 Districts and Boundaries.................................. 05
1.4 Non-Conforming Uses....................................... 06
1.5 General Provisions............................................. 07
2 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987
1.1 Purpose, Jurisdiction, and Interpretation
A. Purpose: For the purpose of promoting health,
safety, morals, comfort or general welfare; to
conserve and protect property and property values;
to secure the most appropriate use of land; and
to facilitate adequate but economical provision of
public improvements, all in accordance with the
provisions of Section 519.01 et seq. of the Ohio
Revised Code, it is hereby provided as follows:
B. Title: This resolution shall be known and may be
cited and referred to as the “Zoning Resolution” to
the same effect.
C. Jurisdiction: These provisions shall apply to all
unincorporated land areas of Anderson Township,
Hamilton County, Ohio pursuant to prior voter
approval in accordance with the requirements of
the Ohio Revised Code. Those areas are indicated
on the Official Zoning District Map(s) on file with
Anderson Township.
D. Interpretation: The provisions of this Resolution
shall be construed to achieve the purposes for
which they are adopted. In interpreting and
applying the provisions of this Resolution, these
provisions shall be held to be the minimum
requirements for the promotion of public health,
safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity and
general welfare. It is not intended by this
Resolution to interfere with or abrogate or annul
any easements, covenants, building restrictions
or other agreements between parties. However,
where this Resolution imposes a greater
restriction upon the use of buildings or premises
or upon the height of buildings, or requires larger
open spaces than are imposed or required by
other laws, rules, regulations or permits, or by
easements, covenants, building restrictions or
agreements, the provisions of this Resolution shall
govern. For the purposes of this Resolution, the
following additional rules of interpretation shall
apply:
1. In the event of a conflict between the text
of these provisions and any caption, figure,
illustration, table, or map, the text of these
provisions shall control.
2. The words “shall”, “must”, and “will”, as used
in these provisions, are mandatory and indicate
an obligation to comply with the particular
provisions to which they apply.
3. The word “may” as used in these provisions is
permissive.
4. Words used or defined in one tense or form
shall include other tenses and derivative forms.
E. Severability: It is hereby declared to be the
intent of the Township that nothing in this
Resolution shall be construed to conflict with the
laws of the State of Ohio or to limit additional
requirements, if any, imposed by law. This
ARTICLE 1
General
Article 1: General Provisions | 3
1.1 Purpose, Jurisdiction, and Interpretation | 1.1
4 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
1.6 HOW TO USE THIS DOCUMENT
A. STRUCTURE. The structure of the text of this Ordinance is as follows: Chapter (indicated by 1, etc.), Section
(indicated by 1.1, etc.), and subsequent Subsections (indicated by A, 1, a, etc.). Below is an example of this
format:
Resolution and the various articles, sections,
paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases are
severable. If any article, section, paragraph,
sentence, clause or phrase of this Resolution
shall be declared unconstitutional by the
decree of any court of competent jurisdiction,
such constitutionality shall not affect any of
the remaining articles, sections, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases of this Resolution.
1.2 How to Use This Document
A. Structure: The structure of the text of this
ordinance is as follows: Article (indicated by
1, ect.), Section (indicated by 1.1, etc), and
subsequent Subsections (indicated by A, 1, a,
ect.). Below is an example of this format:
B. Applicable Districts: Zoning district
designations are located in various places
throughout the document. If one of these
identifiers appears within a section, then that
section will apply to the corresponding zoning
district. A complete list of the identifiers can be
found at the beginning of Article 1.3
C. Defined Words: Words used in a special sense
in this Zoning Resolution are defined in: Article
6. All other words shall have the meaning inferred
from their context in this Resolution or their
ordinarily accepted definitions.
D. Meanings: The following rules of construction
shall apply to the text of this Resolution:
1. The particular and specific provisions of
this Resolution shall supersede any general
requirements that are established by it.
2. The words “shall” “must” and “will” are
always mandatory and not discretionary. The
words “may” and “should” are permissive.
3. Words used in the present tense include the
future; and words used in the singular number
include the plural; and the plural includes the
singular; words of the masculine gender will
include the feminine and the neuter gender
will refer to any gender as required, unless the
context plainly indicates the contrary.
4. The phrase “used for” includes “arranged for,
designed for, intended for, maintained for, or
occupied for.”
5. The word “person” includes an individual, a
corporation, a partnership, an incorporated
Residence District
Multiple Residence
District
Business District
Office District
Industrial District
Special District
1.11,A,1,a,i
(Subsection)
(Section)
(Article)
1 ...................................... (Article)
1.11............................... (Section)
A.............................. (Subsection)
1........................... (Subsection)
a....................... (Subsection)
i................... (Subsection)
1.1 - 1.2 | 1.1 Purpose, Jurisdiction, and Interpretation
1.2 How to Use This Document
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987
association, or any other similar entity.
6. Unless it is plainly evident from the context
that a different meaning is intended, a
regulation which involves two (2) or more
items, conditions, provisions, or events
connected by the conjunction “and”, “or”, or
“either . . . or,” the use of the conjunction is
defined as follows:
a. “And” means that all the connected items,
conditions, provisions, and events apply
together and not separately.
b. “Or” means that the connected items,
conditions, provisions, or events apply
separately or in any combination.
c. “Either... or” means that the connected
items, conditions, provisions, or
events shall apply separately but not in
combination.
7. The word “includes” does not limit a term
to the specified examples, but is intended
to extend the term’s meaning to all other
instances or circumstances of like kind or
character.
8. The word “Township” means Anderson
Township, Ohio, and the word “state” means
the State of Ohio.
1.3 Districts and Boundaries
A. Districts: In order to classify, regulate and restrict
the location of trades, industries, residences,
recreation, and other land uses and the location of
buildings designed for specified uses; to regulate
and limit the height, number of stores and size of
buildings and other structures hereafter erected
or altered; to regulate and limit the percentages
of lot areas which may be occupied, set back
building lines, sizes of yards and other open
spaces within and surrounding such buildings, the
density of population; the unincorporated territory
of Anderson Township, Hamilton County, Ohio,
is hereby divided into twenty-two (22) classes
of “Districts”. All such regulations are uniform
for each class or kind of building or structure or
use throughout each class of District, and said
Districts shall be known as:
AA Residence District
A-30 Residence District
A Residence District
A2 Residence District
B Residence District
B2 Residence District
C Residence District
D Residence District
DD Planned Multiple Residence District
MHP Mobile Home Park District
O Office District
O1 Limited Office District
OO Planned Office District
E Retail Business District
EE Planned Business District
ID Industrial Development District
FF Planned Light Industrial District
GG Planned Heavy Industrial District
EF Excavation and Landfill District
H Riverfront District
HD Historic District
FPM Flood Plain Management
B. Boundaries: The boundaries of these Districts
are indicated upon the District Maps of the
unincorporated area of Anderson Township,
Hamilton County, Ohio, which maps are made a
part of this Resolution. The said District Maps of
the unincorporated area of Anderson Township,
Hamilton County, Ohio, and all the notations,
references and other matters shown thereon
Article 1: General Provisions | 5
1.2 How to Use This Document | 1.2 - 1.3
1.3 Districts and Boundaries
6 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
shall be as much a part of this Resolution as if
the notations, references and other matters set
forth by said Maps were all fully described herein;
which District Maps are properly attested and
are on file in the Office of the Board of Township
Trustees.
C. All territory which may hereafter become a part
of the unincorporated area of Anderson Township,
Hamilton County by the disincorporation of any
village, town, or city, or portion thereof, shall
automatically be classed as lying and being in the
“B” Residence District until such classification
shall have been changed by an amendment to the
Zoning Resolution as provided by law.
D. Whenever any street, alley or other public way
is vacated by official action of the Trustees, the
zoning Districts adjoining each side of such street,
alley or public way shall be automatically extended
to the center of such vacation and all area included
in the vacation shall then and henceforth be
subject to all regulations of the extended Districts.
E. Whenever a court declares by a judgment or
decree that is final (whether because no appeal is
taken or no further appeal can be taken from such
judgment or decree), that the zoning of a specific
lot or tract is unconstitutional or unreasonable
because it is too restrictive, the property affected
shall thereupon be subject to the next less
restrictive District; provided, however, that where
the court in such judgment or decree, declares
that the property may be used for a particular
use or uses because the Trustees have no right
to prohibit such use or uses on the property, then
such property shall be subject to the regulations
applicable to the most restrictive District in which
the particular use or uses, declared proper by
the court, are permitted; and provided, further,
that such regulations shall be applicable to the
property for not to exceed one hundred eighty
(180) days after the aforesaid court judgment
or decree becomes final or until the appropriate
zoning classification can be established in
accordance with Section 519.12 of the Ohio
Revised Code.
1.4 Non-Conforming Uses
A. The lawful use of any dwelling, building or
structure and of any land or premises as
existing and lawful at the time of enactment
of this Resolution or amendment thereto,
may be continued although such use does not
conform with the provisions of this Resolution
or amendment. If no structural alterations
are made, a non-conforming use of a building
may be changed to another non-conforming
use of the same or of a more restricted
classification. Whenever a non-conforming use
has been changed to a more restricted use or to a
conforming use, such use shall not thereafter be
changed to a less restricted use.
B. Whenever the use of any dwelling building or
structure and of any land or premises becomes
non-conforming through an amendment of this
Resolution or Maps, such use may be continued
and, if no structural alterations are made, it may
be changed to another non-conforming use of the
same or of a more restricted classification.
C. In the event that a non-conforming use of any
dwelling, building or structure and of any land or
premises is voluntarily discontinued for two (2)
years or more, any future use thereof shall be in
conformity with the provisions of this Resolution.
D. Except as hereinafter provided in Article 2.12
no existing building or premises devoted to a use
not permitted by this Resolution in the District in
which such building or premises is located, except
when required to do so by law or order, shall be
enlarged, extended, reconstructed, or structurally
altered, unless the use thereof is changed to a use
permitted in the District in which such building
or premises is located. The non-conforming use
of a building may be extended throughout those
parts thereof which were manifestly arranged or
designed for such use at the time of adoption of
this resolution.
1.3 - 1.4 | 1.3 Districts and Boundaries
1.4 Non-Conforming Uses
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987
E. When a building, the use of which does not
conform to the provisions of this Resolution, is
damaged by fire, explosion, Act of God, or the
public enemy, to the extent of more than sixty
(60%) percent of its reproduction value, it shall
not be restored, unless the relocation of such use
shall have been authorized by the Board in the
manner provided in Article 2.12.
F. Nothing in this Resolution shall be interpreted as
authorization for or approval of the continuance of
the use of any activity, land, building or premises
in violation of zoning regulations in effect at the
time such use was begun.
1.5 General Provisions
A. Except as hereinafter provided:
1. No structure or land shall be used, and no
structure or other development shall be
located, extended, converted, substantially
improved, or structurally altered without full
compliance with all the applicable provisions
of this Resolution.
2. In any Residence District, placing a boat,
trailer, mobile home, manufactured home,
or junk automobile shall be prohibited,
except that outside the “FPM” Flood Plain
Management Overlay District, one (1) trailer
as defined in Article 6 or one (1) boat may
be parked or stored in an enclosed garage or
in the rear yard area, and further excepted
that one junk automobile may be parked in a
completely enclosed accessory building in any
single family residence district. In a multiple
family district, the above restrictions shall
apply, except that boats and trailer that are
owned by the residents of the property shall be
located within the rear yard area or within the
area allowed for main buildings. When located
within the area allowed for main buildings, the
boat or trailer shall be set back a minimum of
100 feet from the front property line and 25
feet from any side property line. No occupancy
for human habitation shall be maintained or
business or storage conducted therein while
such trailer or boat is so parked or stored. The
wheels or any similar transporting devices of
any such trailer permitted within any Residence
District shall not be removed, except when
the trailer is parked in a completely enclosed
garage or accessory building, nor shall any
such trailer be temporarily or permanently
affixed to the ground or attached to something
having a temporary or permanent location on
the ground.
3. The minimum yards and other open spaces,
including the density of population, provisions
contained in this Resolution for each and
every building existing on the effective date of
this Resolution, or for any building hereafter
erected or structurally altered, shall not be
encroached upon or considered as yard or open
space requirements or density of population
requirements for any other building.
4. Every building hereafter erected or structurally
altered shall be located on a lot as herein
defined, and in no case shall there be more
than one main building on a lot, except as
specifically provided hereinafter.
B. The subdivision of any parcel of land into two
or more parcels, sites or lots, any one of which
is less than five (5) acres in area, as defined in
Chapter 711, Plats of the Ohio Revised Code, shall
be considered evidence that any such parcels,
sites or lots are not used for agriculture.
C. Nothing contained in this Resolution shall require
any change in the plans, construction, size or
designated use of a building, for which a valid
permit has been issued or lawful approval given
before the effective date of this Resolution;
provided, however, construction under such permit
or approval shall have been started within six (6)
months and the ground story framework including
structural parts of the second floor shall have
Article 1: General Provisions | 7
1.4 Non-Conforming Uses | 1.4 - 1.5
1.5 General Provisions
8 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
been completed within one (1) year and the entire
building completed within two (2) years after the
effective date of this Resolution.
D. In the event of any conflict in the provisions of this
Resolution and the provisions of Chapter 519 of
the Ohio Revised Code, the latter shall prevail.
E. In addition to the notification requirements
specified in Section 519 of the Ohio Revised Code,
the Zoning Inspector may post notification of a
public hearing on or about the property that is the
subject of the hearing. The Zoning Inspector shall
have the authority to enter on the property to the
extent necessary to place such notification.
F. Human Remains Provisions: When human
remains are unearthed in the course of excavation
work in the construction of a project authorized
by an Anderson Township Zoning Certificate, the
work in the immediate vicinity of such human
remains shall cease forthwith, and the owner or
owner’s representative shall call in the Hamilton
County Sheriff and notify the Zoning Inspector.
If the Sheriff, with whatever consultations he
deems appropriate, determines that the human
remains do not constitute evidence of a crime,
the owner or owner’s representative shall consult
at the owner’s expense with an archeologist
to determine whether the human remains are
prehistoric with respect to the location at which
found. If the human remains are determined
not to be prehistoric, they shall be reburied in
accordance with applicable law. If the human
remains are determined to be prehistoric, the
Zoning Inspector shall immediately notify The Ohio
Council for Native American Burial Rights (the
“Council”) or The Ohio Center for Native American
Affairs (the “Center”), or any successor to the
Council or the Center, that at its option the human
remains (and any artifact physically attached
thereto or determined by the archaeologist to
have been so attached at the time such human
remains were originally buried) are available
for ceremonial reburial if claimed and receipted
for within three (3) days by a duly authorized
representative thereof. During the three (3) day
period, the human remains and any such artifacts
shall be accorded reasonable protection by the
owner at the site where they were unearthed. If
the human remains and any such artifacts are
not so claimed and receipted for, they shall be
reburied or otherwise disposed of by the owner in
accordance with applicable law.
G. Severability: It is the intention of Anderson
Township that all sections of this Resolution be
considered as severable, and that if any section
is declared to be invalid that all other sections
remain in effect.
1.5 | 1.5 General Provisions
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987
ARTICLE 2
Administration
2.1 Zoning Certificates............................................. 10
2.2 Plats....................................................................... 11
2.3 Boundaries of Districts..................................... 11
2.4 Interpretation, Purpose and Conflict.............. 11
2.5 Amendments........................................................ 12
2.6 Repeal................................................................... 12
2.7 Enforcement......................................................... 12
2.8 Applicable Provisions....................................... 13
2.9 Validity.................................................................. 13
2.10 Violations and Penalties................................... 13
2.11 Remedies.............................................................. 13
2.12 Township Board of Zoning Appeals............... 13
2.13 When Effective.................................................... 17
Administration | 2.0
Article 2: Administration | 9
10 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
2.1 Zoning Certificates
A. Except as provided otherwise in this Resolution,
no land shall be occupied or used and no building,
structure or sign shall be located, constructed,
reconstructed, enlarged or structurally altered, nor
work commenced upon the same, nor occupied
or used in whole or in part for any purpose
whatsoever until a zoning certificate is issued
by the Anderson Township Zoning Inspector
stating that the building, structure, sign and use
comply with the provisions of this Resolution.
No change of use shall be made in any building,
structure, sign, or part thereof, now or hereafter
located, constructed, reconstructed, enlarged
or structurally altered, except for single-family
dwelling purposes, without a zoning certificate
being issued therefore by the Anderson Township
Zoning Inspector. No zoning certificate shall be
issued to make a change unless the changes
are in conformity with the provisions of this
Resolution.
B. Nothing in this Section shall prevent the
continuance of a non-conforming use as herein
before authorized unless a discontinuance is
necessary for the safety of life or property.
C. A zoning certificate shall be applied for prior
to or coincidentally with the application for
a construction permit. A record of all zoning
certificates shall be kept on file in the office of the
Anderson Township Building Inspector, and copies
shall be furnished on request to any person having
a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building
affected.
D. A zoning certificate shall be required of all Non-
Conforming Uses. Application for the zoning
certificate for Non-Conforming Uses shall be filed
within twelve (12) months from the effective date
of this Resolution.
E. A non-refundable fee, to be determined by the
Trustees of Anderson Township, shall be paid at
the time an application for a zoning certificate, a
certificate of occupancy, or any other requested
permit or authorization is submitted.
F. The Director of Planning and Zoning may revoke
a zoning certificate where there has been a
violation of the provisions of this resolution
or a misrepresentation of fact on the permit
application. The Director of Planning and Zoning
shall issue a written statement contemporaneous
with his decision, explaining the reasons for
revocation. Appeals from such decisions may be
made to the Anderson Township Board of Zoning
Appeals, pursuant to Article 2.12,C.
ARTICLE 2
Administration
2.1 | 2.1 Zoning Certificates
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 Article 2: Administration | 11
2.2 Plats
A. Unless otherwise directed by the Anderson
Township Zoning Commission (ATZC), each
application for a zoning certificate shall be
accompanied by a plat and plan in duplicate
drawn to scale, showing the actual shape and
dimensions of the lot to be built upon or used, the
exact size and location on the lot of the buildings,
structures and accessory buildings existing, and
the lines within which the proposed building or
structure shall be erected or altered, the existing
and intended use of each building or part of a
building, the number of families or housekeeping
units the building is designed to accommodate,
and such other information with regard to the
lot and neighboring lots as may be necessary
for the enforcement of this Resolution. One (1)
copy of such plats and plans shall be returned
to the applicant when such plats and plans shall
have been approved by the Anderson Township
Zoning Inspector. All dimensions shown on these
plats and plans relating to the location and size
of the lot to be built upon shall be based on an
actual survey. The lot and location of the building
or structure thereon shall be staked out on the
ground before construction is started. Site plans
that are required for new structures shall show
the exact location of the structure in relation to all
property and rights-of-way lines, and plans shall
be signed by an Ohio Registered Surveyor.
2.3 Boundaries of Districts
A. Rules Where Uncertainty May Arise: Where
uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries
of the various Districts as shown on the Maps
accompanying and made a part of this Resolution,
the following rules apply:
1. The District boundaries are the center lines
of streets or alleys, unless otherwise shown,
and where the Districts designated on the
Maps, accompanying and made a part of this
Resolution are bounded approximately by
street or alley center lines, such center lines
shall be construed to be the boundary of the
Districts.
2. Where the District boundaries are not
otherwise indicated, and where the property
has been or may hereafter be divided into
blocks and lots, the District boundaries
shall be construed to be the lot lines and
where the Districts designated on the Maps
accompanying and made a part of this
Resolution are bounded approximately by lot
lines, the lot lines shall be construed to be the
boundary of the Districts unless the boundaries
are otherwise indicated on the Maps.
3. In unsubdivided property, the District boundary
lines on the Maps accompanying and made a
part of this Resolution shall be determined by
dimensions or the use of the scale appearing
on the Maps.
2.4 Interpretation, Purpose and Conflict
A. In interpreting and applying the provisions of this
Resolution and any amendments thereto, they
shall be held to be the minimum requirements
for the promotion of the public health, safety,
morals, comfort and general welfare. Wherever
the regulations of this Resolution require a greater
width or size of yards or other open spaces or
require a lower height of building or less number
of stories or require greater percentage of lot to
be left unoccupied or require a lower density of
population, or require a more restrictive use of
land, or impose other higher standards than are
required in any other resolution on regulation,
private deed restrictions or private covenants,
these regulations shall govern, but if the
requirements of the other resolution, regulation,
2.2 Plats
2.3 Boundaries of Districts
2.4 Interpretation Purpose and Conflict | 2.2 - 2.4
12 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
private deed restriction or private covenant is the
more restrictive, then those requirements shall
govern.
B. With respect to the unincorporated portion of
Anderson Township, this Resolution shall replace
and supersede a Zoning Resolution for the
unincorporated territory of Hamilton County, Ohio,
heretofore adopted pursuant to the provisions of
Ohio law.
2.5 Amendments
A. Amendments or supplements to the Zoning
Resolution may be initiated by motion of the
Anderson Township Zoning Commission (ATZC),
by the passage of a resolution therefore by the
Trustees or by the filing of an application therefore
by one or more of the owners or lessees of
property within the area proposed to be changed
or affected by the proposed amendment or
supplement with the ATZC. Upon adoption of such
motion, certification of such resolution, or the
filing of such application, the procedure provided
in Section 519.12 of the Ohio Revised Code shall
be followed. In the event the Trustees deny or
modify the recommendations of the ATCZ, the
majority vote of the Trustees shall be required.
Be it further provided, that no amendment or
supplement to the Zoning Resolution shall be
adopted except by a vote of a majority of the
Trustees.
B. Such amendment or supplement adopted by the
Trustees shall become effective thirty (30) days
after the date of such adoption unless within thirty
(30) days after the adoption of the amendment
or supplement there is presented to the Trustees
a petition, signed by a number of qualified
voters residing in the unincorporated area of the
township or part thereof included in the zoning
plan equal to not less than eight per cent (8%) of
the total vote cast for all candidates for governor
in such area at the last preceding general election
at which governor was elected, requesting the
Trustees to submit the amendment or supplement
to the electors of such area for approval or
rejection, at the next primary or general election.
C. No amendment or supplement for which
referendum vote has been requested shall be put
into effect unless a majority of the vote cast on
the issue is in favor of the amendment. Upon
certification by the Board of Elections that the
amendment has been approved by the voters it
shall take immediate effect.
2.6 Repeal
A. The Township Zoning Resolution and Map may be
repealed in the following manner: The Trustees (a)
may adopt a resolution upon its own initiative, and
(b) shall adopt a resolution if there is presented
to it a petition signed by a number of qualified
voters residing in the unincorporated area of the
Township included in the zoning plan equal to
not less than eight (8%) per cent of the total vote
cast for all candidates for governor in such area
at the last preceding general election, at which a
governor was elected, requesting the questions
of whether or not the plan of zoning in effect in
said Township shall be repealed to be submitted
to the electors residing in the unincorporated area
of the Township included in the zoning plan, at
the next primary or general election. In the event
a majority of the vote cast on said questions in
the township is in favor of repeal of zoning, then
said regulations shall no longer be of any force
or effect in the township. No more than one such
election shall be held in any two calendar years.
2.7 Enforcement
A. It shall be the duty of the Anderson Township
Zoning Inspector to enforce this Resolution.
2.5-2.6 | 2.5 Amendments, 2.6 Repeal
2.7 Enforcement
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 Article 2: Administration | 13
2.8 Applicable Provisions
A. This Resolution has been passed under the
authority of Section 519.01 et seq. of the Ohio
Revised Code and embraces the provisions
thereof regarding enforcement and penalties for
violations.
2.9 Validity
A. This Resolution shall in all respects be construed
so as to conform with the provisions and
requirements of Ohio law, including, but not
limited to, the provisions of Chapter 519 of the
Ohio Revised Code.
B. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause,
or phrase of this Resolution is for any reason
adjudged to be unconstitutional or invalid by a
court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder
shall not be affected thereby.
2.10 Violations and Penalties
A. It shall be unlawful to locate, erect, construct,
reconstruct, enlarge, change maintain or use any
building or to use any land in violation of any
regulation in or any provision of this Resolution or
any amendment or supplement thereto.
B. Any person, firm or corporation violating any
regulation, provision, amendment or supplement
to this Resolution, or failing to obey any lawful
order of the Anderson Township Zoning Inspector
issued in pursuance thereof, shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction
thereof, shall be subject to fines allowed under
Ohio Revised Code 519.99. Each and every day
during which such illegal location, erection,
construction, reconstruction, enlargement, change,
maintenance or use continues may be deemed a
separate offense.
2.11 Remedies
A. In case any building is or is proposed to be
located, erected, constructed, reconstructed,
enlarged, changed, maintained or used or any
land is or is proposed to be used in violation
of any regulation, provision, amendment or
supplement of this Resolution, the
Trustees, the Prosecuting Attorney, the Anderson
Township Zoning Inspector or any adjacent or
neighboring property owner who would be
specially damaged by such violation, in addition to
other remedies provided by law, may institute
injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other
appropriate action, actions, proceeding or
proceedings to prevent, enjoin, abate or
remove such unlawful location, erection,
construction, reconstruction, enlargement, change,
maintenance or use.
2.12 Township Board of Zoning Appeals
A. A Township Board of Zoning Appeals is hereby
created. Such Board shall consist of five (5)
members, to be appointed by the Trustees who
shall be residents of the unincorporated territory
of Anderson Township included in the area zoned.
The terms of all members shall be of such length
and so arranged that the term of one member
will expire each year. Each member shall serve
until his successor is appointed and qualified.
Members of the Board shall be removable for
nonperformance of duty, misconduct in office or
other cause by the Trustees upon written charges
having been filed with the Trustees and after
a public hearing has been held regarding such
charges, a copy of the charges having been served
upon the member so charged at least ten (10)
days prior to the hearing, either personally, or
| 2.7 - 2.12
2.8 Applicable Provisions, 2.9 Validity
2.10 Violations and Penalties
2.11 Remedies, 2.12 Township Board of
Zoning Appeals
14 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
by registered mail, or by leaving the same at his
usual place of residence. The member shall be
given an opportunity to be heard and answer such
charges. Vacancies shall be filled by the Trustees
and shall be for the unexpired term.
B. The Board shall organize, and adopt rules in
accordance with the provisions of this Resolution.
Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call
of the Chairman, and at such other times as the
Board may determine. The Chairman, or in his
absence the acting Chairman, may administer
oaths and the Board may compel the attendance
of witnesses. All meetings of the Board shall
be open to the public. The Board shall keep
minutes of its proceedings showing the vote of
each member upon each question, or, if absent
or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall
keep records of its examinations and other official
actions, all of which shall be immediately filed
with the Trustees in the Anderson Township
Planning and Zoning office and shall be a public
record.
C. Appeals to the Board may be taken by any person
aggrieved or by any Officer of the Township
affected by any decision of the administrative
Officer. Such appeal shall be taken within
twenty (20) days after the decision by filing with
the Officer from whom the appeal is taken and
with the Board a notice of appeal specifying the
grounds thereof. The Officer from whom the
appeal is taken shall forthwith transmit to the
Board all the papers constituting the record upon
which the action appealed from was taken. The
Board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing
of the appeal, give at least ten (10) days’ notice
in writing to the parties in interest, give notice
of such public hearing by one publication in one
or more newspapers of general circulation in the
Township at least ten days before the date of
hearing, and decide the same within a reasonable
time after it is submitted. Upon the hearing, any
party may appear in person or by attorney. Any
party adversely affected by a decision of the Board
may appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of
Hamilton County as provided by law.
D. The Board shall have the following powers:
1. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged
there is error in any order, requirement,
decision or determination made by an
administrative Official in the enforcement of
this Resolution.
2. To authorize, upon appeal, in specific cases,
such variance from the terms of the Zoning
Resolution, as will not be contrary to the public
interest, where, owing to special conditions,
a literal enforcement of the provisions of the
Resolution will result in unnecessary hardship,
or impose practical difficulties, so that the
spirit of the Resolution shall be observed and
substantial justice done.
a. Standards to be considered and weighed
in determining whether a property owner
seeking a use variance has encountered
unnecessary hardships in the use of his/her
property are as follows:
i. There are exceptional or extraordinary
circumstances, or conditions applying
to the subject property that do not apply
generally to other properties in the same
District or Vicinity;
ii. The special circumstances or
conditions do not result from actions
of the property owner or any of the
predecessors in title;
iii. Such variance is necessary for the
preservation and enjoyment of a
substantial property right of the
applicant that is possessed by owners of
other properties in the same District or
Vicinity; and
iv. The authorization of such variance will
not be materially detrimental to the
public welfare or injurious to property
in the District or Vicinity in which the
property is located.
2.12 | 2.12 Township Board of Zoning Appeals
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 Article 2: Administration | 15
b. Standards to be considered and weighed
in determining whether a property owner
seeking an area variance has encountered
practical difficulties in the use of his/her
property include, but are not limited to the
following:
i. The property in question will yield a
reasonable return or whether there can
be any beneficial use of the property
without the variance;
ii. The variance is substantial;
iii. The essential character of the
neighborhood would be substantially
altered or whether adjoining properties
would suffer a substantial detriment as
a result of the variance;
iv. The variance would adversely affect the
delivery of governmental services (i.e.
water, sewer, garbage);
v. The property owner purchased the
property with knowledge of the zoning
restrictions;
vi. The property owner’s predicament can
be feasibly obviated through some
method other than a variance.
vii. The spirit and intent behind the zoning
requirement would be observed and
substantial justice done by granting the
variance.
3. To permit the extension of a District where the
boundary line of a District divides a tract of
not more than one acre in area and held in a
single ownership on the effective date of this
Resolution, provided such extension shall not
exceed 100 feet.
4. To permit, where the boundary line of a District
divides a tract of more than ten (10) acres
under a single ownership, adjustment of such
line to conform with the topography of the
ground where such a tract is being subdivided
and when a preliminary subdivision plan for
such a tract has been approved by the Regional
Planning Commission of Hamilton County,
provided such variation does not extend for a
distance of more than five hundred (500) feet
and does not come closer than three hundred
(300) feet to any boundary of the tract.
5. To interpret the provisions of this Resolution
in a way to carry out the intent and purpose of
the plan, as shown upon the Maps fixing the
several Districts accompanying and made a
part of this Resolution, where the street layout
actually on the ground varies from the street
layout as shown on the maps aforesaid.
6. To permit a variation in the yard requirements
of any District where there are practical
difficulties in the carrying out of these
provisions due to an irregular shape of the
lot, topographic or other conditions, provided
such variations will not seriously affect any
adjoining property or the general welfare.
7. To authorize a Special Zoning Certificate
for any of the Conditional Uses in the “ID”
Industrial Development District set forth in
Article 3.16,C. In authorizing such Conditional
Uses, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
employ the performance standards described
in Article 3.16,F and shall also consider the
compatibility of such uses with surrounding
uses and the effect of such uses upon the
health, safety, and morals of the community.
8. To authorize by the grant of a special zoning
certificate after public hearing, the location
of any of the following uses, including such
buildings and structures as are necessary for
their operation, in a District from which they
are prohibited by this Resolution.
a. In determining whether to grant a special
zoning certificate pursuant to this section
the Board shall consider and apply the
following standards:
i. Spirit and Intent. The proposed use and
development shall comply with the spirit
2.12 Township Board of Zoning Appeals | 2.12
16 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
and intention of the Zoning Resolution
and with District purposes.
ii. No Adverse Affect. The proposed use
and development shall not have an
adverse affect upon adjacent property,
or the public health, safety, and general
welfare.
iii. Protection of Public Services: The
proposed use and development
should respect, to the greatest extent
practicable, any natural, scenic, and
historic features of significant public
interest.
iv. Consistent with Adopted Plans. The
proposed use and development shall, as
applicable, be harmonious with and in
accordance with the general objective of
the Township’s comprehensive plan and/
or Zoning Resolution.
b. Private airports or landing fields.
c. Parking lots on land, the farthest point of
which shall not be more than 200 feet from
the boundary of an Office, Limited Office,
Commercial or Industrial Districts.
d. To authorize by the grant of a special zoning
certificate after public hearing, the ingress
and egress to an Office, Limited Office,
Commercial or Industrial District through a
more restricted district.
e. Riding stables or fishing lakes, including the
sale of food and refreshments.
f. To authorize by grant of a special zoning
certificate after public hearing the location
and erection and use of private radio
transmitter and/or tower in a district in
which it is prohibited.
g. To authorize in its discretion, the alteration
and conversion of single-family dwelling to
a two-family dwelling, provided, however,
the dwelling was in existence at the time
of the adoption of this resolution that there
be no enlargement of the existing building,
that no living unit contain a total of less
than three hundred (300) square feet of
floor area and that the minimum lot area
contained in the lot or tract of land will be
twenty (20%) per cent greater than the lot
area required in the District in which they
are located.
h. The restoration of a non-conforming use
damaged by fire, explosion, act of God,
or the public enemy to the extent of more
than sixty (60%) per cent of its reproduction
value.
i. In granting such special zoning certificate,
the Board may impose such special
conditions as it shall deem desirable
under the circumstances, to reduce the
adverse effect of the above uses upon
the preservation of the character and
development of the District in which such
uses are located.
9. To grant the extension of a non-conforming use
or building upon a lot or tract of land occupied
by such use or building, where such extension
is necessarily incident to the existing use,
provided, however, that the floor area of such
extension or extensions shall not exceed in
all fifty (50%) percent of the floor area of the
existing building or buildings devoted to a nonconforming
use on the effective date of this
Resolution.
10. To grant a Conditional Zoning Certificate for
any of the Conditional Uses in a Single Family
Residence District set forth in Article 5.4. In
authorizing such Conditional Uses, the Board of
Zoning Appeals shall employ the performance
standards described in Article 5.4,G and shall
also consider the compatibility of such uses
with surrounding uses and the effect of such
uses upon the health, safety, and morals of the
2.12 | 2.12 Township Board of Zoning Appeals
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 Article 2: Administration | 17
community.
E. In exercising the above-mentioned powers, the Board
may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the
order, requirement, decision or determination appealed
from, and may make such order, requirement, decision or
determination as ought to be made, and to that end shall
have all powers of the Officer from whom the appeal is
taken.
F. The Board shall act by Resolution, in which three (3)
members concur and every variation granted or denied
shall be accompanied by a written finding of fact, based
on testimony and evidence and specifying the reason for
granting or denying the variation.
2.13 When Effective
A. This Resolution shall be in full force and effect from and
after the earliest period allowed by law.
2.12 Township Board of Zoning Appeals | 2.12 - 2.13
2.13 0 When Effective
18 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
ARTICLE 3
Zoning Districts
3.1 “A-A” Residence District Regulations......... 19
3.2 “A-30” Residence District Regulations........ 23
3.3 “A” Residence District Regulations.............. 24
3.4 ”A-2” Residence District Regulations.......... 25
3.5 “B” Residence District Regulations.............. 26
3.6 “B-2” Residence District Regulations.......... 27
3.7 “C” Residence District Regulations.............. 28
3.8 “D” Residence District Regulations.............. 29
3.9 “DD” Planned Multiple Residence District Reg..32
3.10 “O” Office District Regulations...................... 34
3.11 “O-1” Limited Office District........................... 36
3.12 “OO” Planned Office District Regulations.... 38
3.13 “MHP” Mobile Home Park District Regulations. 40
3.14 “E” Retail Business District Regulations..... 44
3.15 “EE” Planned Business District Regulations....... 46
3.16 “ID” Industrial Development District............ 48
3.17 “FF” Planned Light Industrial District Reg... 58
3.18 “GG” Planned Heavy Industrial District Reg........ 60
3.19 “EF” Excavation and Landfill District........... 62
3.20 “H” Riverfront District Regulations................ 64
3.21 District Lot Standards ....................................... 66
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987
3.1 “AA”
Residence District Regulations
A. The regulations set forth in this Section, or set
forth elsewhere in this resolution, when referred
to in this Section, are the District Regulations in
the “AA” Residence District.
B. Use Regulations: A building or premises shall
be used only for the following purposes permitted
and conditional use purposes. Conditional uses
require the issuance of a conditional use zoning
certificate, after public hearing, by the Board of
Zoning Appeals, as outlined in Article 5.4 of this
Resolution.
1. Permitted Uses: The following describes
permitted uses for the AA residence
district.
a. 3.1,C,1 Agricultural
b. 3.1,C,2 Cemeteries (including
mausoleums)
c. 3.1,C,9 Public and Private Forests
d. 3.1,C,11 Platted Subdivision
e, 3.1,C,13 Single Family Dwelling
f, 3.1,C,14 Accessory Buildings
g. 3.1,C,15 Day Care Center, Type B
2. Conditional Uses: The following describes
conditional uses for the AA residence district.
a. 3.1,C,3 Church, Sunday School,
and Other Places of Worship
b. 3.1,C,4 Country Clubs, Swimming,
and Tennis Clubs
c. 3.1,C,5 Community Fire House
d. 3.1,C,6 Golf Course
e. 3.1,C,7 Greenhouses
f. 3.1,C,8 Hospitals and Assorted
Institutions
g. 3.1,C,10 Public Properties (Parks etc.)
h. 3.1,C,12 Schools (Public and Private)
i. 3.1,C,16 Adult Family Home
j. 3.1,C,15 Day Care Center, Type A
C. Use Descriptions
1. Agriculture, as provided in Section 3.1,C,11.
2. Cemeteries, including mausoleums, provided
that any mausoleum shall be at least one
hundred (100) feet from every property line
Article 3: Z oning Districts | 19
ARTICLE 3
Zoning Districts
“A-A” Residence District Regulations | 3.1
20 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
3.1 | “A-A” Residence District Regulations
and provided further that any new cemetery
shall contain an area of twenty (20) acres or
more.
3. Church, Sunday School, and other places of
worship.
4. Country clubs, swimming and tennis clubs;
provided that any structures, except fences,
and any parking areas necessary to the
operation shall be at least one hundred (100)
feet from every property line.
5. Community fire house.
6. Golf course, except miniature courses and
practice driving tees; including such buildings
and uses necessary for its operation except
those the chief activity of which is a service
customarily carried on as a business provided
the site on which the course is located shall
contain at least twenty (20) acres.
7. Greenhouses, provided any exterior storage or
refuse or supplies and the heating plant shall
be at least one hundred (100) feet from every
property line.
8. Hospitals and institutions of an educational,
religious, charitable, philanthropic nature
provided the site upon which such uses are
located shall contain at least five (5) acres and
that such buildings shall not occupy over ten
percent (10%) of the total area of the site.
9. Public and private forests and wild life
reservations or similar conservation projects,
including the usual buildings therefor.
10. Publicly owned or operated properties
including parks, playgrounds and community
centers. A preliminary subdivision plan
for such a tract has been approved by the
Regional Planning Commission of Hamilton
County, provided such
11. In any platted subdivision approved under
Section 711.05, 711.09, or 711.10 of the
Ohio Revised Code, or in any area consisting
of fifteen (15) or more lots approved under
Section 711.131 of the Ohio Revised Code
that are contiguous to one another, or some
of which are contiguous to one another and
adjacent to one side of a dedicated public
road, and the balance of which are contiguous
to one another and adjacent to the opposite
side of the same dedicated public road:
a. Any buildings or structures incidental to
the use of land for agricultural purposes,
including but not limited to riding stables,
or animal hospitals or kennels for the
boarding of animals shall, on lots of five
(5) acres or less, be set back at least one
hundred (100) feet from every property
line.
b. Dairying and animal and poultry husbandry
shall not be permitted on lots of five (5)
acres or less when at least thirty-five
(35) percent of the lots in the subdivision
are developed with at least one building,
structure, or improvement that is subject
to real property taxation or that its subject
to the tax on manufactured and mobile
homes under Section 4503.06 of the Ohio
Revised Code. After thirty-five (35) percent
of the lots are so developed, dairying and
animal and poultry husbandry shall be
considered nonconforming use of land and
buildings or structures pursuant to Section
519.19 of the Ohio Revised Code.
c. The provision of this Section shall
be construed so as to conform to all
applicable Sections of the Ohio Revised
Code.
12. Schools, public and private, having a
curriculum equivalent to that ordinarily
given in public elementary and high schools,
provided no rooms are regularly used for
housekeeping or sleeping rooms.
13. Single family dwellings.
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987
“A-A” Residence District Regulations | 3.1
14. Accessory buildings and uses customarily
incident to any of the above uses, including:
a. Quarters for domestic employees
employed on the premises as provided
in the “AA” Residence Districts.
b, A private garage or parking spaces,
provided that this section shall not
be deemed to permit parking of a
truck or other commercial vehicle on
the premises other than as defined in
Article 6.
c. A private stable, subject to the
requirements of Section 3.1,E,11,a.
d. Home Occupations.
e. The keeping of animals and fowls
as pets, provided, however, that any
building or enclosure for such animals
or fowls, other than for not more than
two adult dogs or cats, shall be at
least one hundred (100) feet from every
property line.
f. Farm Markets where 50% or more of
the gross income received from the
market is derived from produce raised
on farms owned or operated by the
market operator in a normal crop year.
g. Temporary buildings incidental to
construction, which buildings shall
be removed upon the completion or
abandonment of the construction work.
15. Day Care Center, Type B
16. Adult Family Home. This section shall be
interpreted so as to comply with Ohio Revised
Code Section 3722.03.
D. Lot and Yard Standards
1. Height Regulations: No building shall exceed
two and one-half (2-1/2) stories or thirty-five
(35) feet in height, except as hereinafter
provided in Article 5.2.
2. Area Regulations: (See Illustration on Next
Page)
a. Front Yard:
i. There shall be a front yard having a
depth of not less than fifty (50) feet
provided, however, no alignment
setbacks or front yard depth shall
be required to exceed the average
minimum depths of the existing
front yards on the lots adjacent on
each side, if each of such lots are
within the same block and within one
hundred (100) feet.
ii. Where lots have a double frontage,
the required front yard shall be
provided on both streets.
iii. Where a lot is located at the
intersection of two or more streets
there shall be a front yard on each
street side of a corner lot, except that
the buildable width of a lot of record
shall not be reduced to less than
forty (40) feet. No accessory building
shall project beyond the front yard
line on either street.
b. Side Yard: Except as hereinafter
provided in Article 5.2, there shall be
a side yard on each side of a building
which yard shall have a width of not
less than twenty-five (25) feet.
c. Rear Yard: Except as hereinafter
provided in Article 5.2 there shall be
a rear yard having a depth of not less
than sixty (60) feet.
d. Intensity of Use: Except as hereinafter
provided in Article 5.2, every lot or
tract of land shall have a minimum
width of one hundred fifty (150) feet at
the building line and an area of not less
than one (1) acre.
Article 3: Z oning Districts | 21
22 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
Illustration 3.1: Lot Area Regulations (AA District)
35’ max
Property Line
150’ Min Lot Width
25’ Side Yard Setback
25’ Side Yard Setback
Minimum Lot Area
1 Acre
60’ Rear Yard Setback
50’ Front Yard Setback
ROW Line
3.1 | “A-A” Residence District Regulations
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 23
3.2 “A-30”
Residence District Regulations
A. The regulations set forth in this Section, or set
forth elsewhere in this resolution, when referred
to in this Section, are the District Regulations in
the “A-30” Residence District.
B. Use Regulations: A building or premises shall
be used only for purposes permitted in Article
3.1,B,1. Conditional Uses shall match those
permitted in Article 3.1,B,2.
C. Lot and Yard Standards
1. Height Regulations: No building shall exceed
two and one-half (2-1/2) stories or thirty-five
(35) feet in height, except as hereinafter
provided in Article 5.2.
2. Area Regulations: (See Illustration Below)
a. Front Yard: There shall be a front yard
having a depth of not less than fifty (50)
feet, provided, however, no alignment
or setback or front yard depth shall be
required to exceed the average of the
minimum depth of the existing front yards
on the lots adjacent on each side, if each
of such lots are within the same block and
within one hundred (100) feet.
i. Where lots have a double frontage, the
required front yard shall be provided on
both streets
ii. Where a lot is located at the
intersection of two or more streets,
there shall be a front yard on each
street side of a corner lot, except that
the buildable width of a lot of record
shall not be reduced to less than forty
(40) feet. No accessory building shall
project beyond the front yard line on
either street.
b. Side Yard: Except as hereinafter provided in
Article 5.2, there shall be a side yard on each
side of a building which yard shall have a
width of not less than twenty-five (25) feet.
c. Rear Yard: Except as hereinafter provided in
Article 5.2, there shall be a rear yard having
a depth of not less than thirty-five (35) feet.
3. Intensity of Use: Except as hereinafter provided in
Article 5.2 every lot or tract of land shall have a
minimum width of one hundred fifty (150) feet at
the building line and an area of not less than thirty
thousand (30,000) square feet.
Property Line
50’ Front Yard Setback
25’ Side Yard Setback
25’ Side Yard Setback
35’ Rear Yard Setback
150’ Min Lot Width
ROW Line
Minimum Lot Area
30,000 s.f.
Illustration 3.2: Lot Area Regulations (A-30 District)
“A-30” Residence District Regulations | 3.2
Article 3: Z oning Districts
24 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
3.3 “A”
Residence District Regulations
A. The regulations set forth in this Section, or set
forth elsewhere in this Resolution, when referred
to in this Section, are the district regulations in
the “A” Residence District.
B. Use Regulations: A building or premises shall
be used only for purposes permitted in Article
3.1,B,1. Conditional Uses shall match those
permitted in Article 3.1,B,2.
C. Lot and Yard Standards
1. Height Regulations: No building shall exceed
two and one-half (2-1/2) stories or thirty-five
(35) feet in height, except as hereinafter
provided in Article 5.2.
2. Area Regulations: (See Illustration Below)
a. Front Yard: There shall be a front yard
having a depth of not less than fifty (50)
feet, provided, however, no alignment
or setback or front yard depth shall be
required to exceed the average of the
minimum depth of the existing front yards
on the lots adjacent on each side, if each
of such lots are within the same block and
within one hundred (100) feet.
i. Where lots have a double frontage, the
required front yard shall be provided on
both streets
ii. Where a lot is located at the
intersection of two or more streets,
there shall be a front yard on each
street side of a corner lot, except that
the buildable width of a lot of record
shall not be reduced to less than forty
(40) feet. No accessory building shall
project beyond the front yard line on
either street.
b. Side Yard: Except as hereinafter provided in
Article 5.2 there shall be a side yard on each
side of a building which yard shall have a
width of not less than fifteen (15) feet.
c. Rear Yard: Except as hereinafter provided in
Article 5.2 there shall be a rear yard having a
depth of not less than thirty-five (35) feet.
d. Intensity of Use: Except as hereinafter
provided in Article 5.2 every lot or tract
of land shall have a minimum width of one
hundred (100) feet at the building line and
an area of not less than twenty thousand
(20,000) square feet.
3.3 | “A” Residence District Regulations
Property Line
50’ Front Yard Setback
15’ Side Yard Setback
15’ Side Yard Setback
35’ Rear Yard Setback
100’ Min Lot Width
ROW Line
Minimum Lot Area
20,000 s.f.
Illustration 3.3: Lot Area Regulations (A District)
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987
3.4 “A-2”
Residence District Regulations
A. The regulations set forth in this Section, or set
forth elsewhere in this Resolution when referred
to in this Section, are the district regulations in
the “A 2” Residence District.
B. Use Regulations: A building or premises shall
be used only for purposes permitted in Article
3.1,B,1. Conditional Uses shall match those
permitted in Article 3.1,B,2.
C. Lot and Yard Standards
1. Height Regulations: No building shall exceed
two and one-half (2-1/2) stories or thirty-five
(35) feet in height, except as hereinafter
provided in Article 5.2
2. Area Regulations: (See Illustration Below)
a. Front Yard: There shall be a front yard
having a depth of not less than forty (40)
feet, provided, however, no alignment
setback or front yard depth shall be
required to exceed the average of the
minimum depths of the existing front
yards on the lots adjacent on each side,
if each of such lots are within the same
block and within one hundred (100) feet.
i. Where lots have a double frontage, the
required front yard shall be provided on
both streets
ii. Where a lot is located at the
intersection of two or more streets,
there shall be a front yard on each
street side of a corner lot, except that
the buildable width of a lot of record
shall not be reduced to less than forty
(40) feet. No accessory building shall
project beyond the front yard line on
either street.
b. Side Yard: Except as hereinafter provided
in Article 5.2 there shall be a side yard on
each side of a building, which yard shall
have a width of not less than ten (10) feet.
c. Rear Yard: Except as hereinafter provided in
Article 5.2 there shall be a rear yard having
a depth of not less than thirty-five (35) feet.
d. Intensity of Use: Except as hereinafter
provided in Article 5.2 every lot or tract of
land shall have a minimum width of eighty
(80) feet at the building line and an area of
not less than fourteen thousand (14,000)
square feet.
“A2” Residence District Regulations | 3.4
Property Line
40’ Front Yard Setback
10’ Side Yard Setback
Minimum Lot Area
14,000 s.f.
10’ Side Yard Setback
35’ Rear Yard Setback
80’ Min Lot Width
ROW Line
Illustration 3.4: Lot Area Regulations (A2 District)
Article 3: Z oning Districts | 25
26 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
3.5 “B”
Residence District Regulations
A. The regulations set forth in this Section, or set
forth elsewhere in this Resolution, when referred
to in this Section, are the district regulations in
the “B” Residence District.
B. Use Regulations: A building or premises shall
be used only for purposes permitted in Article
3.1,B,1. Conditional Uses shall match those
permitted in Article 3.1,B,2.
C. Lot and Yard Standards
1. Height Regulations: No building shall exceed
two and one-half (2-1/2) stories or thirty-five
(35) feet in height, except as hereinafter
provided in Article 5.2.
2. Area Regulations: (See Illustration Below)
a. Front Yard: There shall be a front
yard having a depth of not less than
thirty-five (35) feet, provided, however,
no alignment setback or front yard
depth shall be required to exceed the
average of the minimum depths of
the existing front yards on the lots
adjacent on each side, if each of such
lots are within the same block and
within one hundred (100) feet.
i. Where lots have a double frontage, the
required front yard shall be provided on
both streets
ii. Where a lot is located at the
intersection of two or more streets,
there shall be a front yard on each
street side of a corner lot, except that
the buildable width of a lot of record
shall not be reduced to less than forty
(40) feet. No accessory building shall
project beyond the front yard line on
either street.
b. Side Yard: Except as hereinafter provided
in Article 5.2, there shall be a side yard
on each side of a building, which yard shall
have a width of not less than eight (8) feet.
c. Rear Yard: Except as hereinafter provided
in Article 5.2,. there shall be a rear yard
having a depth of not less than thirty-five
(35) feet.
d. Intensity of Use: Except as hereinafter
provided in Article 5.2, every lot or tract of
land shall have a minimum width of seventy
(70) feet at the building line and an area
of not less than ten thousand five hundred
(10,500) square feet.
3.5 | “B” Residence District Regulations
Property Line
35’ Front Yard Setback
8’ Side Yard Setback
8’ Side Yard Setback
35’ Rear Yard Setback
70’ Min Lot Width
ROW Line
Minimum Lot Area
10,500 s.f.
Illustration 3.5: Lot Area Regulations (B District)
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987
3.6 “B-2”
Residence District Regulations
A. The regulations set forth in this Section, or set
forth elsewhere in this Resolution, when referred
to in this Section, are the district regulations in
the “B-2” Residence District.
B. Use Regulations: A building or premises shall
be used only for purposes permitted in Article
3.1,B,1. Conditional Uses shall match those
permitted in Article 3.1,B,2.
C. Lot and Yard Standards
1. Height Regulations: No building shall exceed
two and one-half (2-1/2) stories or thirty-five
(35) feet in height, except as hereinafter
provided in Article 5.2.
2. Area Regulations: (See Illustration Below)
a. Front Yard: There shall be a front yard
having a depth of not less than thirtyfive
(35) feet, provided, however, no
alignment setback or front yard depth
shall be required to exceed the average
of the minimum depths of the existing
front yards on the lots adjacent on each
side, if each of such lots are within the same
block and within one hundred (100) feet.
i. Where lots have a double frontage, the
required front yard shall be provided on
both streets.
ii. Where a lot is located at the
intersection of two or more streets,
there shall be a front yard on each
street side of a corner lot, except that
the buildable width of a lot of record
shall not be reduced to less than forty
(40) feet. No accessory building shall
project beyond the front yard line on
either street.
b. Side Yard: Except as hereinafter provided
in Article 5.2. there shall be a side yard on
each side of a building, which yard shall
have a combined width of not less than
thirteen (13) feet, and provided further that
neither side yard shall be less than five (5)
feet wide.
c. Rear Yard: Except as hereinafter provided in
Article 5.2. there shall be a rear yard having
a depth of not less than thirty (30) feet.
d. Intensity of Use: Except as hereinafter
provided in Article 5.2., every lot or tract of
land shall have a minimum width of sixty (60)
feet at the building line and an area of not
less than seventy-five hundred (7,500) square
feet.
“B2” Residence District Regulations | 3.6
Property Line
35’ Front Yard Setback
30’ Rear Yard Setback
70’ Min Lot Width
ROW Line
Minimum Lot Area
10,500 s.f.
Side Yard Setback
Side Yard Setback
*Side Yard Setback
Combined Width Minimum
13', Neither Side Yard Shall
Be Less than 5' Wide.
Illustration 3.6: Lot Area Regulations (B2 District)
Article 3: Z oning Districts | 27
28 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
3.7 “C”
Residence District Regulations
A. The regulations set forth in this Section, or set
forth elsewhere in this Resolution, when referred
to in this Section, are the district regulations in
the “C” Residence District.
B. Use Regulations: A building or premises shall
be used only for purposes permitted in Article
3.1,B,1. Conditional Uses shall match those
permitted in Article 3.1,B,2.
C. Lot and Yard Standards
1. Height Regulations: No building shall exceed
two and one-half (2-1/2) stories or thirty-five
(35) feet in height, except as hereinafter
provided in Article 5.2.
2. Area Regulations: (see below illustration)
a. Front Yard: There shall be a front yard
having a depth of not less than thirty (30)
feet, provided, however, no alignment
setback or front yard depth shall be
required to exceed the average of the
minimum depths of the existing front yards
on the lots adjacent to each side, if each
of such lots are within the same block and
within one hundred (100) feet.
i. Where lots have a double frontage, the
required front yard shall be provided on
both streets.
ii. Where a lot is located at the
intersection of two or more streets,
there shall be a front yard on each
street side of a corner lot, except that
the buildable width of a lot of record
shall not be reduced to less than
thirty-two (32) feet. No accessory
building shall project beyond the front
yard line on either street.
b. Side Yard: Except as hereinafter provided in
Article Article 5.2. there shall be a side yard
on each side of a building, which yard shall
have a width of not less than five (5) feet.
c. Rear Yard: Except as hereinafter provided in
Article 5.2. there shall be a rear yard having
a depth of not less than thirty (30) feet.
d. Intensity of Use: Except as hereinafter
provided in Article 5.2, every lot or tract of
land shall have a minimum width of fifty (50)
feet at the building line and an area of not
less than six thousand (6,000) square feet.
3.7 | “C” Residence District Regulations
Property Line
30’ Front Yard Setback
L
30’ Rear Yard Setback
50’ Min Lot Width
ROW Line
Minimum Lot Area
6,000 s.f.
5' Side Yard Setback
5' Side Yard Setback
Illustration 3.7: Lot Area Regulations (C District)
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987
3.8 “D”
Residence District Regulations
A. The regulations set forth in this Section, or set
forth elsewhere in this Resolution, when referred
to in this Section, are the district regulations in
the “D” Residence District.
B. Use Regulations: A building or premises
shall be used only for the following purposes
permitted and conditional use purposes.
Conditional uses require the issuance of a
conditional use zoning certificate, after public
hearing, by the Board of Zoning Appeals, as
outlined in Article 5.5 of this Resolution.
1. Permitted Uses: The following describes
permitted uses for the D residence district.
a. 3.8,C,1 Agriculture;
b. 3.8,C,2 Single and two family
dwellings;
c. 3.1,C,3 Multiple dwellings;
d. 3.1,C,4 Boarding and lodging houses;
e. 3.1,C,5 Fraternities, sororities,
dormitories and lodges;
f. 3.1,C,6 Public and private forest and wild
life reservations;.
g. 3.1,C,7 Accessory Buildings;
h. 3.1,C,15 Day Care Center, Type B.
2. Conditional Uses: The following describes
conditional uses for the D residence district.
a. 3.1,C,5 Cemeteries;
b. 3.1,C,6 Places of Worship (Church/Sunday
School etc.);
c. 3.1,C,7 Clubs;
d. 3.1,C,8 Fire House;
e. 3.1,C,10 Golf Course;
f. 3.1,C,11 Hospitals and Assorted
Institutions;
g. 3.1,C,10 Public Properties (Parks etc.);
h. 3.1,C,14 Rest Home, Day Care Center,
Nursery School;
i. 3.1,C,15 Schools;
j. 3.1,C,18 Adult Family Home.
C. Use Descriptions
1. Agriculture, as provided in Article 3.1,C,11.
2. Single and two family dwellings.
3. Multiple dwellings.
4. Boarding and lodging houses.
5. Cemeteries, including mausoleums; provided
that any mausoleum shall be at least one
hundred (100) feet from every property line
and provided further that any new cemetery
shall contain an area of twenty (20) acres or
more.
6. Church, Sunday School, and other places of
worship.
7. Clubs
8. Community fire house.
9. Fraternities, sororities, dormitories and
lodges, except those the chief activity of
which is a service customarily carried on as
a business.
10. Golf course, except miniature courses and
practice tees; including such buildings and
uses necessary for its operation except
those the chief activity of which is a service
customarily carried on as a business.
11. Hospitals, except animal hospitals, and
institutions of an educational, religious,
charitable, philanthropic nature.
“D” Residence District Regulations | 3.8
Article 3: Z oning Districts | 29
30 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
12. Public and private forest and wild life
reservations or similar conservation projects,
including the usual buildings therefor.
13. Publicly owned or operated properties
including parks, playgrounds and community
centers.
14. Rest home, convalescent home, day care
center, nursery school, prekindergarten,
kindergarten, or similar private school;
located on a site of not less than one (1)
acre.
15. Schools, public and private, having a
curriculum equivalent to that ordinarily given
in public elementary and high schools.
16. Accessory buildings and uses customarily
incident to any of the above uses, including:
a. Private garage.
b. Storage garages, where the lot is
occupied by a multiple dwelling, hospital
or institutional building.
c. Home occupation.
d. The keeping of animals and fowls as pets
provided, however, that any building or
enclosure for such animals or fowls, other
than for not more than two (2) adult dogs
or cats, shall be at least one hundred
(100) feet from every property line.
e. Temporary buildings incidental to
construction, which buildings shall
be removed upon the completion or
abandonment of the construction work.
17. Day Care Center, Type B
18. Adult Family Home. This section shall
be interpreted so as to comply with Ohio
Revised Code Section 3722.03.
D. Lot and Yard Standards
1. Height Regulations: No building shall exceed
three (3) stories or forty-five (45) feet in
height, except as hereinafter provided in
Article 5.2.
2. Area Regulations:
a. Front Yard: A 30’ front yard setback is
required.
b. Side Yard: Except as hereinafter provided
in Article 5.2;
i. For buildings not exceeding two and
one-half (2-1/2) stories in height, there
shall be a side yard on each side of
such building, which yard shall have a
width of not less than five (5) feet.
ii. There shall be a side yard on each side
of a three (3) story building which yard
shall have a width of not less than ten
(10) feet.
c. Rear Yard: Except as hereinafter provided
in Article 5.2;
i. For buildings not exceeding two and
one-half (2-1/2) stories in height, there
shall be a rear yard having a depth of
not less than thirty (30) feet.
ii. A three (3) story building shall have a
rear yard of not less than forty (40) feet
in depth.
3. Intensity of Use:
a. Every lot or tract of land on which there
is erected a single-family dwelling, shall
have a minimum width of fifty (50) feet
at the building line and an area of not
less than five thousand (5,000) square
feet.
b. Every lot or tract of land on which there
is erected a two-family dwelling or a
multiple dwelling shall have a minimum
width of fifty (50) feet at the building
line and an area of not less than three
thousand (3,000) square feet per family,
except that the area regulation shall
not apply to dormitories, fraternities or
3.8 | “D” Residence District Regulations
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987
sororities where no cooking is done in
individual rooms or apartments. Every
lot on which there is erected a building
for any other use permitted in the “D”
Residence District shall have a minimum
width of sixty (60) feet and a minimum
area of ten thousand (10,000) square
feet.
c. Where a lot or tract of land has less
width or area than herein required and
was of record on the effective date of this
Resolution, that lot or tract of land may
be used only for single-family dwelling
purposes, or for any other non dwelling
use permitted in this Article.
“D” Residence District Regulations | 3.8
Article 3: Z oning Districts | 31
32 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
3.9 “DD” Planned Multiple
Residence District Regulations
A. The regulations set forth in this Section, or set
forth elsewhere in this Resolution, when referred
to in this Section, are the district regulations in
the “DD” Planned Multiple Residence District.
It is the purpose of this district to provide sites
for the uses permitted herein at appropriate
locations in relation to the existing and potential
development of their surroundings to afford an
attractive setting for such uses and to harmonize
with the surroundings.
B. Use Regulations: Any use permitted in Article
3.8,B,1 may be permitted in the “DD” Planned
Multiple Residence District provided, however,
that the district shall be laid out and developed
as a unit according to an approved development
plan as defined in Article 6, in order that the
specific use or uses may be properly integrated
with the surrounding area, and provided
further, that a service establishment such as
a restaurant, a bar, barber shop, beauty shop,
and the like, principally serving the residents
and having no entrance except from within the
building may be permitted after review by the
ATZC which may consider the recommendation of
the Regional Planning Commission, and found to
be warranted by the size of the development.
C. Procedure: The owner or owners of a tract
of land adjoining a similarly or less restricted
district, may submit a plan for the use and
development of such tract for the purposes
of, and meeting the requirements set forth
in this Section. The development plan shall
show the details defined in Article 6, in
order to indicate the type and character of the
proposed development and the treatment of the
tract, including screening and landscaping, in
relation to abutting land uses for a harmonious
relationship with the surrounding property and
the protection thereof.
D. Height and Area Requirements
1. No building shall exceed three (3) stories or
forty (40) feet in height unless such building
is set back from the street line a distance of
not less than its height and is set back from
all other property lines a distance of thirty
(30) feet plus two (2) feet for each foot in
height in excess of forty (40) feet.
2. No building shall be closer than forty (40)
feet to any front or rear lot line, or closer
than fifteen (15) feet in the case of a one or
two-story building, or closer than thirty (30)
feet in case of a three-story building, to any
side lot line.
3. The lot area per apartment shall not be less
than: twenty-five hundred (2500) square
feet for an apartment of two bedrooms
or more; two thousand (2000) square feet
for one-bedroom apartment and fifteen
hundred (1500) square feet for an efficiency
apartment.
4. Where part or all of the off-street parking
spaces required for a multi-family dwelling
are provided within the principal building or
buildings, the minimum lot area per dwelling
unit specified in this section may be reduced
by a maximum of twenty per cent (20%), in
accordance with the following formula:
a / b x 20%, where:
a = the number of spaces provided
within the building, and
b = the number of spaces required for
the multi-family dwelling
5. In a case where the topography or other
physical features of the tract or its relation
to surrounding property may make complete
compliance with the yard requirements as
prescribed in this Subsection, unnecessary
or undesirable, the ATZC may modify such
requirements to the extent warranted
by such physical conditions provided the
surrounding property and the public welfare
are adequately protected. The ATZC
3.9| “DD” Planned Multiple Residence District
Regulations
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 33
may consider the recommendation of the
Regional Planning Commission at its public
hearing.
E. Parking Requirements: Off-street parking
spaces shall be provided on the basis of at least
one and one-half spaces for each efficiency
apartment, or one-bedroom apartment and two
spaces for each apartment of two bedrooms or
more.
F. General Requirements:
1. The size and location of the tract in
relation to surrounding property shall be
such that in the proposed development,
including landscaping and screening and
other adjustments to the abutting land
uses, can be made to harmonize with the
neighborhood. The proposed plan shall not
be approved unless the ATZC specifically
makes a finding that the development will
be harmoniously related to the overall
neighborhood.
2. In furthering this objective, the location and
arrangement of buildings, parking structures
and areas, walks, lighting, and appurtenant
facilities shall be adjusted to the surrounding
land uses, and any part of the site not used
for buildings or other structures, or for
parking, loading or access ways shall be
landscaped with grass, trees and shrubs or
pedestrian walks.
3. No sign or displays or advertising of
merchandise and services offered in the
shops shall be visible from outside the
building.
4. Reasonable additional requirements as to
landscaping, lighting, screening, access
ways and building setbacks may be imposed
by the ATZC for the protection of adjacent
property. The Regional Planning Commission
may make recommendations, which
reference such additional requirements.
G. Violation of Plan: The development plan
approved in accordance with this Section and
Article 5.1 shall be an integral part of the
Zoning Resolution and any departure from this
plan or any modification thereof, except when
specifically approved in accordance with
Article 5.1 shall be a violation of said Zoning
Resolution and shall be subject to the provisions
and penalties prescribed therefore in
Article 2.10.
“DD” Planned Multiple Residence District | 3.9
Regulations
Article 3: Z oning Districts
34 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
3.10 “O”
Office District Regulations
A. The regulations set forth in this Section, or set
forth elsewhere in this Resolution when referred
to in this Section, are the district regulations in
the “O” Office District.
B. Use Regulations: A building or premises shall
be used only for the following purposes:
1. Any use permitted in Article 3.8,B,1.
2. Hotels and motels, including a restaurant,
provided that such restaurant is subordinate
and incident to the hotel or motel, and
provided further that the floor of the
restaurant does not exceed twenty-five
percent (25%) of the floor area of the hotel
or motel.
3. Office buildings devoted exclusively to
professional services, banking, and other
similar financial services, the management
of commercial, industrial, religious, public
institutions. The uses permitted by this
subordinate section shall not include the
manufacture or sale of commodities, unless
such sale is incidental and subsidiary to the
principal service rendered, but may include
the display or storage of commodities
incidental to the principal use, provided that
the gross floor area of any one tenant or
occupant devoted to such display or storage
shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the
total floor area occupied by such tenant
or occupant, and provided further that no
display or commodities shall be visible from
the exterior of the building.
4. Restaurants, pharmacies, and other
accessory services subordinate and incident
to the principal uses permitted by this
section when conducted and entered only
from within the principal building, and where
there is no display or advertising pertaining
to such accessory service visible from the
exterior of the building and health, wellness
or fitness facilities, when associated with
or related to medical offices, medical clinics
or rehabilitation services provided that (i)
such health, wellness or fitness facilities are
located in or attached to the same Building
where the associated or related medical
offices, medical clinics or rehabilitation
services are located (ii) the associated or
related medical offices, medical clinics or
rehabilitation services occupy at least 20%
of the space in such building and (iii) the site
upon which such building is located contains
at least five (5) acres.
5. Funeral homes, including the display
or storage of incidental commodities,
provided that the gross floor area devoted
to such display or storage shall not exceed
ten percent (10%) of the total floor area
occupied by the principal use.
6. Studios for the broadcasting of radio,
facsimile and television, including rooms,
spaces, and aerials incident to the operation
of such studios.
7. Storage garages and other accessory
buildings devoted to uses customarily
incident to the use of the principal building
when located on the same lot as the
principal building and not involving the sale,
display or storage of commodities.
C. Lot and Yard Standards
1. Height Regulations: No building shall exceed
three (3) stories or forty-five (45) feet in
height, except as hereinafter provided in
Article 5.2.
2. Area Regulations:
a. Front Yard: A 30’ front yard setback is
required.
b. Side Yard: Except as hereinafter provided
3.10 | “O” Limited Office District
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987
in Article 5.2;
i. For buildings not exceeding two and
one-half (2-1/2) stories in height, there
shall be a side yard on each side of
such building, which yard shall have a
width of not less than five (5) feet.
ii. There shall be a side yard on each side
of a three (3) story building which yard
shall have a width of not less than ten
(10) feet.
c. Rear Yard: Except as hereinafter provided
in Article 5.2;
i. For buildings not exceeding two and
one-half (2-1/2) stories in height, there
shall be a rear yard having a depth of
not less than thirty (30) feet.
ii. A three (3) story building shall have a
rear yard of not less than forty (40) feet
in depth.
D. Intensity of Use:
1. Every lot or tract of land on which there is
erected a single-family dwelling, shall have
a minimum width of fifty (50) feet at the
building line and an area of not less than five
thousand (5,000) square feet
2. Every lot or tract of land on which there is
erected a two-family dwelling or a multiple
dwelling shall have a minimum width of
fifty (50) feet at the building line and an
area of not less than three thousand (3,000)
square feet per family, except that the area
regulation shall not apply to dormitories,
fraternities or sororities where no cooking
is done in individual rooms or apartments.
Every lot on which there is erected a
building for any other use permitted in the
“O” OFFICE DISTRICT REGULATIONS shall
have a minimum width of sixty (60) feet and
a minimum area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet
3. Where a lot or tract of land has less width or
area than herein required and was of record
on the effective date of this Resolution,
that lot or tract of land may be used only
for single-family dwelling purposes, or for
any other non-dwelling use permitted in this
Section.
“O” Limited Office District | 3.10
Article 3: Z oning Districts | 35
36 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
3.11 |
3.11 “O-1”
Limited Office District
A. The regulations set forth in this Section or set
forth elsewhere in this Resolution when referred
to in this Section, are the district regulations in
the “O-1” Limited Office District.
B. Use Regulations: A building or premises shall
be used only for the following permitted use
purposes.
1. The following describes Permitted Uses for
the 0-1 Limited Office district.
a. 3.11,D,1 Office
b. 3.11,D,2 Restaurants, Pharmacies,
Accessory
c. 3.11,D,3 Funeral Homes
d. 3.11,D,4 Day Care Center
e. 3.11,D,5 Storage Garages
C. Use Descriptions
1. Office buildings devoted exclusively to
professional services, banking and other
similar financial services, the management
of commercial, industrial, religious, public
institutions. The uses permitted by this
subordinate section shall not include the
manufacture or sale of commodities, unless
such sale is incidental and subsidiary to the
principal service rendered, but may include
the display or storage of commodities
incidental to the principal use, provided that
the gross floor area of any one tenant or
occupant devoted to such display or storage
shall not exceed 10% of the total floor
area occupied by such tenant or occupant,
and provided further that no display or
commodities shall be visible from the
exterior of the building.
2. Restaurants, pharmacies and other accessory
services subordinate and incident to the
principal uses permitted by Article 3.10,B,4
when conducted and entered only from
within the principal building, and where
there is no display or advertising pertaining
to such accessory service visible from the
exterior of the building.
3. Funeral homes, including the display or
storage of incidental commodities, provided
that the gross floor area devoted to such
display or storage shall not exceed 10% of
the total floor area occupied by the principal
use.
4. Day Care Center or Nursery School, including
outdoor recreation areas in the rear and
side yard not less than 20 feet from any
residential district. The 20-foot setback shall
be landscaped with a tight screen of a mix
of evergreen plants not less than six (6) feet
high.
5. Storage garages and other accessory
buildings devoted to uses customarily
incident to the use of the principal building,
when located on the same lot as the
principal building and not involving the sale,
display or storage of commodities.
D. Lot and Yard Standards
1. Height Regulations: No building shall exceed
three (3) stories or forty-five (45) feet in
height, except as hereinafter provided in
Article 5.2.
2. Area Regulations:
a. Front Yard: A 30’ front yard setback is
required.
b. Side Yard: Except as hereinafter provided
in Article 5.2;
i. For buildings not exceeding two and
one-half (2-1/2) stories in height, there
shall be a side yard on each side of
such building, which yard shall have a
width of not less than five (5) feet.
“O1” Limited Office District
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987
| 3.11
ii. There shall be a side yard on each side
of a three (3) story building which yard
shall have a width of not less than ten
(10) feet.
c. Rear Yard: Except as hereinafter provided
in Article 5.2;
i. For buildings not exceeding two and
one-half (2-1/2) stories in height, there
shall be a rear yard having a depth of
not less than thirty (30) feet.
ii. A three (3) story building shall have a
rear yard of not less than forty (40) feet
in depth.
E. Intensity of Use:
1. Every lot or tract of land on which there is
erected a single-family dwelling, shall have
a minimum width of fifty (50) feet at the
building line and an area of not less than five
thousand (5,000) square feet
2. Every lot or tract of land on which there is
erected a two-family dwelling or a multiple
dwelling shall have a minimum width of
fifty (50) feet at the building line and an
area of not less than three thousand (3,000)
square feet per family, except that the area
regulation shall not apply to dormitories,
fraternities or sororities where no cooking is
done in individual rooms or apartments.
3. Every lot on which there is erected a
building for any other use permitted in the
“O-1” LIMITED OFFICE DISTRICT shall have
a minimum width of sixty (60) feet and a
minimum area of ten thousand (10,000)
square feet
4. Where a lot or tract of land has less width or
area than herein required and was of record
on the effective date of this Resolution,
that lot or tract of land may be used only
for single-family dwelling purposes, or for
any other non-dwelling use permitted in this
Section.
“O1” Limited Office District
Article 3: Z oning Districts | 37
38 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
3.12 “OO”
Planned Office District Regulations
A. The regulations set forth in this Section, or
set forth elsewhere in this Resolution, when
referred to in this Section, are the district
regulations in the “OO” Planned Office District.
It is the purpose of this district to provide sites
for the uses permitted herein at appropriate
locations in relation to the existing and potential
development of their surroundings to afford an
attractive setting for such uses and to harmonize
with the surroundings.
B. Use regulations: Any use permitted in Article
3.10,B may be permitted in the “OO” Planned
Office District, provided, however, that the
district shall be laid out and developed as a unit
according to an approved development plan for
the specific use or uses, as defined in Article 6,
in order that the use may be properly integrated
with the surrounding area.
C. Procedure: The owner or owners of a tract
of land adjoining a similarly or less restricted
district, may submit a plan for the use and
development of such tract for the purpose of,
and meeting the requirements set forth in this
Section. The development plan shall show
the details defined in Article 6, in order to
indicate the type and character of the proposed
development and the treatment of the tract,
including screening and landscaping, in relation
to abutting land uses for harmonious relationship
with the surrounding property and the protection
thereof.
D. Height and Area Requirements:
1. No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet
in height unless such building is set back
from the street line a distance of not less
than one-half (1/2) its height and is set back
from all other property lines a distance of ten
(10) feet, plus two (2) feet for each foot of
height in excess of thirty-five (35) feet.
2. No building shall be closer than thirty
(30) feet to any front or rear lot line, or
closer than ten (10) feet to any side lot
line. Adopted plans for specific areas may
recommend a front yard setback of less than
thirty (30) feet.
3. In a case where the topography or other
physical features of the tract or its relation
to surrounding property may make complete
compliance with the yard requirements, as
prescribed in this Subsection, unnecessary
or undesirable, the ATZC may modify such
requirements to the extent warranted
by such physical conditions provided the
surrounding property and the public welfare
are adequately protected. The ATZC
may consider the recommendation of the
Regional Planning Commission at its public
hearing.
E. Parking and Loading Requirements:
Off-street parking and loading spaces shall be
provided in accordance with the requirements of
Article 5.3.
F. General Requirements:
1. The size and location of the tract in
relation to surrounding property shall be
such that the proposed development,
including landscaping and screening and
other adjustments to the abutting land
uses, can be made to harmonize with the
neighborhood. The proposed plan shall not
be approved unless the ATZC specifically
makes a finding that the development
will be properly integrated in the overall
neighborhood.
2. In furthering this objective, the location and
arrangement of buildings, parking structures
and area, walks, lighting, and appurtenant
facilities shall be adjusted to the surrounding
land uses, and any part of the site not used
for buildings or other structures, or for
parking loading or access ways shall be
landscaped with grass, trees and shrubs or
3.12 | “OO” Planned Office District Regulations
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 39
| 3.12
pedestrian walks.
3. Reasonable additional requirements as to
landscaping, lighting, screening, access
ways and building setbacks may be imposed
by the ATZC for the protection of adjacent
property. The Regional Planning Commission
may make recommendations which reference
additional requirements.
G. Violation of Plan: The development plan
approved in accordance with this Article and
Article 5.1 shall be an integral part of the
Zoning Resolution and any departure from this
plan or any modification thereof, except when
specifically approved in accordance with
Article 5.1 shall be a violation of said Zoning
Resolution and shall be subject to the provisions
and penalties prescribed therefore in
Article 2.10.
“OO” Planned Office District Regulations
Article 3: Z oning Districts
40 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
3.13 “MHP” Mobile Home
Park District Regulations
A. The regulations set forth in this Section, or set
forth elsewhere in this Resolution when referred
to in this Section, are the district regulations in
the “MHP” Mobile Home Park District. It is the
purpose of this district to provide sites for mobile
homes at appropriate locations in relation to
the existing and potential development of their
surroundings and in relation to other uses and
community facilities to afford a proper setting for
such uses and proper relation to other land uses
and the comprehensive plan.
B. Use Regulations: Land or premises within the
“MHP” Mobile Home Park District shall be used
only for mobile homes and manufactured homes
and accessory buildings and uses customarily
incident thereto.
1. Procedure: The owner or owners of a tract of
land (except land situated within the “FPM”
Flood Plain Management Overlay District)
comprising not less than ten (10) acres may
submit a plan for the use and development
of the tract of land for a mobile home park as
provided herein. Such plan for development
of the area shall be filed with the Township
Zoning Commission and shall be referred
to the Regional Planning Commission for
study and report. The Regional Planning
Commission shall recommend the approval
or denial of the plan or approval of some
modifications thereof and submit the plan,
together with a report stating its findings
and recommendations, to the Township
Zoning Commission for public hearing and
recommendation thereon to the Board of
Township Trustees for final public hearing
and determination. If the report of the
Regional Planning Commission recommends
approval of the plan, it shall state the
reasons for approval and shall include
specific evidence and facts showing that
the proposed mobile home park meets the
following requirements:
2. General Requirements: Each mobile home
park shall comply with the rules of the
Ohio Department of Health, Public Health
Council, Mobile Home Parks, Chapter 3701
27 inclusive, and with Sections 3733.01
to 3733.20 inclusive, of the Ohio Revised
Code, and other requirements imposed by
the Hamilton County Health Department and
any others required by law, in addition to the
provisions of Article 3.10 of this Resolution.
3. Design Requirements:
a. The location and planning of the mobile
home site and the amount, arrangement
and treatment of open space shall be
designed to ensure a satisfactory living
environment and shall be carried out in
consideration of property adjacent to
the area included in the plan and ensure
that such adjacent property will not be
adversely affected.
b. To this end there shall be established and
maintained an open space landscaped
buffer within the mobile home park along
its exterior boundaries. This buffer shall
not be less than forty (40) feet or the
required front yard, whichever is greater,
along the front lot line, or less than fifty
(50) feet along any other line, except
that where topography or other physical
features of the tract or its relation to
surrounding property may make complete
compliance with the buffer requirements,
as prescribed herein, unnecessary or
undesirable, ATZC, which may consider
the recommendation of the Regional
Planning Commission, may modify such
requirements to the extent warranted
by such physical conditions, provided
the surrounding property and the public
welfare are adequately protected, and
areas not used for access, parking,
3.13 | “MHP” Mobile Home Park District Regulations
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987
circulation, building and service shall be
completely and permanently landscaped
and the entire site maintained in good
condition. The buffer required herein
shall be maintained as open space and
landscaping in its entirety, and no areas
used for access, parking, circulation,
building or service or other accessories
of the mobile home park shall be
located within any part of such buffer.
Recommendations of the Regional
Planning Commission are subject to
the approval of the Anderson Township
Zoning Commission.
c. The number of mobile homes and
manufactured homes shall not exceed
seven (7) such units per net usable acre
of the site. The net usable acreage shall
be deemed to be the total area of the
site, excluding any public street right-ofway
and excluding the open space buffer
required in Article 3.13,B,3,b.
d. All mobile homes and manufactured
homes, accessory buildings and uses,
including the recreation areas required
herein, shall be located within the area
determined and defined as the net usable
area.
e. Permitted accessory buildings and uses
shall include management offices,
laundry facilities, recreation areas and,
where specifically approved as a part of
the park plan, other recreation facilities
and the sale of convenience goods and
services exclusively for and to occupants
of the mobile home park.
f. Every mobile home park shall provide
one or more recreation areas easily
accessible to all residents of the park.
The aggregate size of such areas shall
be not less than one hundred (100)
square feet for each lot, and no individual
recreation areas shall be less than three
thousand (3,000) square feet. Such
recreation areas shall be graded and
arranged and provided with appropriate
equipment for full recreational use of the
area. No such recreation area shall be
located in any part of the buffer.
g. Each mobile home park shall abut and
have access to a public street, and each
mobile home and manufactured home lot
shall have direct access to the private
internal road system, either by direct
frontage or by means of a ten-foot, hardsurfaced
driveway. Such internal road
system shall be constructed to provide
a permanent pavement of at least
twenty-six (26) feet, including curbs and
gutters. Off-street parking spaces shall
be provided in the ratio of two (2) spaces
for each mobile home and manufactured
home lot; such spaces shall be within two
hundred (200) feet from the mobile home
and manufactured home or homes served.
No parking space shall be located within
any part of the buffer.
h. A common walk system shall be provided
and maintained between locations where
pedestrian traffic is concentrated, and
all mobile home and manufactured home
stands shall be connected by walks to
the common walk system, to the parking
spaces, to the paved streets, and to all
service buildings.
i. Each mobile home and manufactured
home stand shall be equipped with a
concrete slab or with concrete ribbons of
adequate thickness and size to support
the mobile home and manufactured home
load during all seasons. Where concrete
ribbons are used, the area between such
ribbons shall be filled with crushed rock.
j. Each mobile home park shall be
adequately lighted for safety at night,
all such lights shall be so located and
shielded to prevent direct illumination of
any area outside the park.
“MHP” Mobile Home Park District Regulations | 3.13
Article 3: Z oning Districts | 41
42 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
3.13 | “MHP” Mobile Home Park District Regulations
k. Each mobile home park shall be
provided with public water supply and
a water distribution system installed in
accordance with County specifications.
Where a public sanitary sewer is
reasonably accessible, the park shall
be provided with sanitary sewerage
connected thereto, including a lateral
connection to each mobile home lot,
subject to the review and approval of
the Metropolitan Sewer District, the
Hamilton County Health Department,
and the State Department of Health.
Where a public sanitary sewer is not
available and not reasonably accessible
in the combined judgment of the
Regional Planning Commission and the
Metropolitan Sewer District, an alternate
means of sewage disposal, such as a
community sewage treatment plan may
be considered, subject to review and
approval of officials having jurisdiction.
An individual sewage disposal system
shall not be permitted.
l. Each park shall be graded and drained
to prevent the standing of storm water
and the method of drainage including
treatment of both paved and unpaved
areas shall be subject to approval of the
Hamilton County Department of Public
Works.
C. Additional Requirements: In addition to
the foregoing, the ATZC may impose such
other conditions, requirements or limitations
concerning the design, development and
operation of such mobile home park as it may
deem necessary for the protection of adjacent
properties and the public interest. ATZC may
consider the recommendation of the Regional
Planning Commission.
D. Enlargement: Any enlargement or extension of
an existing mobile home park shall be treated
as if it were a new establishment and shall be
subject to the provisions of Article 3.13,B,1
and the other provisions of this Section.
No enlargement or extension of a mobile home
park shall be permitted unless the existing
park is made to conform substantially with all
the requirements for new construction of such
establishment.
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987
“E” Retail Business District Regulations | 3.14
PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK
Article 3: Z oning Districts | 43
44 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
3.14 “E” Retail Business
District Regulations
A. The regulations set forth in this Section, or set
forth elsewhere in this Resolution, when referred
to in this Section43q, are the district regulations
in the “E” Retail Business District.
B. Use Regulations: A building or premises may
be used for any purpose except the following:
1. Any use prohibited or requiring a conditional
use certificate in the “ID” Industrial
Development District, except dwellings.
2. Animal hospitals and structures where small
animals are boarded, if closer than one
hundred (100) feet to any Residence District
and outside runs if closer than two hundred
(200) feet to any Residence District.
3. Automobile body and fender repairing,
including painting, except where incidental
to a garage, commercial.
4. Automobile wrecking or salvage, or the
storage of junk automobiles.
5. Bakeries, employing more than five (5)
persons on the premises.
6. Blacksmith or horse-shoeing shops.
7. Breweries and Distilleries, as differentiated
from Microbreweries and Micro-Distilleries
as defined in Article 6 of this Resolution.
8. Building material storage yards.
9. Carting, express, hauling or storage yards.
10. Contractor’s plant or storage yards.
11. Coal, coke or wood yards of more than fifty
(50) ton capacity.
12. Crematories, except in a cemetery.
13. Dyeing and cleaning works, employing more
than five (5) persons on the premises or
using a cleaning fluid that has a petroleum
base.
14. Laundries, employing more than five (5)
persons on the premises.
15. Livery stables or riding academies.
16. Lumber yards or planing mills.
17. Metal working or welding shops.
18. Milk distributing stations, other than retail
business conducted on the premises.
19. Mobile homes as defined in Article 6 of this
Resolution.
20. Stone or monumental works, employing more
than five (5) persons on the premises.
21. Storage, baling or treatment of junk, iron,
rags, bottles or scrap paper.
22. Storage warehouses.
23. Wholesale warehouses or businesses.
24. Any kind of manufacture or treatment other
than manufacture or treatment of products
clearly incidental to the conduct of a retail
business conducted on the premises.
C. Lot and Yard Standards
1. Height Regulations: No building shall exceed
three (3) stories or forty-five (45) feet in
height, except as hereinafter provided in
Article 5.2.
2. Area Regulations:
a. Front Yard: There shall be a front yard
having a depth of not less than thirty (30)
feet, provided, however, no alignment
setback or front yard depth shall be
required to exceed the average of the
minimum depths of the existing front yards
on the lots adjacent to each side, if each
of such lots are within the same block and
within one hundred (100) feet.
3.14 | “E” Retail Business District Regulations
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 45
i. Where lots have a double frontage,
the required front yard shall be
provided on both streets.
ii. Where a lot is located at the
intersection of two or more streets,
there shall be a front yard on each
street side of a corner lot, except
that the buildable width of a lot
of record shall not be reduced to
less than thirty-two (32) feet. No
accessory building shall project
beyond the front yard line on either
street.
b. Side Yard: Except as hereinafter provided
in Article 5.2;
i. For dwellings not exceeding two
and one-half (2-1/2) stories in
height, there shall be a side yard on
each side of such building, which
yard shall have a width of not less
than five (5) feet.
ii. There shall be a side yard on each
side of a three (3) story dwelling
which yard shall have a width of not
less than ten (10) feet.
iii. In all other cases, a side yard is not
required except on the side of a lot
adjoining Districts, in which cases
there shall be a side yard of not less
than five (5) feet.
c. Rear Yard: Except as hereinafter
provided in Article 5.2;
i. There shall be a rear yard having a
depth of not less than thirty-five (35)
feet for all dwellings.
ii. In all other cases, a rear yard is not
required except where a lot abuts
upon the “A-A”, “A”, “A-30”, “A-2”,
“B”, “B-2”, “C”, “D”, “D-D”, or
“CUP” Residence Districts in which
case, there shall be a rear yard of
not less than fifteen (15) feet.
d. Intensity of Use:
i. Every lot or tract of land on which
there is erected a single-family
dwelling, shall have a minimum
width of fifty (50) feet at the
building line and an area of not less
than five thousand (5,000) square
feet.
ii. Every lot or tract of land on which
there is erected a two-family
dwelling or a multiple dwelling
shall have a minimum width of fifty
(50) feet at the building line and an
area of not less than three thousand
(3,000) square feet per family,
except that the area regulation
shall not apply to dormitories,
fraternities or sororities where
no cooking is done in individual
rooms or apartments. Every lot on
which there is erected a building
for any other use permitted in the
“D” Residence District shall have a
minimum width of sixty (60) feet and
a minimum area of ten thousand
(10,000) square feet
iii. Where a lot or tract of land has less
width or area than herein required
and was of record on the effective
date of this Resolution, that lot or
tract of land may be used only for
single-family dwelling purposes,
or for any other non dwelling use
permitted in this Section.
“E” Retail Business District Regulations | 3.14
Article 3: Z oning Districts
46 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
3.15“EE”
Planned Business District
Regulations
A. The regulations set forth in this Section, or set
forth elsewhere in this Resolution, when referred
to in this Section, are the district regulations
in the “EE” Planned Business District. It is the
purpose of this district to provide sites for retail
business uses at appropriate locations for service
and in appropriate relation to their surroundings
to afford an attractive setting in harmony with
the environs.
B. Use Regulations: Any use permitted in the
“E” Retail Business District may be permitted
in the “EE” Planned Business District, provided,
however that the district shall be laid out and
developed as a unit according to an approved
development plan for the specific use or uses,
as defined in Article 6,in order to provide for
business and retail shopping facilities properly
integrated with the surrounding area and at
appropriate locations for service.
C. Procedures: The owner or owners of a tract
of land adjoining a similarly or less restricted
district, may submit a plan for the use and
development of such tract for the purposes
of, and meeting the requirements set forth
in, this Section. The development plan shall
show the details defined in Article 6,in order
to indicate the type and character of the
proposed development and the treatment of the
tract, including screening and landscaping, in
relation to abutting land uses for a harmonious
relationship with the surrounding property and
the protection thereof.
D. Height and Area Requirements:
1. No building shall exceed thirty-five (35) feet
in height, unless such building is located at
a distance of not less than its height from all
side and rear lot lines, and occupies no more
than ten (10) per cent of the total area of the
tract.
2. No building shall be closer than thirty (30)
feet to any street line or closer than thirtyfive
(35) feet to any other boundary line
of the tract that abuts any more restricted
district.
3. The aggregate ground area occupied by all
buildings shall not exceed twenty-five (25)
percent of the entire area of the tract.
4. In a case where the topography or other
physical features of the tract or its relation
to surrounding property may make complete
compliance with the requirements of this
Subsection unnecessary or undesirable, the
ATZC may modify such requirements to the
extent warranted by such physical conditions
provided the surrounding property and the
public welfare are adequately protected.
The ATZC may consider the recommendation
of the Regional Planning Commission at its
public hearing.
E. Parking and Loading Requirements: Offstreet
parking and loading spaces shall be
provided in accordance with the requirements of
Article 5.3.
F. General Requirements:
1. The size and location of the tract in
relation to surrounding property shall be
such that the proposed development,
including landscaping and screening and
other adjustments to the abutting land
uses, can be made to harmonize with the
neighborhood. The proposed plan shall not
be approved unless the ATZC specifically
makes a finding that the development
will be properly integrated in the overall
neighborhood.
2. Adequate provision shall be made for traffic
circulation into and out of the development,
in addition to the provision for through traffic
movements on the access street or streets,
and to this end, the means of location of all
ingress and egress and the provisions for
traffic movement and circulation, including
additional traffic lanes, where needed,
3.15 | “EE” Planned Business District
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 47
shall be subjected to approval of the County
Engineer. The installation of additional lanes
for deceleration or turning movements may
be required, and traffic controls, as needed,
may be imposed to provide for safe and
efficient traffic circulation by and within the
development.
3. Service drives or other areas shall be
provided for off-street loading, in such a
way that trucks will not block the passage of
other vehicles or impede circulation on any
other public or private drive or street.
4. All drives, parking areas, loading areas,
and walks shall be paved with hard surface
material meeting the approval of the County
Engineer.
5. The location and arrangement of building,
parking areas, walks, access ways, lighting
and appurtenant facilities shall be adjusted
to the surrounding land uses, and no part
of any area for parking shall be located
within twenty (20) feet of any side line of
a residential lot, either existing or to be
created in the future. Any part of the area
not used for building or other structures or
for parking, loading or access ways, shall be
landscaped with grass, trees and shrubs or
pedestrian walks.
6. All mechanical equipment for heating,
cooling, air conditioning or similar purposes,
which may create either noise or fumes,
if not within the main building shall be
located at least one hundred (100) feet from
all property lines within or adjacent to a
Residence District.
7. Reasonable additional requirements as to
landscaping, lighting, signing, screening,
access ways and building setbacks may be
imposed by the ATZC for the protection of
adjacent property. The Regional Planning
Commission may make recommendations,
which reference additional requirements.
G. Violation of Plan: The development plan
approved in accordance with this Article and
Article 5.1 shall be an integral part of the Zoning
Resolution and any departure from this plan or
modification thereof, except when specifically
approved in accordance with Article 5.1, shall
be a violation of said Zoning Resolution and
shall be subject to the provisions and penalties
prescribed therefor in Article 2.10.
“EE” Planned Business District | 3.15
Article 3: Z oning Districts
48 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
3.16 “ID” Industrial
Development District Regulations
A. Purpose: The regulations set forth in this
Section, or set forth elsewhere in the Resolution
when referred to in this Section, are the district
regulations in the “ID” Industrial Development
District. The purpose of this district is to
improve the quality of commercial, research,
and industrial use and enhance its value and to
provide a significant area where commercial,
research, and industrial development may be
encouraged and guided for the benefit of the
total community.
B. Permitted and Prohibited Uses: A building or
premises may be used for any purpose except the
following prohibited uses:
1. Uses in conflict with any applicable
resolution of Anderson Township or Hamilton
County, or any applicable law of the State of
Ohio or the United States of America.
2. Dwellings except those used for watchmen
or operators whose continuous presence
is reasonably necessary on the premises.
However, the floor area of any dwelling
which is a Non-Conforming Use as of the
effective date of this amendment may be
increased by not more than 50% of the floor
area existing as of the effective date of this
amendment.
3. Except as provided in Article 5.3,O,1,i,
mobile homes as defined in Article 6 and
manufactured homes as defined in Article 6
of this Resolution or structures not meeting
building code requirements for permanent
structures.
4. Abattoirs, tanneries, slaughter houses or
stockyards.
5. Acid manufacture or wholesale storage
thereof.
6. Cement, lime, gypsum or plaster of paris
manufacture.
7. Distillation of bones.
8. Explosive manufacture or storage, including
fireworks.
9. Fat rendering.
10. Fertilizer manufacture.
11. Dumps; temporary or permanent disposal
or dumping of any unwanted residual solid
or semisolid material which results from
industrial, commercial, research, agricultural,
or community operations, or any waste
or combination of wastes in solid, liquid,
semisolid, or contained gaseous form. The
foregoing, by way of example and not of
limitation, includes garbage, construction
debris, radioactive material, products derived
from petroleum or petroleum distillates,
offal, dead animals or animal parts or
products, and any combustible material.
The foregoing does not include earth, sand,
rock, or concrete, or any non-hazardous
noncombustible material. “Disposal or
dumping” means any discharge, deposit,
injection, spilling, leaking, emitting, or
placing into or on any land or ground or
surface water or aquifer or into the air,
unless such disposal or dumping constitutes
storage or treatment, or, as to discharges
or emissions into the air, is permitted by
applicable state or federal law or regulation.
12. Gas manufactures.
13. Glue manufacture, except as incidental to a
permitted or Conditional Use.
14. Petroleum or petroleum products refining or
processing.
15. Smelting or chemical reduction of ores,
minerals or metallurgical products.
16. Manufacture, storage, processing or use of
3.16 | “ID” Industrial Development District Regulations
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 49
“ID” Industrial Development District Regulations | 3.16
radioactive material, except where incidental to a
permitted or Conditional Use.
17. Incinerators, except as incidental to a permitted
or Ionditional Use, or when operated solely to
control emissions, and then only as permitted by
applicable state or federal law or regulation.
18. Crematoria.
19. Paper manufacture.
20. Junk yards and waste separation facilities.
21. Adult Entertainment or related activity (including
activities described in Article 4.2, C.
C. Conditional Uses: Except as provided in
Article 3.16,D, no building or premises shall be used
for any of the following uses until and unless a special
zoning certificate shall have been authorized and issued
by the Board of Zoning Appeals in the manner provided
in this Article and in Article 2.12 of this Resolution:
1. Extraction and Related Operations: Extracting,
excavating, mining or processing of sand, rock and/
or gravel.
2. Processing, Manufacturing and Other Operations:
Processing, manufacturing or storage of mulch,
compost or related materials.
3. Food Processing: Food processing, distillation, or
packing.
4. Storage and Distribution Facilities: Storage or
wholesale distribution facilities, warehouses or
transportation terminals, except as incidental to
permitted uses or authorized Conditional Uses.
5. Legitimate Recycling Facilities: Facilities that
accept only source separated recyclables, except
scrap tires, and/or mixed recyclables which are
currently recoverable utilizing existing technology;
OR Facilities that: (a.) accept mixed or source
separated solid waste streams; and (b.) recover
for beneficial use not less than sixty percent of
the volume of solid wastes brought to the facility
each month (as averaged monthly) for not less than
eight months in each calendar year; and c. properly
dispose of not more than forty percent of the total
volume of solid wastes brought to the facility each
month (as averaged monthly) for not less than
eight months in each calendar year. “Recycling”
means processing a material using such methods,
including but not limited to, screening, sorting, or
shredding, for use in a beneficial manner that does
not constitute disposal.
6. Floodplain Uses: Any use in the floodplain,
including the floodway, flood fringe, and the
special flood hazard area.
7. Regulated Substances: Any facility used for or
permitting the storage, use, or local transport of
Regulated Substances, as defined in this section
in areas having a Pollution Potential Index of 180
or higher, or areas with gravel pits or quarries, all
as shown on the Map of Ground-Water Pollution
Potential of Hamilton County, published by the Ohio
Department of Natural Resources, 1989 edition, as
the same may be from time to time revised (“GWPP
Map”).
a. Regulated Substances subject to Conditional
Use review are defined as substances,
chemicals or mixtures that are determined by
the United States Environmental Protection
Agency (USEPA), the Ohio Environmental
Protection Agency (OEPA), or any other federal
or state agency, to pose any health hazard.
Regulated Substances shall also
include:
i. Hazardous or toxic substances and
materials, including any substance
designated pursuant to Section 111(b)(2)
(A) of the Federal Water Pollution Control
Act (33 U.S.C. §1321(b)(2)(A)), any element,
compound, mixture, solution, or substance
designated pursuant to Section 102 of the
Comprehensive Environmental Response
Compensation and Liability Act (42 U.S.C.
§9602) as amended by the Superfund
Amendment and Reauthorization Act; any
hazardous waste having the characteristics
identified under or listed pursuant to Section
3001 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (41
Article 3: Z oning Districts
50 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
U.S.C. §6921); any toxic pollutant
listed under Section 307(a) of the
Federal Water Pollution Control Act
(33 U.S.C. §1317(a)); any hazardous
air pollutant listed under Section 112
of the Clean Air Act (42 U.S.C. §7412);
any imminently hazardous chemical,
substance or mixture with respect
to which the administrator of USEPA
has taken action pursuant to Section
7 of the Toxic Substances Control Act
(15 U.S.C. §2606); any hazardous
or toxic substance or material
identified by any other federal or state
environmental law or regulation, all
as the same may be from time to time
amended.
ii. Any substance for which there is
credible scientific evidence that acute
or chronic health effects may result
from exposure, including carcinogens,
toxic and highly toxic agents,
reproductive toxins, nephrotoxins,
neurotoxins, agents which act on a
hematopoietic system, and agents
which damage the lungs, skin, eyes,
or mucous membranes.
iii. Mixtures of chemicals or substances
which have been tested as a whole
and have been determined to be a
health hazard.
iv. Mixtures of chemicals or substances
which may not have been tested as a
whole but which contain any chemical
or substance which has been
determined to be a health hazard.
v. Except as provided below, any
petroleum product including crude
oil or any fraction thereof, non-solid
petroleum derivatives, natural gas
liquids, liquified natural gas, or
except where used directly for utility
purposes, natural gas or synthetic gas
usable for fuel (or mixtures of natural
gas and such synthetic gas).
b. Regulated Substances shall not include:
i Substances or chemicals after they
have been packaged for personal or
household use, such as food or drink.
ii. Substances or chemicals after they
have been packaged for consumer use
or commercial products for use solely
for janitorial or minor maintenance
purposes.
iii Oils and fluids within electric utility
transformers, switches or other
electrical apparatus.
iv. Liquid fuels, not to exceed 55 gallons
per building, securely stored above
ground for the purpose of fueling one
or more generators to provide back-up
or emergency power.
D. Regulatory Review Process
1. Determination of whether a chemical
or substance is a Regulated Substance
within the meaning of this Article, and the
applicability of any exceptions, shall be
made by the Zoning Inspector. The Applicant
may appeal the decision to the Board of
Zoning Appeals.
2. The Zoning Inspector and Board of Zoning
Appeals, in making determinations regarding
Regulated Substances, may rely upon
information supplied by the USEPA or OEPA.
Determination of whether a substance or
chemical is a Regulated Substance also
may be made upon review of any Material
Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) provided by the
Applicant or any manufacturer, or upon
review of the most recent USEPA Title III List
of Lists (which is acknowledged not to be a
comprehensive listing of hazardous and toxic
substances).
3. The Zoning Inspector and Board of Zoning
3.16 | “ID” Industrial Development District Regulations
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 51
Appeals, in making any determination
of whether a chemical or substance is a
Regulated Substance, the applicability
of exceptions, and establishing and
enforcing performance standards may
retain independent consultants and use the
services of independent OEPA-approved
laboratories to advise them.
4. The cost of any independent consultants or
independent laboratory analysis, testing,
or review shall be paid by the Applicant.
No such costs shall be assessed, and
no independent consultation or testing
required, unless the Applicant has obtained
all other necessary zoning approvals, which
may be conditioned upon obtaining such
independent consultation or testing.
5. As provided in Article 2.1,E of this
Resolution, any person who seeks Non-
Conforming Use status for any Regulated
Substance shalmake application for a zoning
certificate for Non-Conforming Use within
twelve (12) months from the effective date
of this amendment, and, in connection
therewith, shall detail by affidavit the kinds
and quantities of each Regulated Substance
used or located on the Applicant’s premises
at that date.
6. Any person who seeks the approval of the
Board of Zoning Appeals for a Conditional
Use as provided in this Resolution or
who seeks expansion of an existing Non-
Conforming Use shall provide a written
statement describing any emissions which
are expected to result from such use, and
shall also demonstrate compliance with
Article 3.16,F,5 of this Resolution.
E. Operations
1. Certain Existing Operations: Existing
operations involving the extraction,
excavation, mining or processing of sand,
rock, and/or gravel shall be allowed to
continue to operate strictly in accordance
with the extent of operations authorized by
permits issued by the Ohio Department of
Natural Resources and in existence at the
time of the adoption of this Section if true
copies of such permits are filed with the
Township Director of Planning and Zoning
within thirty (30) days after the adoption
of this Section, and to such extent no
Conditional Use permit shall be required
for such uses. For purposes of this Article
3.16,E,1 any change in the type of method
or methods of extracting, excavating, mining
or processing operations which were in
use prior to or at the time of adoption of
this Section shall not be considered to be
an existing operation and shall require
an application for, and approval of, a
Conditional Use permit under this Section.
2. Existing Operations, Functions and
Procedures: Existing industrial operations
and business functions or processes related
thereto shall be permitted to continue
lawful operations being conducted as of the
effective date of this amendment, without
obtaining a Conditional Use permit for such
operations. Furthermore, no Conditional Use
permit shall be required if such operations
are modified to utilize new procedures in
connection with existing operations in an
existing building. Such modifications may
include but are not limited to manufacturing
processes, research techniques, distribution
practices, transportation requirements, and
maintenance practices or requirements.
However, any exception to the requirement
of a Conditional Use permit for modification
as described in this paragraph must comply
with all applicable state and federal laws,
rules and regulations. If the operation’s
modification would result in any net gain
in emissions, measured against emissions
reported to the USEPA for 1994, the
applicant must demonstrate, through a
risk assessment analysis performed in
accordance with the latest procedures
approved by USEPA there for by a
“ID” Industrial Development District Regulations | 3.16
Article 3: Z oning Districts
52 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
toxicologist or other qualified professional
approved by the Director of Planning and
Zoning, that such net gain will not result
in any adverse health impact. A written
statement confirming compliance with the
requirements of this paragraph shall be
submitted with any application for a zoning
certificate.
F. Performance Standards for Conditional
Uses: As authorized in Article 2.12,D,7 of this
Resolution, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
employ the following performance standards in
approving Conditional Uses:
1. Modifications by Board of Zoning Appeals:
In a case where the topography or other
physical features of the tract or its relation
to surrounding property may make complete
compliance with the requirements of this
section unnecessary or undesirable, the
Board of Zoning Appeals may modify such
requirements to the extent warranted
provided the surrounding property and the
public welfare are adequately protected.
2. Emissions: In the case of emissions,
applicable U.S. and Ohio Environmental
Protection Agency regulations shall be
obsrved, and the Board of Zoning Appeals
may rely on expert testimony from parties
who by education, training and experience
are recognized experts.
3. Regulated Substances: Once it has been
determined that a proposed use may involve
one or more Regulated Substances, the
Anderson Township Board of Zoning Appeals
shall establish and enforce necessary
and appropriate performance standards
to protect the public health, safety and
welfare and the environment. The Board
of Zoning Appeals shall consider any
information supplied by the Applicant;
a report and recommendation of the
Anderson Township Zoning Inspector and
such other relevant information as may be
requested or submitted. In any application
for a special zoning certificate for a use
involving any Regulated Substance, the
Applicant shall indicate how it will comply
with the requirements set forth below.
Noncompliance with any such requirements
shall be grounds for revocation of such
special zoning certificate:
a. Observation of all federal, state and
local environmental laws including all
applicable USEPA and OEPA Rules and
Regulations.
b. Use of Best Management Practices
(“BMPs”) and Best Available Technology
(“BAT”), unless alternative practices
or technology are shown to be
equally effective, to control the use,
storage or transport of Regulated
Substances. BMPs mean a practice or
combination of practices that is the
most effective and practicable (including
technological, economic, and institutional
considerations) means of preventing or
reducing the amount of emissions or
pollution generated. BMPs may include
structural and non-structural practices,
conservation practices and operation and
maintenance procedures, including those
as may be defined from time to time by
USEPA, OEPA or the Hamilton County
Soil and Water Conservation District.
Best Available Technology means the
best technology, treatment techniques or
other means for preventing or reducing
the release or discharge of regulated
substances into the environment, taking
into consideration efficacy under field
conditions and cost.
c. Implementation of BMP and BAT primary
and secondary containment measures.
d. Implementation of sufficient security
measures to prevent accidental or
unauthorized use.
e. Installation and maintenance of ground
3.16 | “ID” Industrial Development District Regulations
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 53
water monitoring wells or equivalent
devices where determined by the Board
of Zoning Appeals to be necessary.
f. Development and implementation of
emergency response plans with sufficient
equipment to rapidly contain accidental
discharges or releases. Emergency
response plans, including applicable floor
plans and Material Safety Data Sheets,
shall be filed with local emergency
response agencies and kept up to date.
g. Development and implementation of
hazardous material and emissions
management plans where determined
by the Board of Zoning Appeals to be
necessary.
4. Vibration and Shock: No vibration or
shock perceptible to a person of normal
sensibilities at or beyond the property line
shall be permitted.
5. Nuisances: In order to prevent the
operation or use of any facility or property
from constituting a nuisance to or upon
surrounding property, all odor, dust, smoke,
gas, emissions, noise or similar nuisance
shall be so located on the tract that such use
does not create a nuisance at or beyond any
boundary line of the tract, and evidence shall
be submitted, consisting of testimony or a
certified statement by a competent authority
in the field affected, to clearly demonstrate
that the use will not create a nuisance.
The best practical means known for the
abatement of a nuisance caused by odor,
dust, smoke, gas, emissions, noise or similar
nuisance shall be employed in a manner
approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
6. Landscaping and Other Requirements:
Reasonable additional requirements as to
landscaping, lighting, screening, fencing,
access ways, building setbacks, and building
sitting may be imposed by the Board of
Zoning Appeals for the protection of adjacent
property.
7. Consideration of Enhancements: In
reviewing Conditional Use applications,
the Board of Zoning Appeals shall consider
enhancements proposed by the Applicant
to the transportation network, the working
environment, and the neighborhood as
positive reasons for granting the application.
Such enhancements may include but shall
not be limited to:
a. Provision for on-site or nearby childcare
facilities;
b. Bicycle transportation facilities, including
bicycle lockers, bicycle racks, bicycle
lanes, and shower/changing areas; and
c. Public transit facilities including bus
shelters, park-n-ride lots, and helicopter
landing areas.
G. Lot and Yard Standards
1. Height Regulations: No building shall exceed
thirty-five (35) feet in height unless it is set
back from all property lines a distance not
less than two times the building height,
provided that no building shall exceed fifty
(50) feet in height.
2. Area Regulations:
a. Minimum Lot Size: The minimum lot
size in the “ID” Industrial Development
District shall be 20,000 square feet.
b. Front Yard: There shall be a front yard
having a depth of not less than fifty (50)
feet from the street line or as otherwise
provided in Article 5.2 et seq.
A planting strip of twenty (20) feet shall
be established and maintained within the
required front yard in accordance with
Article 3.16,H,2.
c. Corner Lots: Where a lot is located at
the intersection of two or more streets,
the front yard requirements of Article
3.16,G,2,b shall apply to each street
side of the corner lot, except that the
buildable width of such lot shall not
thereby be reduced to less than twentyeight
(28) feet, and no accessory building
“ID” Industrial Development District Regulations | 3.16
Article 3: Z oning Districts
54 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
shall project beyond the front yard line on
either street.
d. Side Yard: In any case where the
Industrial Development District abuts a
Residence District, there shall be a side
yard of not less than fifty (50) feet along
the line of abutment, which side yard
shall be landscaped or preserved in its
natural state in accordance with Article
3.16,H. In other cases, a side yard of not
less than ten (10) feet is required.
e. Rear Yard: In any case where the
Industrial Development District abuts
a Residence District, there shall be a
rear yard, which rear yard shall be not
less than fifty (50) feet along the line of
abutment and landscaped or preserved
in its natural state in accordance with
Article 3.16,H. In other cases, a rear
yard of not less than ten (10) feet is
required.
f. Setback from Residential Property
Line: There shall be not less than 100
feet between any existing residential
property line and any building located
on a separate lot in the Industrial
Development District.
H. Landscaping and Preservation
Requirements
1. Open Space and Landscaping: Maximum
site coverage by buildings on any lot or
tract shall not exceed 30%. Maximum
site coverage by buildings, paved areas
and other hard surfaces shall not exceed
75%. At least 25% of any developed
tract shall be landscaped or preserved in
its natural state in accordance with this
section.
2. Landscaping and Preservation of Natural
Areas. Where landscaping (including
grass, trees, ground cover, decorative
plantings and water) or the preservation
of natural areas is permitted or required
under this Article, the following
provisions shall apply:
a. Where a planting strip is established
and maintained in a front yard
pursuant to Article 3.13,G,2,b, a
minimum ratio of two (2) three (3) inch
caliper shade trees or three (3) two
(2) inch caliper grouped ornamentals
shall be planted within the twenty
(20) foot wide planting strip for each
twenty-five (25) feet or fraction
thereof of linear footage. If the front
yard is across from or adjacent to a
residential zone, the Board of Zoning
Appeals may require a wider planting
strip as needed to provide further
protection for the residential area.
b. In all areas not used for buildings
or other structures or for roads,
walks, sidewalks, parking areas
or access ways, all existing trees
with a diameter of eight (8) or more
inches measured twenty-four inches
above the ground shall remain and
be preserved unless otherwise
approved by the Board of Zoning
Appeals. All such trees shall be
protected during construction so as to
prevent root, trunk or branch injury or
dismemberment.
c. All water courses shall be retained
and preserved in their natural states
unless otherwise approved by the
Board of Zoning Appeals.
d. Stormwater detention and retention
basins shall be designed and
incorporated in landscaped or natural
areas as natural appearing ponds or
as architectural design features.
e. It is recommended that all
landscaping be in accordance with the
Landscape Guidelines of the Anderson
Township Comprehensive Plan as from
time to time amended.
3.16 | “ID” Industrial Development District Regulations
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 55
f. All landscaped areas shall be
maintained in accordance with
prevailing practices of commercial
landscapers.
3. Protection of Surface Water and Ground
Water: No discharge other than water which
does not violate applicable U.S. and Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency regulations
may be allowed to enter any surface water,
ground water, or aquifer. Special measures
shall be taken to contain and dispose of any
potentially harmful discharge in compliance
with such regulations.
4 Stormwater Management: Stormwater
runoff from the post development condition
shall not exceed the peak rate of runoff
from the same area before development
for all 24 hour storms with frequencies of
2, 5, and 10 years. The peak runoff rate for
storms greater than 10 years but less than
or equal to 50 years shall be the 10 year predevelopment
rate (i.e., detention/retention
will be required to hold the difference
between the 10 year pre-development and
50 year post development runoff rate).
a. All artificial lighting shall be designed,
shielded and installed to minimize visual
impact on adjacent residential properties.
In areas adjoining residential properties,
intensity shall not exceed .1 (one-tenth)
foot-candle at any property line and the
light source shall not exceed twelve (12)
feet in height.
b. There may be certain channels,
watercourses, or other stormwater
runoff carriers that would be damaged
or flooded by the additional runoff or
extending the time of discharge from
detention/retention basins. For areas
in question, the Zoning Inspector may
require the developer to provide study
data. Where the study indicates, the
Zoning Inspector may require additional
controls. At the discretion of the Zoning
Inspector, the Hamilton County Soil and
Water Conservation District and other
agencies may be asked for assistance.
5. Little Miami River: A naturally forested
buffer shall be maintained a horizontal
distance of 120 feet outward from the
normal high water mark on the bank of the
Little Miami River. This area shall exist
to preserve the topography, trees, natural
vegetation, water quality and river habitat,
and to prevent erosion, sedimentation and
damage from flooding. Permitted uses of
this area are limited to those activities such
as fishing, hiking, nature study, or other
similar activities, which do not degrade or
detract from a naturally forested condition.
Therefore, no cutting of trees or natural
vegetation shall be permitted, except (a)
cutting of noxious weeds (as defined in R.C.
§5579.04, as from time to time amended),
(b) to remove up to 15% of trees or natural
vegetation to facilitate permitted uses, or
(c) to remove up to 15% of the tree canopy
(i.e., the foliage of the tree only) to facilitate
viewing of the river. No alteration of the
land surface, placing of fill, structures
(excepting public utilities) or impervious
surfaces shall be permitted, except that dead
or diseased trees which are determined by
the Zoning Inspector to constitute a hazard
may be removed.
a. When construction outside the 120 foot
buffer zone is within 500 feet of the
normal high water mark of the River and
not beyond the present right of way of
Roundbottom Road, special precautions
during construction shall be taken to
avoid detriment to the River. Such
precautions shall include but are not
limited to such landscaping, buffering,
erosion control and similar measures
as are reasonably necessary to protect
and preserve the natural condition of the
River.
“ID” Industrial Development District Regulations | 3.16
Article 3: Z oning Districts
56 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
I. Parking and Loading Requirements: Offstreet
parking and loading spaces shall be
provided in accordance with the requirements of
Article 5.3 of this Resolution.
J. Sidewalks and Fencing
1. All new developments and substantial
additions (meaning those which result in
thirty per cent (30%) or greater increase in
square footage) to existing developments
shall provide sidewalks along the abutting
public street frontage.
2. Fences that are more than 75% open may be
erected on any part of the property.
K. Other Requirements: To accomplish the
objectives of the Industrial Development District,
including mitigation of conflicts within the
Industrial Development District and between
the Industrial Development District and other
zoning districts, the following requirements are
prescribed for all uses:
1. Ingress and egress to the lot or tract
and the location and arrangement of
buildings, parking areas, walks, lighting and
appurtenant facilities shall be compatible
with adjacent land uses. No part of any
parking or loading areas or access drive
thereto shall be located within fifty (50) feet
of any Residence District or within sixty
(60) feet of any existing residential property
line, and no parking or loading area shall
be closer than fifty (50) feet to any street
line of a County or State road and not closer
than 20 feet to any Township or private
street. All drives, parking areas, loading
areas, and walks shall be paved with hard
surface material, and any part of the lot or
tract which is a front yard or side yard and
is not used for buildings or other structures,
or for parking, loading or access, shall be
landscaped or preserved in its natural state
in accordance with Article 3.13,H,2.
2. No open storage of materials, inventory
or equipment shall be permitted within two
hundred (200) feet of any Residence District
or existing residential property line Any other
such open storage visible from any property
line of the lot or tract shall, notwithstanding
Article 5.2, 9, be screened by a solid fence
or wall or dense row of foliage not less
than eight (8) feet in height, the design of
which is compatible with surrounding uses.
Dumpsters, utility boxes and other unsightly
appurtenances shall be screened in the same
manner.
3. Provisions shall be made, subject to approval
of the Hamilton County Board of Health,
Ohio E.P.A., Metropolitan Sewer District of
Greater Cincinnati, and Hamilton County
Department of Public Works, or the lawful
successors to their respective duties, as
appropriate, for satisfactory disposal of all
liquid and solid wastes concomitant with the
development.
4. Except as provided in Article 3.16,D,4,
all costs of any independent verification
or determination required in an ID District
by the Zoning Inspector or the Board of
Zoning Appeals prior to or during review of
an application, or subsequent to issuance
of a zoning certificate, shall be paid by the
Applicant or certificate holder.
L. Human Remains Provisions: When human
remains are unearthed in the course of
excavation work in the Industrial Development
District, the work in the immediate vicinity of
such human remains shall cease forthwith,
and the owner or owner’s representative shall
call in the Hamilton County Sheriff and notify
the Zoning Inspector. If the Sheriff, with
whatever consultations he deems appropriate,
determines that the human remains do not
constitute evidence of a crime, the owner
or owner’s representative shall consult at
the owner’s expense with an archeologist
designated by the Zoning Inspector to determine
whether the human remains are prehistoric
with respect to the location at which found. If
the human remains are determined not to be
3.16 | “ID” Industrial Development District Regulations
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 57
prehistoric, they shall be reburied in accordance
with applicable law. If the human remains
are determined to be prehistoric, the Zoning
Inspector shall immediately notify The Ohio
Council for Native American Burial Rights
(the “Council”) or The Ohio Center for Native
American Affairs (the “Center”), or any successor
to the Council or the Center deemed bona fide by
the Zoning Inspector, that at its option the human
remains (and any artifact physically attached
thereto or determined by the archaeologist to
have been so attached at the time such human
remains were originally buried) are available
for ceremonial reburial if claimed and receipted
for within three (3) days by a duly authorized
representative thereof. During the three (3) day
period, the human remains and any such artifacts
shall be accorded reasonable protection by the
owner at the site where they were unearthed. If
the human remains and any such artifacts are
not so claimed and receipted for, they shall be
reburied or otherwise disposed of by the owner
in accordance with applicable law.
M. Variations or Conflicts: In the event of any
variation or conflict in the provisions of this
Section and the provisions of any existing section
of the Anderson Township Zoning Resolution, the
provisions of this Section shall prevail.
N. Headings and Captions: The headings and
captions in this Section are for convenience
purposes only and shall not be considered a part
of or affect the construction or interpretation of
any provision of this Section.
O. Land Use Planning Study: “The Land Use
Planning Study” for the Ancor area of Anderson
Township is to be considered and implemented
as a guideline by the Anderson Township
Zoning Commission, the Anderson Township
Board of Zoning Appeals, and the Anderson
Township Board of Trustees in all decisions
and determinations regarding the Industrial
Development District.
“ID” Industrial Development District Regulations | 3.16
Article 3: Z oning Districts
58 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
3.17 “FF” Planned
Light Industrial District Regulations
A. The regulations set forth in this Section, or set
forth elsewhere in this Resolution, when referred
to in this Section, are the district regulations in
the “FF” Planned Light Industrial District. It is
the purpose of this district to provide space at
appropriate locations for types of business and
industry free of conflict with their surroundings
so as to provide more attractive locations
for such uses and to afford opportunities
for employment closer to residence with a
corresponding reduction of travel time between
home and work.
B. Use Regulations: Any use permitted in
Article 3.16 may be permitted in the “FF”
Planned Light Industrial District, provided
however, that the district shall be laid out and
developed as a unit according to an approved
development plan for the specific use or uses, as
defined in Article 6, in order that the use may be
properly integrated with the surrounding area.
C. Procedure: The owner or owners of a tract of
land adjoining an existing Industrial District,
may submit a plan for the use and development
of such tract for the purposes of, and meeting
the requirements set forth in, this Section. The
development plan shall show the details defined
in Article 6, in order to indicate the type and
character of the proposed development and the
treatment of the tract, including screening and
landscaping, in relation to abutting land uses for
a harmonious relationship with the surrounding
property and the protection thereof.
1. The development plan shall be accompanied
by a description of the proposed operations
in sufficient detail to indicate the effect
of the operations with respect to traffic
congestion, noise, glare, air or water
pollution, and fire or safety hazards.
D. Height and Area Requirements:
1. No building shall exceed thirty-five (35)
feet in height, unless it is set back from all
property lines a distance not less than two
times the building height.
2. No part of any building or structure shall be
closer than one hundred (100) feet to any
Residence District boundary or closer than
fifty (50) feet to any other boundary line
of the tract, other than the boundary of an
existing Industrial District, or to any street
line.
3. The aggregate ground area occupied by all
buildings shall not exceed thirty-five (35) per
cent of the entire area of the tract.
4. In a case where the topography or other
physical features of the tract or its relation
to surrounding property make complete
compliance with the yard requirements,
as prescribed in this section, unnecessary
or undesirable, the ATZC may modify such
requirements to the extent warranted
by such physical conditions provided the
surrounding property and the public welfare
are adequately protected. The ATZC
may consider the recommendation of the
Regional Planning Commission at its public
hearing.
E. Parking and Loading Requirements: Offstreet
parking and loading spaces shall be
provided in accordance with the requirements of
Article 5.3.
F. General Requirements: To accomplish
the objectives of this district, the following
requirements are prescribed:
1. Traffic and Access: In general, the
development shall be related to major or
secondary highways or to other industrial
or business districts to avoid access over
residential uses, and to this end no “FF”
3.17 | “FF” Planned Light Industrial District
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 59
Planned Light Industrial District shall be
located where the main vehicular approach
thereto is over a residential street (not a
major or secondary highway) or through a
residential district, unless the character and
operation of the use are such, and it can be
clearly demonstrated, that no more than fifty
(50) vehicles in both directions combined
would travel to and from the use daily.
2. Ingress and egress to the development
and the location and arrangement of
buildings, parking areas, walks, lighting
and appurtenant facilities shall be adjusted
to the surrounding land uses. No part of
any parking and loading areas and access
drives thereto shall be located within fifty
(50) feet of any Residence District, and no
parking or loading area shall be closer than
fifty (50) feet to any street line. All drives,
parking areas, loading areas, and walks shall
be paved with hard surface material, and
any part of the site not used for buildings or
other structures, or for parking, loading or
access ways shall be landscaped with grass,
trees and shrubs.
3. No open storage of materials or equipment
shall be permitted on the tract.
4. Provisions shall be made, subject to approval
of the Hamilton County Board of Health,
Ohio E.P.A., Metropolitan Sewer District, and
Hamilton County Department of Public Works
as appropriate for satisfactory disposal of all
liquid and solid waste concomitant with the
development.
5. Reasonable additional requirements to
landscaping, lighting, screening, fencing,
access ways and building setbacks may be
imposed by the ATZC for the protection of
adjacent property. The Regional Planning
Commission may make recommendations,
which reference such additional
requirements.
G. Violation of Plan: The development plan
approved in accordance with this Article and
Article 5.1 shall be an integral part of the Zoning
Resolution and any departure from this plan or
modification thereof, except when specifically
approved in accordance with Article 5.1, shall
be a violation of said Zoning Resolution and
shall be subject to the provisions and penalties
prescribed therefor in Article 2.10.
“FF” Planned Light Industrial District | 3.17
Article 3: Z oning Districts
60 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
3.18 “GG” Planned Heavy
Industrial District Regulations
A. The regulations set forth in this Section, or set
forth elsewhere in this Resolution, when referred
to in this Section, are the district regulations
in the “GG” Planned Heavy Industrial District.
It is the purpose of this district to provide
space at appropriate locations for uses and to
afford opportunities for employment closer to
residences with a corresponding reduction of
travel time between home and work.
B. Use Regulations: Any use, except mobile
homes as defined in Article 6, or manufactured
homes as defined in Article 6, of this Resolution,
may be permitted not in conflict with any
resolution of Anderson Township of Hamilton
County or law of the State of Ohio regulating
nuisances provided however, that the operation
of the use shall be so controlled and the District
so laid out and developed plan for the specific
use or uses, as defined in Article 6 that the use
may be properly integrated with the surrounding
area.
C. Procedure: The owner or owners of a tract
of land adjoining an existing industrial district,
may submit a plan for the use and development
of such tract for the purposes of, and meeting
the requirements set forth in this Section. The
development plan shall show the details defined
in Article 6, in order to indicate the type and
character of the proposed development and the
treatment of the tract, including screening and
landscaping, in relation to abutting land uses for
a harmonious relationship with the surrounding
property and the protection thereof.
1. The development plan shall be accompanied
by a description of the proposed operations
in sufficient detail to indicate the effects
of the operation with respect to traffic
congestion, noise, glare, air or water
pollution, and fire or safety hazards.
D. Height and Area Requirements:
1. No building shall exceed thirty-five (35)
feet in height, unless it is set back from all
property lines a distance not less than two
times the building height.
2. No part of any building or structure shall
be closer than two hundred (200) feet to
Residence District boundary line, or closer
than fifty (50) feet to any other boundary line
of the tract, other than the boundary of an
existing Industrial District, or to any street
line.
3. The aggregate ground area occupied by all
buildings shall not exceed forty (40) per cent
of the entire area of the tract,
physical features of the tract or its relation
to surrounding property may make complete
compliance with the yard requirements,
as prescribed in this section, unnecessary
or undesirable, the ATZC may modify such
requirements to the extent warranted
by such physical conditions provided the
surrounding property and the public welfare
are adequately protected. The ATZC may
consider the recommendation of the
Regional Planning Commission at its public
hearing.
E. Parking and Loading Requirements: Offstreet
parking and loading spaces shall be
provided in accordance with the requirements of
Article 5.3.
F. General Requirements: To accomplish the
objectives of this district, including avoidance
of traffic and residence conflicts, the following
requirements are prescribed:
1. The development shall be located in relation
to major or secondary highways or to other
industrial or business districts in a way to
provide easy access to the use and to avoid
the use of residential streets, and to this
end, the same specifications concerning
traffic and access prescribed in
Article 3.19, F,1, for the “FF” Planned Light
Industrial District shall apply in the “GG”
District.
3.18 | “GG” Planned Heavy Industrial District
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 61
2. Ingress and egress to the development
and the location and arrangement of
buildings, parking areas, walks, lighting and
appurtenant facilities shall be adjusted to
the surrounding land uses. No part of any
parking and loading areas or access drives
thereto shall be located within 50 feet of any
Residence District, and no parking or loading
area shall be closer than 50 feet to any
street line. All drives, parking areas, loading
areas, and walks shall be paved with hard
surface material, and any part of the site
not used for buildings or other structures, or
for parking, loading or access ways shall be
landscaped with grass, trees and shrubs.
3. No open storage of materials or equipment
shall be permitted within two hundred (200)
feet of any Residence District; any other
open storage of materials or equipment
visible from any property line of the tract
shall be screened by a solid masonry wall
not less than eight (8) feet in height, the
design of which is approved by the ATZC
after reviewed by the Regional Planning
Commission.
4. In order that the operation of the use may
not have an effect on surrounding property,
all odor, dust, smoke, gas, noise, or other
industrial concomitants shall be so abated or
the use shall be so located on the tract that
such use is free from offense at all boundary
lines of the tract, and evidence shall be
submitted, based on testimony or certified
statements by competent authorities in the
fields affected, to clearly demonstrate that
the use will be free of offense.
5. Provisions shall be made, subject to approval
of the Hamilton County Board of Health,
Ohio E.P.A., Metropolitan Sewer District, and
Hamilton County Department of Public Works
as appropriate for satisfactory disposal of all
liquid and solid waste concomitant with the
development.
6. Reasonable additional requirements as to
landscaping, lighting, screening, fencing,
access ways and building setbacks may be
imposed by the ATZC for the protection of
adjacent property. The Regional Planning
Commission may make recommendations
which reference such additional
requirements.
G. Violation of Plan: The development plan
approved in accordance with this Article and
Article 5.1 shall be an integral part of the Zoning
Resolution and any departure from this plan or
modification thereof, except when specifically
approved in accordance with Article 5.1 shall be
a violation of said Zoning Resolution and shall be
subject to the provisions and penalties prescribed
therefor in Article 2.10.
“GG” Planned Heavy Indrial Distirct | 3.18
Article 3: Z oning Districts
62 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
3.19 “EF”
Excavation and Landfill District
A. Purpose: In recognition of the deposits of sand,
gravel and other minerals in Anderson Township,
Hamilton County and the need therefor as well as
the need for proper and sanitary disposal of solid
wastes, the “EF” Excavation and Landfill District
is hereby established. Such district shall be
delineated and the operations therein controlled
to permit extraction of the materials or the filling
of the land in a manner compatible with and
not adversely affecting other uses of land in the
surrounding area.
B. Use Regulations: Within the “EF” Excavation
and Landfill District, a building or premises shall
be used only for the following purposes:
1. Agriculture
2. Excavation of sand, gravel, and other
minerals
3. Disposal of solid waste
4. Location of temporary processing plant or
equipment for the extracting, processing and
stock piling of sand and gravel, which plant
or equipment shall be removed within a
period of four months following cessation of
the operation.
C. Required Conditions: The following standards
and conditions shall be complied with in the
extraction of sand, gravel and other minerals and
in disposal of solid wastes in the “EF” District.
1. All equipment used in the operation shall
be placed and operated in a manner to
minimize noise, vibration and dust.
2. All access ways or roads within the premises
shall be maintained in a dust-free condition
through surfacing or such other treatment as
may be necessary.
3. No excavation of gravel or sand or other
materials shall be permitted nearer than
fifty (50) feet to the boundary of the “EF”
District, and the operation shall be screened
by the mounding of the removed topsoil and
other overburden around the extraction area
to hide objectionable views from adjacent
roads and other properties and to deflect and
reduce the noise. The location and height of
such screening shall be shown on the plans
for the operation and restoration of the area
submitted for review by the Ohio Department
of Natural Resources and the Regional
Planning Commission.
4. In order to insure adequate lateral support,
all sand and gravel excavations shall be
located at least fifty (50) feet and backfilled
to at least one hundred (100) feet from the
right-of-way line of any existing or platted
street, road, highway or railway, except that
such excavation may be permitted within
these limits to the point of reducing the
ground elevation to the grade of the existing
or platted street, road or highway where
officially approved by the Hamilton County
Engineer.
5. No excavation of sand and gravel shall be
made from the banks or beds of the Little
Miami River. No excavation shall be made
from the banks or beds of any other major
stream, Ohio River, unless approved by
the Hamilton County Engineer and, where
appropriate, by the Miami Conservancy
District or the U. S. Corps of Engineers,
with the finding that such excavation will
not impair the lateral support needed for
permanent stream levees.
6. All excavations of gravel or sand shall either
be made to a depth of at least five (5) feet
below the water-producing depth or shall
be graded or backfilled with non-noxious
and non-inflammable solids to assure (a)
that the excavated area will not collect and
3.19 | “EF” Excavation and Landfill District
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987
retain stagnant water or (b) that the graded
or backfilled surface will create a gently
rolling topography to minimize erosion by
wind and rain and substantially conform
with the contours of the surrounding area.
The banks of all excavations not backfilled
shall be sloped to the water line at a grade
of not less than three (3) feet horizontal to
one (1) foot vertical and such banks shall
be sodded or surfaced with at least six (6)
inches of suitable soil and seeded with
grass. Soil banks shall be graded to a level
suiting the existing terrain and planted with
trees, shrubs, legumes or grasses where revegetation
is possible. Where flood water
exists, soil banks shall be high enough to
prevent overflow of water in the gravel pits
and shall be sloped, graded and seeded as
herein prescribed.
7. All sanitary landfills shall be in accordance
with the provisions of the Ohio Sanitary
Code and shall be subject to approval of the
Ohio Environmental Protection Agency and
the Hamilton County Department of Public
Works.
D. Restoration Requirements: In order to
avoid the creation of unusable land after the
excavation or landfill operation is completed
and to permit instead, the continued use of the
land for purposes of the Township’s overall land
use plan, and to avoid health and safety hazards
from open pits, stagnant water and other adverse
land features, and to prevent depreciation of the
area, a land use plan, such as that described in
Chapter 1514 of the Ohio Revised Code, shall
be prepared and submitted to the ATZC. Such
plan shall include a statement of intended future
uses of the area in keeping with the aforesaid
land use plan and shall show the approximate
sequence in which the excavation or landfill
and reclamation measures are to occur, the
approximate timing of the reclamation of the
various parts of the area and the measures to be
undertaken to prepare the site adequately for its
intended future use or uses in keeping with the
land use plan. The plan shall comply with all the
other mining and reclamation requirements of
Chapter 1514 of the Ohio Revised Code.
E. Before the beginning of any operation in the“EF”
Excavation and Landfill District, the plan for
restoration of the area shall be reviewed and
approved by the ATZC and in the case of a
sanitary landfill, such plan shall likewise be
reviewed and approved by the Hamilton County
Department of Public Works. Such approval by
the ATZC and/or Department of Public Works is
in addition to the approval required by the Ohio
Department of Natural Resources, Division of
Reclamation, with respect to surface mining and
the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency with
respect to sanitary landfills.
“EF” Excavation and Landfill District | 3.19
Article 3: Z oning Districts | 63
64 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
3.20 “H”
Riverfront District Regulations
A. The regulations set forth in this Section, or set
forth elsewhere in this Resolution, when referred
to in this Section, are the District Regulations for
the “H” Riverfront District.
B. Use Regulations: The following uses are
permitted within the “H” Riverfront District:
1. Floodway: The following uses shall be
allowed within the Floodway area of the “H”
Riverfront District.
a. Agriculture
b. Marina facilities limited to harbors,
launching ramps, and fuel dispensing
facilities.
c. Recreation areas including but not limited
to driving ranges, fee golf courses, boat
docks, fishing lakes, sale of bait and the
rent or leasing of recreational equipment
provided any building (as permitted in
Article 3.20,B,3) or illuminated areas
will be at least two hundred (200) feet
from any Residence District.
d. Loading areas, parking areas, and airport
landing strips.
e. River terminal uses limited to conveyers
and barge loading and unloading
facilities, and enclosed storage facilities
which comply with the provisions of
Article 3.20,B,2,e. The tract upon which
such uses are located shall have direct
access to both a navigable stream, as
defined in Article 6, and a highway or its
service road where access to the highway
is controlled.
2. Floodway Fringe: The following uses shall
be allowed within the Floodway Fringe area
of the Base Flood Plain and other areas of
the “H” Riverfront District, outside of the
floodway.
a. All uses permitted within the Floodway
area of the “H” Riverfront District.
b. Detached single family dwellings, but
not including mobile homes as defined
in Article 6 and manufactured homes as
defined in Article 6 of this Resolution.
c. Extraction of sand, gravel, and other
materials, provided such use complies
in full with the requirements of Article
3.19, “EF” Excavation and Landfill
District.
d. Marina facilities, including those
allowed by Article 3.20,B,1,b,
structures for the operation, sale,
and/or rental of watercraft and
accessories, and incidental repair,
storage and maintenance of boats. Any
bar, restaurant, or cocktail lounge, is
permitted if incident to a permitted
marina facility.
e. Storage of equipment, machinery,
and materials heavier than water, but
not including solid waste material or
garbage. The site for such uses shall
be located within 300 feet of a major
highway as defined in Article 6. No
building for such uses or outside storage
areas shall be closer than 200 feet to any
Residence District.
f. Summer camp, campgrounds, and
cabin groups which provide central
management and control to assure
seasonal occupancy only between April 1
and October 31; provided that in the case
of campgrounds the site shall be not less
than 10 acres.
g. River terminals, including conveyers,
barge loading and unloading facilities,
enclosed storage, and allied material
storage facilities, which comply with the
provisions of Article 3.20,B,1,e.
3.20 | “H” Riverfront District Regulations
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 65
3. Accessory structures and accessory uses to
any use permitted within the “H” Riverfront
District, provided that structures meet all
provisions of this Section, Article 5.2 and
Article 4.4.
C. Lot and Yard Standards
1. Height Regulations: No building shall exceed
two and one-half (2-1/2) stories or thirty-five
(35) feet in height, except as hereinafter
provided in this articleI. In the case of uses
or structures permitted by this Article,
two (2) feet of additional setback shall be
required from all streets or property lines for
each one (1) foot of additional height. In no
case shall any uses or structures permitted
by this Article be greater than forty- five (45)
feet in height, as measured from grade as
defined in Article 6.
2. Area Regulations:
a. Front Yard: There shall be a front yard
having a depth of not less than fifty (50)
feet, provided, however, no alignment
or setback or front yard depth shall be
required to exceed the average of the
minimum depth of the existing front yards
on the lots adjacent on each side, if each
of such lots are within the same block
and within one hundred (100) feet.
i. Where lots have a double frontage,
the required front yard shall be
provided on both streets
ii. Where a lot is located at the
intersection of two or more streets,
there shall be a front yard on each
street side of a corner lot, except that
the buildable width of a lot of record
shall not be reduced to less than forty
(40) feet. No accessory building shall
project beyond the front yard line on
either street.
b. Side Yard: Except as hereinafter provided
in Article 5.2 there shall be a side yard
on each side of a building which yard
shall have a width of not less than fifteen
(15) feet.
c. Rear Yard: Except as hereinafter provided
in Article 5.2 there shall be a rear yard
having a depth of not less than thirty-five
(35) feet.
d. Intensity of Use: Except as hereinafter
provided in Article 5.2 every lot or tract
of land shall have a minimum width of
one hundred (100) feet at the building
line and an area of not less than twenty
thousand (20,000) square feet.
“H” Riverfront District Regulations | 3.20
Article 3: Z oning Districts
66 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
Table 3.9: Other District Lot Standards
Regulation AA A-30 A A-2 B B-2 C D
Minimum Lot Size
1
Acre
30,000
s.f.
20,000
s.f.
14,000
s.f.
10,500
s.f.
7,500
s.f.
6,000
s.f.
3,000 s.f or
10,000 s.f.
Minimum Lot Width
(measured at building line)
150’ 150’ 100’ 80’ 70’ 60’ 50’ 50’ or 60’
Front Setback (feet) 50’ 50’ 50’ 40’ 35’ 35’ 30’ 30’
Side Setback (feet) 25’ 25’ 15’ 10’ 8’
13’ Total
(5’min,1side)
5’ 5’ or 10’
Rear Setback (feet) 60’ 35’ 35’ 35’ 35’ 30’ 30’ 30’ or 40’
Maximum Height
35’ 35’ 35’ 35’ 35’ 35’ 35’ 45’
Or 2.5 stories
Table 3.9: Other District Lot Standards (continued)
Regulation DD O 01 OO
Minimum Lot Size
1,500,
2,000 or
2,500 s.f.
3,000 s.f.
3,000
s.f.
5000 s.f. N/A
5000
s.f.
10,000
s.f.
10,000
s.f.
Minimum Lot Width
(measured at building line)
N/A 50’ or 60’
50’ or
60’
N/A
Front Setback (feet) 40’ 30’ 30’ 30’
Side Setback (feet) 15’ or 30’ 5’ or 10’
5’ or
10’
10’
Rear Setback (feet) 40’ 30’ or 40’
30’ or
40’
40’
Maximum Height
40’ 45’ 45’ 35’
Or 2.5 stories
3.21 | District Lot Standards
For reference information please see standards located within Article 5.2 and individual district standards located within this Article.
For reference information please see standards located within Article 5.2 and individual district standards located within this Article.
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 67
District Lot Standards | 3.21
3.1 “A-A” Residence District
Regulations
3.2 “A-30” Residence District
Regulations
3.3 “A” Residence District
Regulations
3.4 ”A-2” Residence District
Regulations
3.5 “B” Residence District
Regulations
3.6 “B-2” Residence District
Regulations
3.7 “C” Residence District
Regulations
3.8 “D” Residence District
Regulations
3.9 “DD” Planned Multiple
Residence District Reg
3.10 “O” Office District
Regulations
3.11 “O-1” Limited Office
District
3.12 “OO” Planned Office District
Regulations
3.13 “MHP” Mobile Home Park
District Regulations
3.14 “E” Retail Business District
Regulations
3.15 “EE” Planned Business
District Regulations
3.16 “ID” Industrial Development
District
3.17 “FF” Planned Light Industrial
District Reg
3.18 “GG” Planned Heavy
Industrial District Reg.
3.19 “EF” Excavation and Landfill
District
3.20 “H” Riverfront District
Regulations
District Reference
Article 3: Z oning Districts
68 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
Table 3.9: Other District Lot Standards (continued)
Regulation E EE ID FF GG EF*15 H
Minimum Lot Size
3,000 s.f.
N/A
20,000
s.f.
N/A N/A N/A
20,000
s.f.
5000 s.f.
10,000 s.f.
Minimum Lot Width
(measured at building line)
50’ or 60’ N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 100’
Front Setback (feet) 30’ 30’ or 35’ 50’ 50’ 50’ N/A 50’
Side Setback (feet) 0, 5’ or 10’ 30’ or 35’ 10’ or 50’ 50’ 50’ N/A 15’
Rear Setback (feet) 0’,15’ or 35’ 30’ or 35’ 10’ or 50’ 50’ 50’ N/A 35’
Maximum Height
(feet)
45’ 35’ 35’ or 50’ 35’ 35’ N/A
35’ or
45’
Minimum Planting
Strip (within front
yard)
N/A 25% 20’ 35% 40% N/A N/A
Setback From
Residential Property
Line
N/A N/A 100’ 100’ 200’ N/A N/A
3.21 | District Lot Standards
For reference information please see standards located within Article 5.2 and individual district standards located within this Article.
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 69
District Lot Standards | 3.21
3.1 “A-A” Residence District
Regulations
3.2 “A-30” Residence District
Regulations
3.3 “A” Residence District
Regulations
3.4 ”A-2” Residence District
Regulations
3.5 “B” Residence District
Regulations
3.6 “B-2” Residence District
Regulations
3.7 “C” Residence District
Regulations
3.8 “D” Residence District
Regulations
3.9 “DD” Planned Multiple
Residence District Reg
3.10 “O” Office District
Regulations
3.11 “O-1” Limited Office
District
3.12 “OO” Planned Office District
Regulations
3.13 “MHP” Mobile Home Park
District Regulations
3.14 “E” Retail Business District
Regulations
3.15 “EE” Planned Business
District Regulations
3.16 “ID” Industrial Development
District
3.17 “FF” Planned Light Industrial
District Reg
3.18 “GG” Planned Heavy
Industrial District Reg.
3.19 “EF” Excavation and Landfill
District
3.20 “H” Riverfront District
Regulations
District Reference
Article 3: Z oning Districts
70 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
ARTICLE 4
Overlay and Special Districts
4.1 Planned Unit Developments............................. 71
4.2 Community Unit Plan......................................... 76
4.3 “HD” Historic District........................................ 77
4.4 “FPM” Flood Plain Management.................... 80
4.5 Sexually Oriented Businesses........................ 81
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 71
4.1 Planned Unit Development Overlay
and PUD Review Procedures
A. Purpose. The purpose of the Planned Unit
Development (“PUD”) Overlay District is
to encourage the efficient use of land and
resources, promoting greater efficiency in public
and utility services, orderly improvement of
property in accordance with community plans,
and to encourage innovation in the planning and
building of all types of development without
detriment to neighboring properties. The PUD
regulations are intended to permit property to be
used in a manner or intensity not permitted asof-
right by the underlying district regulations.
B. District Designation and Applicability.
The PUD District is an overlay of alternative
regulations, including procedures and standards
that are applicable to all land within the
jurisdiction of these regulations in accordance
with the provisions of this Section. The
PUD Overlay District is established on the
official zoning map in accordance with Ohio
Revised Code 519.01. This overlay district
enables individual property owners to request
administrative approval of PUD plans on their
property in accordance with the provisions of this
Section.
C. Authority
1. The Anderson Township Board of Trustees
and the Anderson Township Zoning
Commission may, in accordance with the
procedures and standards set out in this
Section and other regulations applicable to
the district in which the subject property is
located, approve a development plan for a
PUD for any of the uses below, except that
areas of the Township that are currently
zoned EE, OO, DD, FF, GG, or CUP, as well as
conditional uses as governed by the Board of
Zoning Appeals, may not be considered as a
PUD:
a. Residential uses in any area zoned AA,
A-30, A, A-2, B, B-2, C, D, and MHP,
provided the net density is equal to or
less than that permitted in the existing
zoning district.
b. Any non-residential use that is permitted
within a single family zoning district, that
has an impervious surface area (ISR) that
is equal or greater than .60.
c. Any non-residential development in an
area zoned E, O, O-1, H, EF, ID, and HD,
that has an impervious surface area (ISR)
that is equal or greater than .60.
2. Approval of PUD Applications: Proposed
planned unit developments whose net
densities or intensities fall within the PUD
ARTICLE 4
Overlay and Special Districts
Planned Unit Development | 4.1
Article 4: Overlay and Special Districts
72 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
range, as stated in Article 4.1.C.1 shall
require administrative approval of a PUD
Plan (Planned Unit Development Plan) by the
Anderson Township Zoning Commission and
certification of a Zoning Compliance Plan by
the Director of Planning and Zoning.
3. Approval of Modifications of Specific
Requirements: The specific requirements
in this Resolution for lot areas, height,
yards, buffers, perimeter setbacks,
parking (including provision of compact
car spaces), landscaping, signs, lighting,
and noise shall apply to all planned unit
developments unless they are modified by
the Anderson Township Zoning Commission
or Anderson Township Board of Trustees
with specific findings that the general
standards in Article 4.1,G will continue
to be met. Nothing in this Subsection shall
be deemed to enable modification of the
average net density (dwelling units per acre)
requirements for PUD applications.
D. Effect of PUD Listing
1. Compliance with Zoning Requirements:
The listing of a use in this section as being
permitted with a PUD Zoning Certificate
does not constitute an assurance or
presumption that a proposed development
plan will be approved. Rather, each proposed
development plan shall be evaluated by the
Anderson Township Zoning Commission or
Anderson Township Board of Trustees, as
the case may be, on an individual basis. This
shall be done in relation to its compliance
with the standards and conditions set forth
in this Section and with the standards for
the district in which it is located, in order
to determine whether approval of the
development plan is appropriate at the
particular location and in the particular
manner proposed.
2. Compliance with Other Requirements:
Nothing in this Section shall be deemed
to prohibit or unreasonably limit any use
guaranteed by state or federal law.
E. Review Procedures for PUD Plans
1. Pre-application Conference: Prior to
preparing or submitting a complete
application for PUD Plan approval pursuant
to Article 4.1,E,2 an applicant shall meet
with the Director of Planning and Zoning
to present the concept of the proposed
development and to discuss the procedures
and standards for development plan
approval. The pre-application conference
is intended to facilitate the filing and
consideration of an innovative development
plan and complete application consistent
with adopted plans and applicable zoning
regulations. No representation made by the
Director of Planning and Zoning during such
conference or at any other time shall be
binding upon the Township with respect to
the application subsequently submitted.
2. Applicant: A PUD Plan application may
be filed with the Director of Planning and
Zoning by the owner or lessee of the subject
property or other person having a legal or
equitable interest in the subject property.
3. Application: An applicant for a planned unit
development shall file an application on a
form or forms provided by the Director of
Planning and Zoning with a PUD Plan. The
plan for the use and development of the tract
may be submitted as either:
a. A conceptual plan showing the areas
within which buildings, parking
areas, and buffering are to be located
accompanied by a detailed description on
the plat identifying the permissible range
or limits of size, type, and other pertinent
details for buildings, buffer/landscape
areas, parking areas, signage, lighting,
access, circulation patterns, and other
details as requested, or
b. A detailed plan meeting the requirements
of a Zoning Compliance Plan as defined
in Article 6.The PUD may be approved
by the Anderson Township Zoning
Commission and the Anderson Township
4.1 | Planned Unit Development
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 73
Board of Trustees, as the case may be, on
the basis of such conceptual or detailed
plan provided said plan otherwise
complies with all regulations.
4. Staff Report: The Director of Planning and
Zoning shall prepare and transmit to the
Anderson Township Zoning Commission
prior to its public hearing a written report
incorporating or summarizing comments of
other departments, agencies and officials.
A recommendation shall be included,
setting forth whether the PUD application
should be approved, approved with
modifications, or denied, and reasons for
such recommendation.
5. Anderson Township Zoning Commission
Hearing and Decision: Within ten (10) to
forty-five (45) days following receipt of
the PUD application determined by the
Department of Planning and Zoning to be
complete, the Commission shall hold a
public hearing in the manner prescribed in
the adopted Organization, Procedure and
Rules and Regulations of the Commission.
At the conclusion of the public hearing, the
Commission shall, on the basis of written
findings relative to the standards set forth in
Article 4.1,G, either
a. Approve the PUD Plan;
b. Approve the PUD Plan subject to further
specified approvals or modifications
necessary to achieve full compliance with
all standards; or
c. Disapprove the PUD Plan.
6. Notification of Decision: The Director
of Planning and Zoning shall notify the
applicant of the decision or recommendation
of the Anderson Township Zoning
Commission via letter and Resolution. The
action of the Anderson Township Zoning
Commission, and one copy of the submitted
plans permanently marked to show such
decision, shall be transmitted to the
applicant.
7. Notification of Decision: The approval of a
PUD Plan by the Anderson Township Zoning
Commission or by the Anderson Township
Board of Trustees as being in compliance
with standards of approval pursuant to
Article 4.1,G shall not be considered to be
an amendment or supplement to this Zoning
Resolution and, in accordance with Section
519.02 of the Ohio Revised Code, shall not
be subject to referendum for the purpose of
Section 519.12 of the Ohio Revised Code.
8. Upon final approval of a PUD Plan by the
Anderson Township Zoning Commission
or by the Anderson Township Board of
Trustees in the PUD Overlay District, the
Director of Planning and Zoning shall revise
the official zoning map, removing the base
zoning district designation and adding
the PUD designation. This action shall
not be considered to be an amendment or
supplement to this Zoning Resolution and,
in accordance with Section 519.021 of the
Ohio Revised Code, shall not be subject
to referendum for the purpose of Section
519.12 of the Ohio Revised Code.
F. Coordinated Review and Approval of
Applications. When an application for approval
of a PUD also requires other zoning approvals,
the applicant shall indicate that fact on the
application when submitted to the Director
of Planning and Zoning. At the time of filing
the application for a PUD, applications shall
be filed with the Anderson Township Board of
Zoning Appeals for any other required approvals.
Whenever an applicant files an application for
other approvals pursuant to this Section, all
required notices shall include reference to the
request for any and all additional approvals.
G. General Standards for PUD Plan Approval.
In determining whether a PUD Plan filed pursuant
to this Article shall be approved or recommended
for approval, the Director of Planning and Zoning,
the Anderson Township Zoning Commission, and
Planned Unit Development | 4.1
Article 4: Overlay and Special Districts
74 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
the Anderson Township Board of Trustees shall
apply the following general standards.
1. Compliance with this Zoning Resolution and
with the purposes of the Zone District in
which the proposed use and development is
to be located;
2. Applicability of and consistency with
adopted objectives and policies of the
Township and County related to land use,
as well as Township plans duly adopted
by the Board of Anderson Township
Board of Trustees and Hamilton County
Regional Planning Commission, including,
but not limited to the Anderson Township
Comprehensive Plan;
3. Compatibility with surrounding land uses;
4. Whether the size and physical features of
the project area enable adequate protection
of surrounding property and orderly and
coordinated improvement of property in the
vicinity of the site;
5. Whether the proposed phasing of the
development is appropriate and the
development can be substantially completed
within the period of time specified in the
schedule of development submitted by the
applicant;
6. Whether the proposed development is
served adequately and efficiently by
essential public facilities and services which
are in existence or are planned;
7. Whether significant scenic or historic
features, as identified or contained in plans
duly adopted by the Board of Anderson
Township Board of Trustees and Hamilton
County Regional Planning Commission, are
adequately conserved;
8. Whether modifications of the zoning or other
regulations are warranted by the innovative
design of the development plan;
9. The adequacy of proposed pedestrian
circulation system to insulate pedestrian
circulation from vehicular movement;
10. The adequacy of the provisions for visual and
acoustical privacy.
11. Whether the development includes an
appropriate amount of, and appropriate
access to, dedicated open space.
12. Whether the development will be
detrimental to present and potential
surrounding uses.
13. The consistency of the development with
recommendations from Township, County,
State and/or Federal agencies.
14. Whether the development is consistent
with the Vision and Goals as adopted by the
Anderson Township Board of Trustees.
H. Zoning Compliance Plan – Certification of
PUD Plan Compliance
1. Review. Upon receipt from the applicant
of an application for a Zoning Compliance
Plan certification, the Director of Planning
and Zoning shall review the application to
determine if it is complete and acceptable
pursuant to Article 2.1 including any
modifications required in conjunction with
the approval by the Anderson Township
Zoning Commission or by the Anderson
Township Board of Trustees, as the case may
be.
2. Conveyance. Any land identified on the
PUD Plan as common open space to be
conveyed to an owners association, shall
be so conveyed subject to a covenant
restricting the common open space to the
uses specified in the Zoning Compliance
Plan and providing for the maintenance of
the common open space in a manner which
assures its use for the purposes intended.
All such conditions, easements and open
space covenants shall specifically provide for
4.1 | Planned Unit Development
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 75
Planned Unit Development | 4.1
enforcement by the Township.
a. A deed and covenant as described herein shall
be recorded with the Recorder of Hamilton
County. A copy of the recorded deed shall be
delivered to both the Township Department of
Planning and Zoning within thirty (30) days of
final approval of the PUD Plan.
3. Decision. Within seven (7) days of receipt of the
completed application, the Director of Planning
and Zoning shall either (1) certify that the Zoning
Compliance Plan complies with the approved PUD
Plan; or (2) refuse to certify the Zoning Compliance
Plan for lack of compliance with the approved PUD
Plan.
4. Effect. A Zoning Compliance Plan as finally
approved and certified in accordance with the
provisions of this Article shall not be modified,
except pursuant to Article 4.1,I.
I. Adjustments to PUD Plan. Adjustments to an
approved PUD Plan or previously approved Zoning
Compliance Plan may be considered minor or major
and shall be reflected on a Zoning Compliance Plan.
Such adjustments may be considered provided there
is no modification of recorded easements or of written
conditions of approval contained in an Anderson
Township Zoning Commission’s Resolution. Further, any
modifications must be in substantial conformity with
the intent of the PUD approval. For any adjustments of
a technical or engineering nature, the applicant shall
submit a report from the appropriate public agency
assuring compliance with agency regulations.
1. Minor Adjustments. The Director of Planning and
Zoning Planning and Zoning has the authority to
consider minor adjustments through the procedure
defined in Article 6. Minor adjustments shall be
the minimum necessary to overcome a particular
difficulty or to achieve a more functional and
desirable use of the property than was initially
anticipated. No adjustment shall result in a
violation of any standard or requirement of this
Resolution nor create or extend any previously
approved variance. Minor adjustments shall be
limited to altering the location of structures,
circulation elements, open space or grading where
such alterations will comply with the intent of
all perimeter setbacks and buffer yards that are
required by any regulation or by the approved PUD
plan.
2. Major Adjustments. Any adjustment to the PUD
Plan within the criteria of Article 4.1 but not
authorized by Article 4.1,I shall be considered
a major adjustment. The Anderson Township
Zoning Commission, following notice by the
Department of Planning and Zoning to all property
owners whose properties are located within two
hundred (200) feet of the PUD, shall hold a public
hearing within ten (10) to forty five (45) days of
receipt of the completed Zoning Compliance Plan
application. At the conclusion of the public hearing,
the Commission may approve an application for a
major adjustment to the PUD Plan not requiring a
modification of or recorded easements or of written
conditions of approval contained in an Anderson
Township Zoning Commission’s Resolution.
Findings shall be made that any changes in the
plan as approved will be in substantial conformity
with the intent of such PUD Plan. If the Commission
determines that a major adjustment is not in
substantial conformity with the intent of such
PUD Plan as approved, then the Commission
shall review the request in accordance with the
procedures set forth in Article 4.1,E.
J. Appeals
1. Appeal of Zoning Commission Decision. Any party
aggrieved by the administrative decision of the
Anderson Township Zoning Commission for a PUD
or a major adjustment concerning compliance with
PUD standards may appeal within thirty (30) days
of the date of decision to the Anderson Township
Board of Trustees.
2. Appeal of Director of Planning and Zoning’s
Decision. Any party aggrieved by the decision of
the Director of Planning and Zoning concerning
the certification of a Zoning Compliance Plan in
the case of a PUD approval or a decision regarding
a minor adjustment, may appeal within thirty
(30) days of the date of decision to the Anderson
Township Zoning Commission.
Article 4: Overlay and Special Districts
76 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
3. Appeal of Anderson Township Board of
Trustees Decision. Any party aggrieved by
the administrative decision of the Anderson
Township Board of Trustees in the case of a
PUD approval or adjustment may appeal a
final order to the Court of Common Pleas of
Hamilton County pursuant to Chapter 2506 of
the Ohio Revised Code.
a. The regulations and maps of the
Zoning Resolution are in full force
and effect from and after in Anderson
Township.
4.2 Community Unit Plan
A. The owner or owners of any tract of land may
submit to the Trustees a plan for the use and
development of the tract of land for residential
and related purposes as hereinafter provided
in Article 4.2,A,3. Such plan for development
of the area shall be referred to the Regional
Planning Commission for study and report. The
plan together with a report stating the findings
and recommendations of the Regional Planning
Commission shall be filed with the ATZC and
Anderson Township Trustees. The report shall
state the reasons for recommendation and shall
include specific evidence and facts showing
the proposed community unit plan meets the
following conditions:
1. That the location and planning of building
sites and the amount, arrangement and
treatment of open space will ensure a
satisfactory living environment and will
be carried out in consideration of property
adjacent to the area included in the plan and
insure that such adjacent property will not
be adversely affected.
2. That the plan is consistent with the
objectives of this Section to further the
best use of the land in relation to its size,
configuration, location and physiography,
and to produce a residential environment of
sustained desirability.
3. That the buildings shall be used only for
single-family dwellings and such accessory
buildings and uses customarily incident to
such use if the area of the Community Unit
Plan is less than thirty (30) acres, or only
for single family, two family or multiple
dwellings, or other residentially related
activities and customary accessory uses if
the area of the Community Unit Plan is more
than thirty (30) acres in area. In the case of
a Community Unit Plan of fifty (50) acres or
more one (1) area may be included in such
plan as a shopping center for parking and
commercial buildings and uses as regulated
in the “E” Retail Business District not to
exceed one (1) acre for each hundred (100)
lots or dwelling units or fraction thereof.
4. That the average lot area per family
contained in the site, excluding streets, will
not be less than the lot per family required
in the District in which the development is
located.
B. Following a review by the Regional Planning
Commission, the plan shall then be referred
to the ATZC for public hearing and report
to the Trustees as provided for amendment
or supplements to the Zoning Resolution in
accordance with Sec. 519.12 of the Ohio Revised
Code.
C. If the Trustees approve the plan, then zoning
certificates may be issued even though the
use of land, the location of the buildings to be
erected in the area, and the yards and open
spaces contemplated by the plan do not conform
in all respects to the District Regulations of
the District in which it is located. The Trustees
may also by the same procedure, authorize the
revision or remodeling of any existing community
unit plan that does not conform in all respects
with the District Regulations of this Resolution.
1. No Zoning Certificate shall be issued for
4.2 | Community Unit Plan
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 77
actual construction until and unless a final
Development Plan, as defined in Article 6
shall have been reviewed and approved by
the ATZC with a determination that such
plan is consistent with the approved plan
and the purposes and intent of this Section.
The ATZC may approve variations in the
Final Development Plan not in violation of
any standards and requirements prescribed
in this Section, and provided that the
variations remain completely in harmony
with the approved plan and within the spirit
of the Resolution. The ATZC may take into
consideration recommendations of the
Regional Planning Commission relative to
such variations.
D. Application may be filed for amendment of the
District Map coincidentally with the submitting
of a Community Unit Plan in accordance with
this Article. In this case, the application for
amendment of the zoning classification and the
plan for the use and development of the tract
of land may be considered together and the
hearings and recommendations therefor may
be combined. When such amendment and plan
are combined, however, any approval shall be
conditioned on carrying out the plan.
4.3 “HD” Historic District
A. Purpose and Intent. A property owner may
file a plan for the Historic District, said district
being a Planned District subject to Article 5.1
of this Resolution and may be approved when in
accordance with this Section.
1. The purpose of this Section is:
a. To safeguard the heritage of the
Township by preserving sites and
structures which reflect elements of the
community’s cultural, social, economic,
political, or architectural history, and
b. To protect and improve the attractiveness
of the community as a place to live, visit,
and do business.
2. The intent of this Section is:
a. To allow additional means for economic
support for the rehabilitation, restoration,
preservation, and maintenance of historic
properties by allowing specific additional
uses of the property,
b. To allow uses of historic properties
that will complement and support the
character of the historic property, and
c. To allow additional uses of historic
properties where such uses will not
have an adverse impact on surrounding
properties.
B. Historic Property Quaifications
1. As part of the application for a Historic
District, applicants shall demonstrate that
their property:
a. Is formally recognized by an appropriate
local (e.g., Cincinnati Preservation
Association or Anderson Township
Historical Society), State or Federal
agency as historically significant, or
b. Substantially meets at least one of the
criteria and related standard under each
of the following headings:
i. Historic Significance
ii. Architectural Significance
iii. Influence on Immediate
Surroundings
3. The specific standards and criteria for each
heading are as follows:
a. Historic Significance
i. Association with an important person.
“HD” Historic District | 4.3
Article 4: Overlay and Special Districts
78 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
Standard: A person who was
significant in national, state, or local
history owned the property, was
related to the owner, stayed at the
property, or accomplished something
significant at the property.
ii. Association with an important event.
iii. Rarity.
Standard: The structure is one of the
last of its kind in the Township or local
area.
iv. Archaeological significance.
Standard: The site has yielded,
or is likely to yield, information
important to prehistoric or historic
understanding.
v. Age of structure.
Standard: The structure is at least 50
years old.
b. Architectural Significance
i. Association with an architectural
period or style.
Standard: The structure has design
elements which reflect a particular
architectural period or style, or which
reflect a unique mix of periods or
styles.
ii. Association with a notable architect
or builder.
Standard: The structure was designed
by an architect of national or regional
note, or by one of the more important
students or apprentices of this
architect.
iii. Association with important building or
structural techniques.
Standard: The design of the structure
employs early use of an important
building technique, or the design
of the structure employs a building
or structural technique which is no
longer used.
iv. Richness of architectural detail.
Standard: Distinctive details,
such as stained glass, tile roof,
ornamentation, stonework,
landscaping, ornamental woodwork
(exterior or interior), or similar details,
characterize the structure.
c. Influence On Immediate Surroundings
i. Role of structure in surrounding
environment.
Standard: The structure stands out
in a complementary way either
because of its size or pivotal location,
or the structure blends in as a part
of a cluster of similar or compatible
buildings.
ii Degree to which original design has
been modified or other changes.
Standard: The structure has never
been modified or modifications which
have been made do not significantly
alter the original design of the
structure.
C. Uses. Uses permitted in the Historic District
for historic properties shall complement and
support the particular historic property under
consideration. Allowed uses shall include:
1. Bed and breakfast and similar overnight
accommodations wherein meal service,
when provided, is to overnight guests only
and the maximum stay shall be two weeks;
2. Museums and similar cultural facilities;
3. Art galleries;
4.3 | “HD” Historic District
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 79
4. Offices, as restricted by applicable statutes
and regulations;
5. Antique shops;
6. Two-family dwellings;
7. Restaurants;
8. Craft shops;
9. Club houses or facilities for private or public
clubs, where food or beverage services are
provided only to members and guests of
members;
10. Similar enterprises and commercial
establishments of the same general
standard which, in the opinion of the Zoning
Commission, meet the purpose and intent of
this Section.
D. Development Standards. The Zoning
Commission may impose such requirements
on hours of operation, landscaping, lighting,
and signage as it deems necessary to meet the
purpose and intent of the Section.
1. Vehicular access shall be limited to avoid
traffic problems and reduce negative impacts
on nearby properties.
2. Hours of operation for any use involving food
or beverage services, entertainment or other
use not normally carried on in a residential
area, shall be restricted as necessary to
preserve the quiet and residential character
of the environs, but in no event shall the
hours of operation begin before 7:00 A.M., or
continue past midnight.
E. Yard and Setback Standards
1. Minimum setbacks for front yards shall
conform to the average established setbacks
of existing buildings within 300 feet. Parking
areas shall be well screened and shall
not encroach upon the front yard setback
required by restrictive adjoining zoning
district.
2. Unless specifically permitted by the Zoning
Commission, all new parking areas shall be
located in the rear yard of the property.
F. Parking Standards
1. Sufficient off-street parking shall be provided
in accordance with the Township Parking
Regulations to insure that no patrons,
guests, or other users of the property park on
the street, or on abutting property.
2. Parking areas shall be located no closer than
25 feet from any adjacent property line, and
shall be effectively screened by landscaping,
or attractive fencing or both landscaping and
fencing.
G. Procedure: The Historic District shall be a
Planned District and therefore shall be subject to
requirements specified in Article 5.1, General
Development Plan Provisions.
1. The owner of land on which a historic
development is located or is proposed to be
located may submit a request to amend the
zoning on the owner’s property to “Historic
District.” Such request shall include a
preliminary plan for the use and development
of the property , documentation showing
how the site satisfies the Historic Property
Qualifications of this Section, and other
materials as specified in the Submission
Requirements for Amendment to the
Anderson Township Zoning Resolution.
2. The application shall be subject to the
standard zoning amendment process of
Anderson Township, as specified by Ohio
Revised Code Section 519.12, including
public notification and public hearings
conducted by the Anderson Township Zoning
Commission and the Board of Trustees.
3. The Zoning Commission and the Board
of Trustees shall employ as necessary
relevant guidelines such as the Secretary of
the Interior’s Standards for Rehabilitation
“HD” Historic District | 4.3
Article 4: Overlay and Special Districts
80 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
and the Advisory Council on Historic
Preservation’s Treatment of Archaeological
Properties: A Handbook in reviewing the
application. The Director of Planning and
Zoning shall submit the application to local
and state historic preservation organizations
for review and comment.
4. Upon approval of the Historic District Zoning
Amendment, the applicant shall submit
a Final Development Plan conforming to
the preliminary plan and the approving
Resolution. No Zoning Certificate for
construction or use shall be issued until
and unless the Final Development Plan is
approved by the Anderson Township Zoning
Commission.
5. The qualification of the site as a historic
property as required in Paragraph B herein
and the conformance to conditions of the
Final Development Plan shall be and remain
a condition of approval for the Historic
District for an historic property. Alteration,
addition, modification, demolition, or
reconstruction of the historic property
without approval shall constitute a zoning
violation.
4.4 “FPM” FLOOD PLAIN MANAGEMENT
OVERLAY DISTRICT REGULATIONS
A. The regulations set forth in this Section,
or set forth elsewhere in this Resolution,
when referred to in this Section, are the
District Regulations for the “FPM” Flood Plain
Management Overlay District.
B. District Map Boundaries and Elevations.
1. The boundaries of the “FPM” Flood Plain
Management Overlay District shall include
all that territory within the jurisdiction of
this Resolution, which is defined as being
within the Special Flood Hazard Areas of
Unincorporated Anderson Township Hamilton
County, Ohio.
2. The following scientific and engineering
reports, and accompanying maps and profiles,
identify, in whole or in part, Special Flood
Hazard Areas within unincorporated Anderson
Township, Hamilton County, Ohio, and shall
be used to determine the elevation and planar
extent of the “FPM” Flood Management
Overlay District, and are hereby adopted by
reference and declared to be a part of this
Resolution
a. Storm Drainage and Open Space Master
Plan for Hamilton County, Ohio (Consoer,
Townsend and Associates, December,
1966);
b. Flood Insurance Study for the County
of Hamilton, Ohio (Federal Emergency
Management Agency, December, 1981,
and as amended).
c. Flood Boundary and Floodway Map for
Unincorporated Hamilton County, Ohio,
June 1, 1982, and as amended.
d. Flood Insurance Rate Map for
Unincorporated Hamilton County, Ohio,
June 1, 1982, and as amended.
3. Where the Flood Insurance Study and the
Storm Drainage and Open Space Master Plan
provide information for the same reaches
of streams, the information which is most
restrictive as to elevation and planar extent
shall be used.
C. Use Regulations: A structure or premises shall
only be used for the purposes permitted by the
applicable underlying Zone District, except that
when a proposed use, structure or premises
is also located within the “FPM” Flood Plain
Management Overlay District, Article 4.4, F of
this resolution shall take precedence.
D. General Conditions: It shall be unlawful to
use any land or structure, or to locate, extend,
convert, substantially improve, structurally alter,
4.4 | “FPM” Flood Plain Management Overlay
District
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 81
or otherwise develop any land or structure within
the “FPM” Flood Plain Management Overlay
District unless such development meets all the
applicable conditions and standards set forth
in regulations governing the National Flood
Insurance Program (44 CFR Section 59.1 et seq.).
4.5 Sexually Oriented Businesses
A. Purpose: It is the purpose and intent of this
Section to regulate sexually oriented businesses
to promote the health, safety, and morals of
the citizens of the Township and to establish
reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent
any deleterious location or concentration
of sexually oriented businesses within the
Township, thereby reducing or eliminating the
adverse secondary effects from such sexually
oriented businesses. The provisions of this
Section have neither the purpose nor effect of
imposing a limitation or restriction on the content
of any communicative material or expression,
including sexually oriented materials. Similarly,
it is not the intent nor effect of this Section to
restrict or deny access by adults to sexually
oriented materials or expression protected by
the First Amendment, or to deny access by the
distributors and exhibitors of sexually oriented
entertainment to their intended market. Neither
is it the intent nor effect of this Section to
condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene
material.
B. Definitions: For the purposes of this Section,
certain terms and words are defined within
Article 6 of this resolution.
C. Establishment and Classification of
Businesses Regulated
1. Sexually oriented businesses include the
following: adult arcade, adult bookstore,
adult novelty store, adult video store, adult
cabaret, adult motel, adult motion picture
theatre, adult theatre, massage parlor,
sexual encounter establishment, escort
agency, or nude model studio, all as defined
in Article 6.
2. The establishment of a sexually oriented
business shall be permitted only in the “ID”
(Industrial Development) District and shall be
subject to the restrictions herein.
D. Location Restrictions and Requirements
for Sexually Oriented Businesses: Sexually
oriented businesses shall be established,
operated, and permitted only as provided in this
Section. A zoning certificate shall be required
prior to the establishment of a sexually oriented
business. In addition, any sexually oriented
business shall be subject to the following
restrictions:
1. No sexually oriented business shall be
established or operated within one thousand
feet of: (a) any religious institution; (b) any
school; (c) any public building or public park;
(d) any residential district.
2. No sexually oriented business shall be
operated within one thousand feet of
another such business, which includes those
defined in Article 6.
3. Nothing in this Section shall prohibit a
person from appearing in a state of nudity
for a modeling class operated:
a. By a proprietary school, licensed by the
State of Ohio; a college, junior college, or
university supported entirely or partly by
taxation;
b. By a private college or university which
maintains and operates educational
programs in which credits are
transferable to a college, junior college,
or university supported entirely or partly
by taxation; or
c. In a structure:
i. Which has no sign visible from the
exterior of the structure and no other
advertising that indicates a nude
person is available for viewing;
Sexually Oriented Businesses | 4.5
Article 4: Overlay and Special Districts
82 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
ii. Where in order to participate in a
class a student must enroll at least
three days in advance of the class;
iii. Where no more than one nude model
is on the premises and available for
viewing at any one time.
E. Measurement of Distance.
1. Distances shall be measured in a straight
line, without regard to intervening structures
or topography (i.e., as measured on a map).
2. The distances shall be measured from
the exterior faces (including architectural
projections) of the exterior walls of the
principal building containing the sexually
oriented business.
3. The distances shall be measured to the
exterior faces (including architectural
projections) of the exterior walls of any
principal building containing another sexually
oriented business, any religious institution,
or school.
4. If the sexually oriented business is to be
located within a tenant space, then the
distances shall be measured from the
exterior faces (including architectural
projections) of the walls creating the
boundaries of the tenant space in a multitenant
building, and not from that of the
entire multi- tenant building.
5. If another sexually oriented business or
any religious institution or school is located
within a tenant space, then the distances
shall be measured to the exterior faces
(including architectural projections) of the
walls creating the boundaries of the tenant
space, and not from that of the entire multitenant
building.
6. Regarding distance measurements to a
residential district, the distances shall be
measured from the exterior faces (including
any architectural projections) of the exterior
walls of the principal building containing
the sexually oriented business to the closest
point of the residential district as established
by the Anderson Township Zoning Map. If
the sexually oriented business is located
within a tenant space, then the distances
shall be measured from the exterior faces
(including architectural projections) of the
walls creating the boundaries of the tenant
space, and not from that of the entire multitenant
building.
7. Regarding distance measurements to a park,
public building, or school not within a tenant
space, the distances shall be measured from
the exterior faces (including any architectural
projections) of the exterior walls of the
principal building containing the proposed
sexually oriented business to the closest
point of the parcel line (as established by
the Hamilton County Auditor) of the parcel
containing the park, public building or school.
If the proposed sexually oriented business
is to be located within a tenant space,
then the distances shall be measured from
the exterior faces (including architectural
projections) of the walls creating the
boundaries of the tenant space, and not from
that of the entire multi-tenant building.
F. Zoning Certificate Required.
1. No sexually oriented business shall be
permitted to operate without a valid Zoning
Certificate for a sexually oriented business
issued by the Township. Upon request, the
Director of Planning and Zoning or his/her
designee shall provide an applicant for a
sexually oriented business an application for
a commercial zoning certificate, which shall
serve as the required application form.
2. Any person desiring to operate a sexually
oriented business shall file with the
Township an original and two copies of all
materials required for submission.
3. An application fee shall also be submitted in
4.5 | Sexually Oriented Businesses
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 83
accordance with the schedule determined by
the Board of Township Trustees.
4. All property included in a sexually oriented
business must meet all the underlying
conditions applicable in the “ID” District.
5. The completed application shall also contain
the following information and shall be
accompanied by the following documents:
a. A map, drawn to scale and marked to
show the location of all land uses and
zoning districts within one thousand feet
of the principal building or tenant space
in which the sexually oriented business
is proposed to be located. For purposes
of this Section, a use shall be considered
existing or established if it is in existence
or owned and designated for specific use
at the time an application is submitted.
G. Approval of Application.
1. The Director of Planning and Zoning or his/
her designee shall approve the application
for a zoning certificate unless:
a. An applicant has failed to provide
information required by this Article or the
application for the issuance of a zoning
certificate.
b. The applicant has falsely answered a
question or request for information on the
application form.
c. The application fee required by this
Article was not paid.
d. The proposed business does not comply
with the zoning locational requirements
or other legally mandated requirements
for a sexually oriented business.
2. If the Director of Planning and Zoning or his/
her designee denies the application, he/
she shall notify the applicant of the denial
and state the reason(s) for the denial. The
applicant shall be given an opportunity to
correct identified deficiencies.
3. The Director of Planning and Zoning or
his/her designee shall issue the zoning
certificate or provide notice and reasons of
denial within ten days of the submission of
the application.
H. Nonconforming Use: Any sexually oriented
business lawfully operating on the effective
date of this Section that is in violation of this
Section shall be deemed a nonconforming use.
Such nonconforming use shall not be increased,
enlarged, extended or altered, except that the
use may be changed to a conforming use. If two
or more sexually oriented businesses are within
one thousand feet of one another and otherwise
in a permissible location, the sexually oriented
business which was first established and
continually operating at the particular location
is the conforming use and the later established
business(es) is or are nonconforming.
I. Appeal of Denial or Revocation: After denial
of an application or revocation of a zoning
certificate, the applicant or permittee may seek
review of such administrative action by the Board
of Zoning Appeals pursuant to Article 2.12, of
this Resolution.
J. Advertising and Lighting
1. No sign, advertisement, promotional material
or display of any type shall be shown or
exhibited so as to be visible to the public
from pedestrian sidewalks or walkways,
public or semi-public areas, nor the public
right-of-way of any street or roadway except
as permitted under Article 4.4,J,4.
2. No displays or exhibits of materials and/
or performances at such sexually oriented
business shall be allowed in any advertising
which is visible outside the premises. This
prohibition shall not extend to advertising
of the existence or location of such sexually
oriented business.
3. The operator of a sexually oriented business
shall not allow any portion of the interior
premises to be visible from outside the
premises.
Sexually Oriented Businesses | 4.5
Article 4: Overlay and Special Districts
84 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
4. Pursuant to Article 5.5, each conforming
sexually oriented business shall be permitted
both wall and freestanding signs which
announce the name of the business. No offpremise
or portable signs shall be permitted.
5. All off- street parking areas and premise
entries of the sexually oriented business
shall meet the requirements for parking
under Article 5.3 of this Resolution and
shall be illuminated from dusk to closing
hours of operation with a lighting system
which provides an average maintained
horizontal illumination of one foot candle
of light on the parking surface and/or
walkways. This required lighting level is
established in order to provide sufficient
illumination of the parking areas and
walkways serving the sexually oriented
business for the personal safety of patrons
and employees and to reduce the incidence
of vandalism and criminal conduct. The
lighting shall be shown on the required
sketch or diagram of the premises.
6. Nothing contained in this Section shall
relieve the operator(s) of a sexually oriented
business from complying with other
requirements of this Resolution as it may be
amended from time to time, or those of any
subsequently enacted resolutions.
4.5 | Sexually Oriented Businesses
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 85
PAGE LEFT INTENTIONALLY BLANK
Article 4: Overlay and Special Districts
86 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
ARTICLE 5
Development Standards
5.1 General Development Plan Provisions.......... 87
5.2 Additional Use, Height
and Area Regulations and Exceptions.......... 89
5.3 Parking and Loading Regulations................... 99
5.4 Conditional Uses in Single
and Multi Family Res. Dist.............................. 120
5.5 Signage............................................................... 128
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 87
5.1 General Development Plan Provisions
A. In any Planned District, for purposes of flexibility,
the plan for the use and development of the tract
may be illustrated by a plat showing the areas
within which buildings, structures, and parking
spaces may be located and the use and maximum
size and height of buildings, rather than the exact
location, shape, size, height and arrangement
thereof, and the Amendment or Supplement of
this Resolution may be adopted on the basis
of such initial plan; provided, however, that
said plan is otherwise in compliance with the
development plan, as defined in Article 6, with
respect to location of vehicular and pedestrian
access, landscaping, and other specifications,
conditions and limitations; and provided,
further, that no building permit shall be issued
for actual construction until and unless a Final
Development Plan, as defined in Article 6
shall have been reviewed and approved by
the ATZC with a determination that the plan is
consistent with the intent of this Resolution and
that property adjacent to the area will not be
adversely affected.
B. If the Final Development Plan is found to comply
with the foregoing conditions and with the
specifications in the definition of “development
plan” as defined in Article 6 and of the
appropriate Planned District Regulations, the
plan shall be approved and incorporated in
the Amendment or Supplement to the Zoning
Resolution as an integral part of the zoning
regulations applicable to the real estate. Every
such final development plan shall comply with
the following procedures and provisions.
1. The owner of the real estate shall execute a
Deed of Acceptance of the final development
plan and the Amendment or Supplement,
and shall attach same to the Amendment or
Supplement following approval of the final
development plan by the ATZC.
2. Following adoption of the Amendment or
Supplement and approval of the Amendment
or Supplement and approval of the final
development plan, the Clerk of the Board
of Township Trustees shall cause such
Amendment or Supplement to be recorded in
the land records applicable to the real estate
in the office of the Recorder of Hamilton
County.
3. The ATZC may approve variations from the
preliminary development plan not in violation
of any of the standards and requirements
prescribed in this Section, provided that the
variations remain completely in harmony
with the general purpose and intent of the
preliminary development plan and of this
Resolution.
4. Any application for a substantial variation
from the preliminary development plan shall
be treated as an Amendment or Supplement
to this Resolution and shall be governed by
the provisions of law and this Resolution
applicable thereto.
ARTICLE 5
Development Standards
General Development Plan Provisions |5.1
Article 5: Development Standards
88 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
C. Major and Minor Modifications of a Final
Development Plan: The following provisions
establish the various methods by which an
applicant can modify the features of a Final
Development Plan. These provisions shall apply
to all Final Development Plans approved for
developments in Community Unit Plan (CUP), EE,
OO, DD or GG Districts. For any modifications
that are of a technical or engineering nature
as determined by the Director of Planning
and Zoning or his/her designee, the applicant
must submit a report from the appropriate
public agency assuring compliance with
agency regulations, in addition to meeting the
requirements as listed below.
1. Minor Modification: The Director of
Planning & Zoning or his/her designee has
the authority to consider and approve Minor
Modifications to a Final Development Plan
provided such modifications are limited to
altering the location of structures, circulation
elements, enlargement or relocation of open
space or grading where such alterations
will comply with the intent of all regulations
as established by the Anderson Township
Zoning Resolution and by the approving
Resolution for the development as adopted
by the Board of Township Trustees. In no
case shall a Minor Modification consist of an
increase in impervious surface area, square
footage of buildings, the grading or location
of structures over an existing sanitary
sewer, or lighting above what is allowed by
the Anderson Township Zoning Resolution
or by Resolution of the Board of Anderson
Township Trustees. Nor shall a Minor
Modification consist of the reduction of open
space, landscaping or buffer, or a change of
use(s), or increase in signage as originally
approved in the Preliminary Development
Plan.
2. Major Modification: Any modification to
the approved Final Development Plan that
fails to meet the requirements set forth
in Article 5.1,C,1, but does not infringe
upon a specific requirement or standard as
set forth in the development’s approving
Resolution as adopted by the Board of
Township Trustees shall be considered a
Major Modification to the Final Development
Plan. The Anderson Township Zoning
Commission, following notice to all property
owners whose properties are located within
two hundred (200) feet of the legal property
boundaries of the subject development, shall
hold a meeting within 14 days of said public
notice to consider the Major Modification
application. For approval, there shall be
findings that any proposed changes to the
Plan will be in substantial conformance
with the intent of the approving Resolution
including related conditions as adopted
by the Board of Township Trustees. The
applicant will be notified of the Zoning
Commission’s decision within one week from
the date of such decision. If the proposed
modification has been approved, a new
Zoning Certificate shall be issued.
3. Substantial Modification: If the Director of
Planning & Zoning or his/her designee or
the Anderson Township Zoning Commission
determines that the proposed modification
to the Final Development Plan does not
meet the above requirements, or that the
proposal would be in direct conflict with
the specific provisions of the approving
Resolution as adopted by the Board of
Township Trustees, then the proposal will be
considered pursuant to the provisions as set
forth in §519.12 and related sections of the
Ohio Revised Code and Article 2.5 of the
Anderson Township Zoning Resolution. Any
application for a final development plan that
occurs more than one year after the effective
date of the approving resolution for the
site shall be subject to a public hearing
and governed by the provisions of law
and this Resolution applicable thereto.
5.1 | General Development Plan Provisions
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 89
5.2 Additional Use, Height
and Area Regulations and Exceptions
A. The district regulations hereinafter set forth
in this Section qualify or supplement, as the
case may be, the district regulations appearing
elsewhere in this Resolution.
1. Public or public service buildings, hospitals
(except as otherwise provided), institutions,
or schools, when permitted in a District, may
be erected to a height not exceeding sixty
(60) feet, and churches and temples may be
erected to a height not exceeding seventyfive
(75) feet if the building is set back from
each required yard line at least one (1) foot
for each foot of additional building height
above the height limit otherwise provided in
the District in which the building is built.
2. Single-family dwellings in the “AA”, “A-30”,
“A”, “A-2”, “B”, “B-2” and “C” Residence
Districts may be increased in height by
not more than ten (10) feet when the side
and rear yards are increased over the yard
requirements of the District in which they
are located by not less than ten (10) feet,
but they shall not exceed three (3) stories
in height. In the “A-2” and “B” Residence
Districts an enclosed garage when attached
to the main building may extend into the
required side yard but shall not be closer
than five (5) feet to the side lot line, provided
further that there shall be no living quarters
above or behind said garage.
3. Church spires, domes, flagpoles, aerials,
antennas, windmills, chimneys, cooling
towers, elevator bulkheads, fire towers,
belfries, monuments, stacks, derricks,
conveyers, stage towers or scenery lofts,
tanks, water towers, silos, farm buildings, or
necessary mechanical appurtenances, may
be erected anywhere on the property to the
maximum height permitted for structures in
the zoning district in which they are located,
provided they are setback one (1) foot for
each two (2) feet in height from the closest
property line.
4. Any lot of record on the effective date of
this Resolution may be used for any singlefamily
dwelling irrespective of the width or
area of said lot; the width of the side yard
of any such lot need not exceed ten (10%)
percent of the width of the lot; the depth of
the rear yard of any such lot need not exceed
twenty (20%) percent of the depth of the lot,
provided, however, that in no instance shall
the minimum dimensions of the side and rear
yards be less than three (3) feet and ten (10)
feet respectively.
5. Buildings on through lots and extending
through from street to street may waive the
requirement for a rear yard by furnishing
an equivalent open space in lieu of such
required rear yard.
6. In computing the depth of a rear yard or the
width of a side yard where the rear or side
yard opens on an alley, one half of the alley
width may be included as a portion of the
rear or side yard as the case may be.
7. Accessory buildings or uses which are not a
part of the main building shall be located in
the rear yard and not less than three (3) feet
from the rear and side lot lines. An accessory
building or use which is not part of the main
building shall not occupy more than thirty
(30) percent of the required rear yard and
shall be located not less than sixty (60) feet
from any front lot line, except on corner or
double frontage lot where the accessory
building or use need only be outside the front
or side yard setback area.
a. The width of the required rear yard is to
be calculated by using the minimum lot
width at the narrowest portion of the
building line. Accessory buildings shall be
no greater than fifteen (15) feet in height,
1 ½ stories, except when the setbacks
Additional Use, Height and | 5.2
Area Regulations and Exceptions
Article 5: Development Standards
90 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
for a primary structure in the respective
zoning district are met, at which point the
maximum height shall not exceed that
otherwise permitted in the zoning district
in which they are located. Swimming
pools, less than one hundred and fifty
(150) square feet, containing less than
twenty-four (24) inches of water, and
not requiring any mechanical water
circulation, shall not be subject to this
section.
8. Accessory buildings or uses which are to
be used for storage materials necessary for
the construction of the principal structure
may be erected upon a lot prior to the
construction of the main building but only
after a zoning certificate has been issued for
the principal structure. No accessory building
shall be used for dwelling purposes except
by domestic employees employed on the
premises as provided in the “AA” Residence
Districts.
9. Every part of a required yard shall be open
to the sky unobstructed, except as otherwise
provided in Article 5.2,A,2 and except
for accessory buildings in a rear yard,
and except for the ordinary projections
of skylights, sill, belt courses, cornices
and ornamental features projecting not to
exceed thirty (30) inches in “AA”, “A-30”,
“A”, “A-2”, or “B” Residence Districts and
not to exceed twelve (12) inches in all other
Districts. This requirement shall not prevent
construction of fences not exceeding six (6)
feet in height in the rear yard, or fences more
than seventy-five (75) percent open and not
exceeding four (4) feet in height in front and
side yards, or basketball goals, provided they
are not in the public right of way.
10. Terraces, uncovered porches, platforms and
ornamental features which do not extend
more than three (3) feet above the floor level
of the ground (first) story may project into a
required front or rear yard, but shall not be
closer to any side lot line than the side yard
requirement. In the “E”, “F” and “G” Districts
canopies may be erected over service station
pump islands. No canopy shall be closer than
five (5) feet to a front right-of-way line and
shall not be more than eighteen (18) feet
above the ground nor less than fourteen (14)
feet above the ground. On a corner lot no
canopy shall be closer than (10) feet to an
intersection of the front right-of-way line.
11. Open or lattice-enclosed fire escapes,
fireproof outside stairways, and balconies
opening upon fire towers projecting into
a yard not more than five (5) feet and
the ordinary projections of chimneys and
flues may be permitted by the Anderson
Township Zoning Inspector or upon the
recommendation of the Hamilton Township
Building Inspector to the Anderson Township
Building Inspector when placed so as not to
obstruct light and ventilation but not closer
than two (2) feet to any lot line in any case.
12. For the purpose of the yard requirements,
a two-family or multiple dwelling shall be
considered as one building occupying a
single lot.
13. An open unenclosed or screened porch, or
paved terrace may project into a front yard
for a distance not exceeding ten (10) feet.
14. Where forty (40) percent or more of the
frontage is occupied by buildings, the
minimum front yard on any lot shall not be
less than the average depths of the front
yards of the two buildings on each side and
within one hundred (100) feet of such lot, or
5.2 | Additional Use, Height and
Area Regulations and Exceptions
Illustration 5.1: Lot Corner Diagram
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 91
where there is a building within one hundred
(100) feet of the lot on one side only, the
minimum front yard shall be the same as that
of such adjacent building, provided, however,
that no yard shall be required to exceed
seventy-five (75) feet in the “AA” , “A-30”,
or “A” Residence Districts or to exceed fifty
(50) feet in any other district requiring a front
yard.
15. Where a lot is used for institutional,
commercial or industrial purposes, or, where
a site plan is specifically approved therefore
by ATZC or multiple dwelling purposes,
more than one main building may be located
on the lot, but only when such buildings
conform to all open space requirements
around the lot for the district in which the lot
is located.
16. No lot on which there is located a
nonconforming use shall be reduced in area
or width so as not to conform with the lot
area per family and lot width requirements
for the district in which such lot is located,
nor shall any existing yard be reduced so as
not to conform with the yard requirements
thereof.
B. Yard and Lot Standards
1. Lot Area and Frontage Requirements: All
portions of lots, including (but without
implied limitation) panhandle lots, shall have
a minimum of twenty (20) feet of width at
every point and at the street line except as
allowed otherwise by an approved Planned
District or Community Unit Plan. Limited
access highways shall not be considered
streets to calculate street frontage. Publicly
owned properties shall be exempt from
lot frontage requirements. In addition, lots
must meet the minimum requirements for
lot width and area specified in each zoning
district.
a. Panhandle Lots. Panhandle lots shall have
a minimum area that is not less than twohundred
(200) percent of the minimum area
required in the respective zoning district.
The panhandle portion of the lot shall not
be included in determining the required
minimum area of a panhandle lot. The
panhandle portion of the lot shall not be
used for storage nor shall any structures be
permitted in such portion of the lot.
b. Irregular shapes of land, panhandles,
andother narrow appendages to lots with
less than forty (40) feet of width at any point
shall not be included in determining the
required minimum lot area.
c. The front line of a lot shall be that line which
is closest to and most nearly parallel with
the public street providing access to the
lot, unless a different line is established by
a plan submitted to and approved by the
Zoning Inspector. Limited access highways
shall not be considered public streets to
calculate front yard areas. The approval shall
be based upon a compatible alignment and
spacing between the buildings.
Additional Use, Height and | 5.2
Area Regulations and Exceptions
Illustration 5.2: Lot Panhandle Diagram
Lot Width
Measured Here
Front Yard
Rear Yard
Side Yard
Side Yard
Street
Panhandle
* Min Width 20’
* Panhandle Lots shall be 200%
of the required lot area.
Article 5: Development Standards
92 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
d. Private drives that provide access to
three or more lots shall be considered
streets for purposes of establishing
setbacks and yard requirements. The lots,
including panhandle lots, adjacent to a
private drive at its intersection with a
public street shall not be included in the
calculation for purposes of determining
the number of lots served by the private
drive. A front yard setback to a private
street shall be no less than a minimum
front yard setback as required in the
zoning district measured from the
building to the edge of the pavement
and shall be no less than the minimum
side yard setback from the building to
the property line. In either case, the
area between the building and such
private drive shall be considered the
front yard. Creation of a private drive or a
public street shall not cause an existing
dwelling to be non-conforming because
of setbacks.
e. Building setback lines indicating the
front, rear and side yards shall be
approved by the Zoning Inspector and
indicated on all proposed lots that
are panhandle, pie shaped, or other
irregularly shaped lots where the front
of the lot is not apparent within the
definition of the Zoning Resolution. These
setbacks shall be a part of and recorded
with a plat designating the division of the
land.
f. In the event of any conflict of this
Subsection B with any other provisions
of the Resolution, this Subsection B shall
prevail.
C. Satellite Dish Antennas: A satellite dish
antenna, as defined in Article 6, is restricted
to the sole purpose of receiving and amplifying
microwave signals for television reception and
shall be permitted in all Districts subject to the
following conditions and restrictions:
1. Applicability: The following categories of
satellite dish antennas shall be exempt from
all zoning requirements and shall not require
a zoning certificate:
a. An earth station (ground mounted)
antenna that is two meters (78.74
inches) or less in diameter and located or
proposed to be located in a commercial
or industrial zoning district.
b. An earth station (ground-mounted)
antenna that is one meter (39.37 inches)
or less in diameter and located in any
zoning district.
2. Site Plan: A plan for a wall or roof mounted
satellite dish or a ground mounted satellite
dish antenna that is not exempted under
Article 5.2,C,1 shall be submitted to the
Zoning Inspector indicating the proposed
height, diameter, location, and setbacks.
Foundation details, landscaping, and
screening shall also be required in the case
of a ground mounted satellite dish antenna.
3. Standards for Wall or Roof Mounted
Satellite Antenna: Approval of a wall or roof
mounted satellite antenna, over 36 inches in
diameter and attached to the main building,
shall be subject to the following standards:
a. Location: In all zoning districts, wall or
roof mounted satellite dish antennas
shall be prohibited on the front elevation
of the building.
b. Setbacks. In all zoning districts, wall
or roof mounted satellite dish antennas
shall not be permitted to project into any
required side or rear yard area.
4. Approval of a ground mounted satellite dish
antenna shall be subject to the following
standards:
a. Location:
i. In the AA, A-30, A, A-2, B, B-2, C, D,
D-D, H, MHP, or “CUP” Residence
Districts satellite dish antennas shall
be located in the rear of the property
5.2 | Additional Use, Height and
Area Regulations and Exceptions
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 93
beyond the rear building line.
ii. In all other zoning districts, ground
mounted satellite dish antennas shall
also be permitted in the interior side
yard.
b. Setbacks. Ground mounted satellite dish
antennas shall provide the following
minimum setbacks:
i. Rear Yard and Side Yard. In all Zoning
Districts, the setback shall be, fifteen
feet (15’).
ii. Front Yard. In no case shall a ground
mounted satellite dish antenna be
located closer to the front or side
street of a lot or building site than is
permitted for the main or principal
building unless otherwise authorized.
iii. Setback from Power Lines. Satellite
dish antennas, or any appurtenances
thereto, shall be located at least eight
feet (8’) from any power line over two
hundred-fifty (250) volts.
c. Landscaping. Ground-mounted antennas
shall be screened from ground view from
the street and adjacent property owners
by landscaping as shall be approved by
the Zoning Inspector. In order to reduce
the height of the required plant material,
berms may be employed in conjunction
with the landscaping plan.
d. Diameter. The diameter of such antennas
shall not exceed the following:
i. In the AA, A-30, A, A-2, B, B-2, C, D,
D-D, H, MHP, or “CUP” Residence
Districts, ten feet (10’).
ii. In all other districts, twelve feet (12’).
e. Height. Ground-mounted antennas shall
be limited to a maximum height of twelve
feet (12’) above grade in the AA, A-30, A,
A-2, B, B-2, C, D, D-D, H, MHP, or “CUP”
Residence Districts, and a maximum
height of fifteen feet (15’) above grade in
all other districts.
f. Ground Coverage. The ground coverage
of satellite dish antennas shall be
counted in computing the ground
coverage for auxiliary and accessory use
structures located upon the building site.
g. Number Permitted. Only one satellite
dish antenna shall be allowed for each
principal building.
h. Installation. The installation or
modification of a satellite dish
antenna shall be in accordance with
all applicable construction and safety
codes and procedures and shall meet
the requirements of the Hamilton County
Building Code.
i. Maintenance. Satellite dish antennas,
appurtenances, landscaping, and
screening shall be kept and maintained in
good condition.
D. The outdoor storage of household furnishings is
prohibited, unless such items are stored in a fully
enclosed, accessory structure.
E. Subdivision entry structures including walls,
fences, gatehouses, and ornaments may be
allowed on each corner of an entrance street to a
subdivision subject to the following limitations:
1. The structures shall not be within an existing
or planned right-of-way.
2. The structures shall not block vehicular
or pedestrian sight distance or otherwise
create a safety problem in connection with
an existing or planned right-of-way.
3. The structures shall not exceed six (6) feet
in height for a perimeter of ten (10) feet,
shall not exceed five (5) feet in height for
a perimeter of twenty (20) feet, and shall
not exceed four (4) feet in the balance of
the front yard area of the frontage lots.
The above listed height limitations may
be increased by not more than twenty (20)
Additional Use, Height and | 5.2
Area Regulations and Exceptions
Article 5: Development Standards
94 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
percent when the structures front to a county
or state right-of-way.
a. In subdivisions with more than ten
(10) lots, the above listed height and
perimeter limitations may be increased
by an additional twenty (20) percent.
4. The perimeter of entry structures with a
depth dimension from front to back that
exceeds two (2) feet shall be measured along
the front, rear and sides of the respective
portion of the structure.
5. Entry structures may be lighted between
6:00 A.M. and 11:00 P.M., provided the
source of the lighting is not visible from off
the premises.
F. Pavement in Front Yards of Residential
Uses: The impervious surface ratio (ISR), of the
required front yard shall not exceed fifty (50)
percent. ISR calculations shall include porches,
sidewalks, driveways, and/or other permanent
impervious surfaces, which project into the
required front yard (excluding the public right-ofway).
G. Telecommunications Tower: This Subsection
G is intended to exercise to the fullest extent
permitted by law the power of the Board of
Trustees of Anderson Township to regulate
telecommunications towers and related facilities,
and accordingly this Subsection G shall also
govern the removal of buildings or structures
that are used in the provision of such service.
Except in accordance with Ohio Revised Code
Section 519.211 which is hereby incorporated by
reference, and the provisions of this Subsection
G of the Anderson Township Zoning Resolution,
no person shall, in an area zoned for residential
use, locate, erect, construct, reconstruct, change,
alter, or enlarge any telecommunications tower.
Whenever any person desires to locate, erect,
construct, reconstruct, change, alter, or enlarge
a telecommunications tower in an area of
the Township zoned for residential use, such
person shall provide evidence satisfactory to the
Township Board of Trustees of strict compliance
with Ohio Revised Code Section 519.211(B).
If the Board of Trustees receives notice from a
property owner under division (B) (3) (a) (111)
of Ohio Revised Code Section 519.211 within
the time specified in that division, or if a Board
member makes an objection to the proposed
location of the telecommunications tower within
fifteen (15) days after the date of mailing of
the notice sent under division (B) (3) (b) of Ohio
Revised Code Section 519.211, the Board shall
request that the clerk of the Township send
the person proposing to construct the tower
written notice that the telecommunications
tower is subject to the power conferred by and in
accordance within division (B) (2) of Ohio revised
Code 519.211. The notice shall be sent no later
than five (5) days after the earlier of the date the
board first receives such a notice from a property
owner or the date upon which a board member
makes an objection. Upon the date of mailing the
notice to the person, Sections 519.02 to 519.25
of the Ohio Revised Code shall apply to the
telecommunications tower.
Whenever a notice has been received or an
objection has been lodged in the foregoing
manner regarding a telecommunications
tower, the Township Board of Zoning Appeals
shall, upon application, have the power
to issue at its discretion a Special Zoning
Certificate after public hearing, allowing the
construction, location, erection, reconstruction,
change, alteration or enlargement of such
telecommunications tower if it finds that the
applicant has satisfied all of the applicable
standards herein and that the application should
be permitted.
1. Definitions: See Article 6: Definitions.
2. Goals, Guidelines, and Objectives: The
goals, guidelines and objectives are set
forth to assist industry and governmental
officials as they consider the location
of new telecommunications tower and
the addition to, or reconstruction of,
5.2 | Additional Use, Height and
Area Regulations and Exceptions
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 95
existing telecommunications towers in
Anderson Township. When Anderson
Township Zoning authorities decide any
matter concerning telecommunications
towers, such authorities shall consider
and determine whether there has been
direct compliance with the performance
standards of Article 5.2,G,3 and whether
the totality of the circumstances surrounding
the telecommunications tower in question
furthers the goals, guidelines and objectives
expressed in the numbered paragraphs set
forth below.
a. Existing telecommunications tower sites
should be used to the fullest, even if this
necessitates the reconstruction or the
expansion of existing telecommunications
towers;
b. Telecommunications tower and
other related facilities should not
be constructed in areas zoned for
residential use in any fashion (height,
location, etc.) that would require
the telecommunications tower to
be equipped with lights except in
circumstances that warrant such
construction by clear and convincing
evidence.
c. Consistent with technological constraints,
telecommunications tower and related
facilities should be constructed using
designs and materials that minimize
visual impact.
d. Telecommunications and related facilities
which have a comparatively greater
visual impact (for example, taller, lighting
required, larger ground space used,
etc.) should be permitted only when
the greater visual impact of a particular
telecommunications tower eliminates
the need to construct additional
telecommunications towers, thus
resulting in a reduced total visual impact.
e. Creative approaches are encouraged
in locating telecommunications towers
that will blend in with their surroundings
while minimizing the adverse visual
effects of telecommunications towers.
Such creative approaches may include
camouflage of telecommunications
towers, if the camouflage is not
itself more offensive than the
telecommunications tower.
f. Township officials and citizens are
encouraged not only to consider each
telecommunications tower in its own
right (i.e., is that telecommunications
tower needed? Is the telecommunications
tower appropriately sized? Will colocation
be facilitated? etc.), but also
to consider the overall inclination and
efforts of the proponents of any new or
reconstructed telecommunications tower
to implement and further the guidelines
set forth herein.
g. Township officials and citizens are
encouraged to be involved in the efforts
of industry to locate telecommunications
towers in Anderson Township and
elsewhere by expressing to school
boards, public utility companies,
community groups and other
governmental bodies the nature of their
experience (e.g., satisfactory? difficult?
cooperative?) with various companies
that seek to locate telecommunications
towers in Anderson Township or that
already have telecommunications towers
in Anderson Township.
h. The Township supports the development
of telecommunications tower on
public land such as parks, schools,
and Township facilities. In the event of
such use, the rent paid by the wireless
communication service provider should
be used to enhance the services provided
to the public by the entity that provided
Additional Use, Height and | 5.2
Area Regulations and Exceptions
Article 5: Development Standards
96 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
the location for the telecommunications
tower.
i. Co-location with government
telecommunications towers is
encouraged.
3. Performance Standards:
a. The location of all telecommunications
towers in Anderson Township (including
those permitted as a matter of right) shall
be subject to the granting of a Zoning
Certificate. A Special Zoning Certificate
to erect the telecommunications tower
shall be granted or denied in accordance
with the following regulations. Except
as set forth below, where the location
of certain types of telecommunications
towers in certain locations is
permitted as of right, the location of
telecommunications towers that meet the
following regulations shall be considered
a Conditional Use and shall require a
Conditional Use Permit.
b. With the application for a Special Zoning
Certificate, a development plan meeting
the standard requirements for appeals
to the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be
submitted. In addition, the applicant must
provide the following:
i. The location of all of the applicant’s
existing telecommunications towers
within the Township.
ii. The general location of the applicant’s
planned future telecommunications
towers in the Township and
contiguous political subdivisions.
iii. For each location shown on the plan,
there must be a schedule showing:
- The type and size of
telecommunications tower at each
location.
- The type of equipment located or
proposed on each tower.
- The space available on the
telecommunications tower for
additional equipment.
- The ground network, if any, served
by the telecommunications tower.
- A site plan showing the
parcel on which any existing
telecommunications tower is
located.
c. A Zoning Certificate for a new
telecommunications tower in an area
of the Township zoned for residential
use shall be granted only if the
telecommunications tower and the
erection of the telecommunications tower
comply with the applicable objectives
of Article 5.2,G,2 and the required
Performance Standards herein.
d. An applicant for a telecommunications
tower in an area zoned for residential use
shall demonstrate by clear and convincing
evidence that its tower antennas cannot
be located on any other communication
towers or facility in the vicinity, and
that all reasonable means have been
undertaken to avoid any undue negative
impact caused by the “clustering” of
telecommunications towers within
an area. Whenever feasible, the use
of an existing telecommunications
tower, owned either by the applicant
or another entity, shall be utilized. In
the event of the construction of new
telecommunications tower by the
applicant, the applicant shall agree to the
shared use of such telecommunications
towers, when technically feasible, by
other telecommunication companies in
accordance with Article 5.2,G.3.m, upon
payment of reasonable fees to the owner
when such shared use does not violate
5.2 | Additional Use, Height and
Area Regulations and Exceptions
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 97
any state or federal law.
e. An application shall be disapproved
unless the applicant demonstrates that
technically suitable and feasible sites
are not available in a nonresidential
district and that the site is located in the
least restrictive district that includes a
technically suitable and feasible site.
f. Every such applicant, owner or operator
of a telecommunications tower shall
annually file with Anderson Township
Zoning Inspector, on or before January 1
of each year, a declaration that each and
every telecommunications tower which
it then maintains in Anderson Township
is used by that applicant for wireless
communication purposes.
g. Within thirty (30) days after an existing
telecommunications tower ceases to be
used by the original applicant thereof as
a wireless telecommunications tower, the
applicant for that telecommunications
tower shall give written notice to the
Anderson Township Zoning Inspector of
the fact that the telecommunications
tower is no longer used by the applicant
as a telecommunications tower.
h. Telecommunications towers shall be
removed within twelve (12) months of
ceasing operation, unless Board of Zoning
Appeals authorizes non-removal of the
telecommunications tower and related
facilities.
i. Any telecommunications tower mounted
on an existing structure (except for
existing communications towers) shall
be of a color which matches, or is
compatible with, the structure on which it
is located.
j. Except as provided in paragraph 11,
below, a new telecommunications
tower site located in an area zoned for
residential use shall not be located any
closer to any adjoining property also in
an area zoned for residential use than
as follows: (a) telecommunications
towers less than 75 feet in height shall
be located no closer than 250 feet; (b)
telecommunications towers between
75 feet high and less than 150 feet in
height shall be located no closer than
500 feet; and (c) telecommunications
towers 150 feet in height or higher
shall be located no closer than 750
feet. (d) Notwithstanding anything
herein contained to the contrary, a
telecommunications tower shall be
constructed no closer than 110 percent
of its height to a property zoned for
residential use.
k. New telecommunications towers to
be located on public land owned by
the Forest Hills Local School District,
the Anderson Township Park District,
the Hamilton County Park Board, the
Board of Township Trustees or any other
political subdivision in an area zoned for
residential use are encouraged, but shall
be constructed no closer than 110 percent
of the tower’s height to a property zoned
for residential use, or residential property
line. In no case shall a tower be closer
than 50 feed from the adjoining property
line.
l. Micro antennas are permitted in all
Districts. A micro antenna may be
located as a matter of right on existing
buildings, poles or other existing support
structures or on newly erected structures
provided that the new structure has a
significant purpose other than support
of the micro antenna. Supporting
equipment for a micro antenna shall be:
(a) hidden inside the support structure to
which the micro antenna is attached; (b)
hidden underground; or (c) enclosed in
a structure that is otherwise permitted
Additional Use, Height and | 5.2
Area Regulations and Exceptions
Article 5: Development Standards
98 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
in the zone where the micro antenna is
erected and designed to blend in with the
neighborhood where the micro antenna is
erected.
m. New telecommunications towers built
in an area zoned for residential use shall
be designed, engineered and constructed
as follows: (a) telecommunications
towers less than 75 feet in height shall
be designed, engineered and constructed
to support antennas installed by one or
more wireless communication service
providers; (b) telecommunications
towers between 75 feet in height and
less than 150 feet in height shall be
designed, engineered and constructed
to support antennas installed by two or
more wireless communication service
providers; and (c) telecommunications
towers 150 feet in height or higher shall
be designed, engineered and constructed
to support antennas installed by three
or more wireless communication service
providers.
n. All sections of this amendment shall be
interpreted so as to conform with the
provisions of Ohio Revised Code Section
519.211(A) and in a manner consistent
with the provisions of other sections
of the Ohio Revised Code. In the event
of any inconsistency between this
amendment and other provisions of the
Anderson Township Zoning Resolution,
the provisions of this amendment shall
prevail.
o. All buildings and structures shall be
architecturally compatible with the
architecture of the adjacent buildings and
structures and shall be designed, painted,
located and landscaped so as to minimize
visual impact. All telecommunications
tower and landscaping shall be
continually maintained.
p. Screen fencing shall be utilized for
aesthetics and public safety. Razor wire
fencing shall be prohibited. Barbed wire
fencing may be used to enclose the
telecommunications tower and shall, if
used, have barbed wire strands not less
than 7 feet and not more than 10 feet
above grade and be a minimum of thirty
(30) feet from each property line.
q. Landscaping to be approved by the Board
of Zoning Appeals shall be incorporated
into the site plan in order to buffer the
installation from adjacent land uses.
r. Monopole installations are to be used
where feasible.
s. The applicant shall demonstrate that
the proposed telecommunications
tower, including its height, is
the least aesthetically intrusive
telecommunications tower for the
neighborhood and function.
t. The applicant shall comply with such
other requirements as are included by
Sections 519.01 519.25 of the Ohio
Revised Code.
u. Proof shall be provided by the applicant
in a form satisfactory to the Board of
Zoning Appeals that the proposal has
been approved by all agencies and
governmental entities with jurisdiction,
including but not limited to the Ohio
Department of Transportation, the Federal
Aviation Administration, the Federal
Communications Commission, or the
successors to their respective functions.
v. Any special zoning certificate issued
under this section shall be revocable
and may be revoked if any continuing
condition of the certificate has been
violated.
w. No antenna shall be permitted on
property designated as an individual
landmark or as a part of a Historic
District, unless such antenna has been
approved in accordance with this Zoning
5.2 | Additional Use, Height and
Area Regulations and Exceptions
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 99
Resolution.
x. No antenna owner, lessee, officer or
employee thereof shall fail to cooperate
in good faith to accommodate other
competitors in their attempts to use
the same tower or building for other
antennas. If a dispute arises about the
feasibility to accommodate another
competitor, the Zoning Inspector may
require a third party technical study, at
the expense of either or both parties, to
resolve the dispute.
4. Expert Review: If expert review of technical
data submitted by an applicant for a
telecommunications tower in an area zoned
for residential use is in the opinion of the
Zoning Inspector required for purposes of
evaluation, the applicant shall reimburse
Anderson Township for the actual cost for
such review not exceeding $2500. One
or more experts may be selected by the
Zoning Inspector for such review, which may
include, but is not limited to legal services
and engineering services.
5. Severability: Should any section, paragraph,
sentence, clause, phrase, or word of
this Subsection G be declared invalid or
unconstitutional by a court or agency of
competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or
unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the
remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences,
clauses, phrases or words of this Subsection
G, all of which will remain in full force and
effect.
5.3 Parking, Loading, and Access
A. Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to
prevent or alleviate the congestion of public
streets, to minimize any detrimental effects of
vehicular use areas on adjacent properties, to
enhance vehicular use areas with landscape
elements, and to promote the health, safety, and
morals of the public.
B. Applicability: A parking and loading plan shall
be submitted with the application for a zoning
certificate for all uses. Parking and loading
spaces for vehicles shall be provided in all
districts and in connection with all uses at the
time any use or building is enlarged, extended,
increased, erected, used, or occupied in
accordance with this Section except as set forth
below or within the regulations of this Section:
1. Applications for a zoning certificate where
there is a change of use and no proposed
increase in the existing or required number
of parking spaces, or no modification to the
parking lot layout, shall not require a parking
review, but must meet the requirements set
forth in Article 5.3,D,1,f and Article 5.3,E.
Applications under these same conditions
are required to demonstrate compliance
with Article 5.3,K if the subject property
is a non-residential use and is adjacent to
a residential district, in which case, the
application for a zoning certificate shall
demonstrate that lighting levels along the
property line(s) adjacent to the residential
district are in compliance with Article 5.3,K.
2. Applications for a zoning certificate where
there is a proposed increase in the existing
or required number of parking spaces, or a
modification to the parking lot layout, shall
be required to meet all requirements of
this Section with the exception of Article
5.3,J and Article 5.3,L where the applicant
shall demonstrate that, at a minimum, any
new parking areas are in full compliance
with these Subsections. Applications under
these same conditions are not required
to demonstrate compliance with Article
5.3,K unless the subject property is a
non-residential use and is adjacent to a
residential district, in which case, the
application for a zoning certificate shall
Parking, Loading, and Access | 5.3
Article 5: Development Standards
100 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
demonstrate that lighting levels along the
property line(s) adjacent to the residential
district are in compliance with Article 5.3,K.
3. Applications for a zoning certificate where
a building or use, constructed or established
prior to the effective date of this Section, is
enlarged in floor area or area used by fifty
(50) percent or more shall be required to
meet all requirements of this Section.
C. Parking And Loading Plan Elements
1. A parking and loading plan for any singlefamily
and two-family dwelling shall include
and illustrate the following:
a. Boundaries of the property and all rightof-
ways;
b. Number and location of parking spaces or
parking garages; and
c. The location, layout, and access for any
driveway.
2. A parking and loading plan for all uses
except single-family or two-family dwellings
shall illustrate the following:
a. Boundaries of the property and all rightof-
ways;
b. Number of parking spaces;
c. The arrangement of parking aisles;
d. The location of driveway entrances;
e. Provisions for vehicular and pedestrian
circulation;
f. Access for safety-service vehicles;
g. A lighting plan illustrating the maximum
foot-candle illumination across the site
and at all property lines. The lighting plan
shall specify the height of all light poles
and any other lighting requirements;
h. The location of sidewalks, wheel stops,
lighting, and curbs on or adjacent to the
property;
i. The location of bus shelters, signs,
boundary walls, and fences;
j. The location of landscaping in and
adjacent to parking areas and the types
and location of vegetation to be planted;
k. The location of mass transit connections
and access drives with adjacent
properties; and
l. Other information as required by the
Director of Planning and Zoning.
D. General Design Requirements For Parking
And Loading Areas: All off-street parking
and loading areas shall meet the following
provisions unless otherwise provided for in these
regulations.
1. Location and Setback Requirements
a. Parking spaces shall be located on the
same lot as the principal use they serve.
b. Parking lots shall be located, to the
maximum extent feasible, to the rear and
side of buildings.
c. Parking areas and other paved areas and/
or structures shall be set back from the
edge of buildings to provide for sidewalk
and landscape treatments in front of the
5.3 | Parking, Loading, and Access
Illustration 5.3: 10’ Streetscape Buffer Yard
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 101
building. See Ilustration 5.3.
d. There shall be a ten (10) foot streetscape
buffer beginning at the right-of-way
line of any street. The area within such
buffer shall be landscaped with natural
vegetation, including, but not limited to,
grass, hardy shrubs, or evergreen ground
cover and maintained in good condition.
See Illustration 5.3. A sidewalk, as well
as a decorative masonry wall, maximum
2’ high and subject to the approval of the
Director of Planning and Zoning per the
recommendations of a Township-adopted
Plan, may be installed within this buffer
yard area.
e. No part of a parking area for five (5)
vehicles or more shall be closer than ten
(10) feet from the property line adjacent
to the residence district or property
devoted to residential use. All setback
areas shall be landscaped with grass
and planting areas and shall be well
maintained.
f. All off-street parking areas for five
(5) vehicles or more shall be screened
on any side that adjoins or faces a
property in any Residence District or
property devoted to residential use.
Such screening shall consist of a fence
that presents a solid appearance, to be
constructed of wood, brick, stone, or
other material of similar appearance, of
not less than four (4) and not more than
six (6) feet in height. A tight screen of
hardy evergreen shrubbery of not less
than four (4) feet in height may be used
as an alternative to the solid masonry
wall or solid fence. For uses or properties
subject to Article 5.3,L Landscaping
and Buffering, the more restrictive
landscaping, screening, or buffering shall
apply.
g. No entrance to or exit from a parking area
of five (5) vehicles or more shall be closer
than fifty (50) feet to the right-of-way line
of intersecting public streets or signalized
intersection.
2. Access
a. Adequate access to a public street,
easement, or shared access to an
adjacent property shall be provided for
each parking space with a driveway
width of at least twenty-four (24) feet
wide at the property line for all multifamily
dwellings and non-residential
uses.
b. Sidewalks to a Right-of-Way
i. Where a sidewalk exists in a public
right-of-way adjacent to the site,
or is required to be constructed as
part of the development approval,
a pedestrian connection shall be
constructed from the building to the
sidewalk.
ii. The sidewalk shall be constructed of
asphalt, concrete, or of hard surface
pavers.
iii. The sidewalk may be created as
part of a driveway provided that
it is delineated with a minimum
of a painted line and the portion
utilized for vehicular traffic is not
reduced from the minimum width
requirements.
c. Sidewalks Along a Public Street
i. Any use or building established after
the adoption of this Article shall be
required to provide a four (4) foot
wide sidewalk along all public streets
for the full length of street frontage.
The Director of Planning and Zoning
may, upon agreement with the
applicant, waive a portion or all of
this requirement if funds are allocated
for the construction of an offsite
Parking, Loading, and Access |5.3
Article 5: Development Standards
102 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
sidewalk, beneficial to the community
and consistent with the intent of
the Anderson Trails plan, which
provides for non-vehicular paths or
sidewalks connecting neighborhoods
to attractions such as schools, parks,
retail centers, etc.
ii. Any established use or building that is
expanded more than fifty (50) percent
of the floor area after the adoption
of this Section shall be required to
install a four (4) foot wide sidewalk
along all public streets for the full
length of street frontage.
iii. Any use or building where there is
a change of use or an expansion of
less than fifty (50) percent of the
floor area, except as required above,
may provide a four (4) foot wide
sidewalk along a public street as an
option for reducing the number of
required optimal parking spaces. See
Illustration 5.2.
iv. All sidewalks shall meet the minimum
design requirements of the appropriate
regulatory agency
d. All parking spaces shall be entered and
exited along parking aisles arranged
perpendicular to access drives or aisles
to the maximum extent feasible. Parking
spaces shall not be located along entry
drives within thirty (30) feet of the rightof-
way. See Illustration 5.4.
e. Driveways shall be placed so that loading
and unloading activities will not hinder
vehicular ingress and egress.
f. To the maximum extent feasible, all
uses shall provide paved, concrete, or
paver pedestrian linkages to existing
trail systems, parks, schools, adjacent
developments, and mass transit stations
or stops. Such pedestrian linkages shall
be a minimum of four (4) feet in width.
g. To the maximum extent feasible,
provisions for primary access along
secondary streets shall be provided to
minimize traffic congestion on primary
arterial streets.
h. Curb definitions shall be maintained,
prohibiting continuous access along the
frontage of a site so as to comply with
the Hamilton County Thoroughfare Plan
and/or Beechmont Corridor Plan.
3. Design Standards
a. Dimensions: The minimum size of a
parking space may be altered based on
aisle width and angle of parking. Parking
stalls shall conform to the minimum
standards set forth in Table 5.3 and
Illustration 5.5.
b. Maneuverability Areas: The following
provisions shall be followed to maintain
efficient maneuverability:
i. Turn Around Area: Where more than
three (3) parking spaces are served by
a single driveway, a turnaround area
shall be provided, or other provision
made, to permit cars to exit the
parking lot without backing onto any
5.3 | Parking, Loading, and Access
Illustration 5.4: Entry Drive Required Dimensions
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 103
Angle of
Parking
(degrees)
One-Way Manuvering
Aisle Width
(Feet) “A”
Two-Way Maneuvering
Aisle Width
(Feet) “A”
Parking Stall Width
(Feet)
“B”
Parking Stall
Length (Feet) “C”
0 – Parallel 12 20 9 23
30 °– 53 ° 13 20 9 19
54 °-75 ° 18 22 9 19
76 °-90 ° 22 24 9 19
Table 5.3 :Minimum Parking Standards:
street or sidewalk. See maneuvering
aisle widths in
ii. Back-Up Area: Each parking space
shall be provided with a sufficient
back-up area so as to permit egress
in one maneuver, consisting of one
backward and forward movement.
See maneuvering aisle widths in
Illustration 5.5.
c. Surface
i. All off-street parking areas,
driveways, and aisles in singlefamily
residential districts shall be
graded and surfaced so as to be a
solid surface and dust free. Pavers
that allow for grass to grow through
them may be permitted as part of a
permitted shadow parking area as
described in Article 5.3,I,1.
ii. Parking areas and aisles in all districts
shall be paved with an asphalt or
concrete surface.
d. Wheel Stops: Each wheel stop shall be
a singular block of reinforced concrete,
stone or other durable material with a
minimum height of six (6) inches and a
minimum length of six (6) feet. Wheel
stops are to be securely attached to the
ground and may be used only at the end
Parking, Loading, and Access | 5.3
Illustration 5.5: Minimum Parking Standards:
9’
23’
9’
19’
9’
19’
9’
19’
Article 5: Development Standards
104 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
of parking stalls. Wheel stops may be
attached no less than two (2) feet from
the rear edge of the parking space. See
Illustrations 5.6 and 5.7.
e. Continuous Curbs: Continuous curbs shall
be made of asphalt, concrete, stone or
other similar material and shall have a
minimum height of six (6) inches and a
minimum width of six (6) inches. They
shall form a non-interrupted edge around
all landscaped areas adjacent to parking
and maneuverability areas that are not
protected by wheel stops. See Illustration
5.7
f. Placement: Wheel stops and/or
continuous curbs shall be located a
minimum of four (4) feet from any
structures, buildings, walls, or plant
material, excluding ground cover, to
prevent a vehicle from driving onto the
landscaped area or hitting any structure
or plant material at the edge of a parking
area. See Illustration 5.7
g. Striping: The individual parking spaces
(stalls) shall be striped according to the
approved layout of the parking area.
4. Parking Requirements for Physically
Disabled: Applicants shall provide parking
spaces for the physically disabled as
required by the Ohio Basic Building Code
and
shall include all necessary markings,
striping, and signage.
5. Fire Code: All parking and loading plans shall
conform to all requirements set forth in the
fire code as adopted by Anderson Township
and as approved by the Township’s Fire and
Rescue Staff.
6. Vision Clearance Triangle To insure that
landscaping and other materials do not
constitute a driving hazard, a vision
clearance triangle will be observed at all
street and access drive intersections. Ground
cover and trees with at least eight (8) feet
of limbless trunk shall be permitted within
the vision clearance triangle. The distance
requirements for and definitions of the
vision clearance triangle shall be set forth in
Article 5.5,C,5 of the Anderson Township
Zoning Resolution.
7. Maintenance of Parking Areas
a. Every off-street parking space required by
these regulations shall be provided with
satisfactory access to a street, easement,
shared access road, or alley by means of
a solid and dust free driveway that meets
the requirements of Article 5.3,D,1
and 2, and all parking areas shall be
developed and maintained in accordance
with the provisions of this Section.
8. Dumpsters & Trash Handling Areas for Non-
Single Family Districts
5.3 | Parking, Loading, and Access
Illustration 5.6: Wheel Stops Illustration 5.7: Placement
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 105
a. The following requirements shall apply to
all dumpsters, trash handling areas, and
related service entrances:
b. Setbacks: Dumpsters, trash handling
areas and related screening, shall be
located in compliance with the same
minimum setbacks as a main building as
determined by the zone district in which
the dumpster is located or the trash
handling area is constructed.
c. Location of Screen: Any such accessory
use shall be screened by a fence or wall
from the view from any public street
and any abutting property located in a
residential, office, or commercial district.
d. Height and Construction of Screen: Any
fence or wall required under this Section
shall have a height no greater than eight
feet (8’) and no less than five feet (5’).
Any wall shall be constructed in a durable
fashion of brick, stone, or other masonry
materials with no greater than twentyfive
percent (25%) of the wall surface left
open. Any fence shall be constructed in
a durable fashion of wood posts and/or
planks with minimum diameter or width
of three inches (3”) and with no greater
than twenty-five percent (25%) of the
fence surface left open between posts
and/or planks. The service side of the
dumpster shall be screened with steel
reinforced solid wood gates. Such gates
are to remain closed unless the unit is
being serviced.
9. Bicycle Parking: All non-residential uses shall
contain two bicycle parking spaces, with
locking accommodations and placed within
reasonable access to the main entrance, for
each 50 parking spaces. The space shall be
at least two (2) feet by six (6) feet in size.
E. Required Number Of Parking Spaces:
All off-street parking areas shall meet the following
provisions unless otherwise provided for in these
regulations.
1. Rules for Computing Parking Spaces:
a. The following rules shall apply when
computing parking spaces:
b. On-Street Parking: On-street parking
spaces shall not be counted toward offstreet
parking space requirements.
c. Multiple Uses: Unless otherwise noted or
approved, off-street parking areas serving
more than one use shall provide parking
in an amount equal to the combined total
of the requirements for each use.
d. Fractions: When a measurement of the
number of required spaces results in a
fractional number, any fraction of ½ or
less shall be rounded down to the next
lower whole number and any fraction of
more than ½ shall be rounded up to the
next higher whole number.
e. Area Measurements: In a non-residential
building, unless otherwise specifically
noted, all square footage-based parking
standards shall be computed on the basis
of gross floor area of all floors.
f. Occupancy- or Capacity- Based
Standards:
i. For the purpose of computing parking
requirements based on employees,
students, residents, or occupants,
calculations shall be based on the
largest number of persons working
on a single shift, the maximum
enrollment or the maximum fire-rated
capacity, whichever is applicable, and
whichever results in a greater number
of parking spaces.
ii. In hospitals, bassinets shall not be
counted as beds.
iii. In the case of benches, pews and
similar seating accommodations, each
18 inches thereof shall be counted
as one seat for the purpose of
determining the parking requirements.
Parking, Loading, and Access | 5.3
Article 5: Development Standards
106 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
5.3 | Parking, Loading, and Access
USE OPTIMAL REQUIRED PARKING SPACES
Residential Uses
Assisted living, children’s home, convalescent home 1 space per 2 beds.
Boarding houses, rooming houses, dormitories 1 space per bed.
Convents or monasteries 1 space per 20 people.
Elderly housing 1 space per bed.
Single –family dwellings 2 spaces per dwelling unit.
Two-family dwellings 2 spaces per dwelling unit.
Efficiency, one bedroom apt. 1.5 spaces per dwelling unit.
Two or more bedroom apts. 2 spaces per dwelling unit.
Table 5.7: Required Parking Spaces by Use
g. Unlisted Uses: Upon receiving an
application for a use not specifically
listed in the parking schedule below,
the Director of Planning and Zoning
shall apply the parking standard
specified for the listed use that is
deemed most similar to the proposed
use in regards to use, size and
intensity of use.
i. If the Director of Planning and
Zoning determines that there is no
use similar in use, intensity or size,
they may require the applicant
to prepare a parking study. The
study must include estimates
of parking demand based on
recommendations of the Institute
of Traffic Engineers (ITE), or other
acceptable estimates as approved
by the Director of Planning and
Zoning, and should include other
reliable data collected from uses
or combinations of uses that are
the same as or comparable with
the proposed use. Comparability
will be determined by density,
scale, bulk, area, type of activity,
and location. The study must
document the source of data used
to develop the recommendations.
ii. This parking study is required to
ensure that the number of parking
spaces provided will meet the
purpose of these regulations as
set forth in Article 5.3,A.
2. Number of Required Spaces
a. Table 5.7 illustrates the optimal
number of parking spaces required for
eah use within Anderson Township.
b. The applicant may very from the
optimal number of parking spaces in
accordance with Article 5.3,F.
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 107
Parking, Loading, and Access | 5.3
USE OPTIMAL REQUIRED PARKING SPACES
Commercial Uses
Amphitheaters, auditoriums, stadiums, theaters, and
other places of assembly
1 space per 4 fixed seats or 1 space per 4
persons based on maximum building capacity
established by Township Fire Department,
whichever is greater.
Amusement centers, arcades, aquariums, banquet
halls, exhibition halls
1 space per 2 persons, or 1 per 1,000 square
feet, whichever is greater..
Animal hospital or veterinary clinics 4 spaces per 1,000 square feet.
Automotive service or incidental body repair 3 spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area,
excluding services bays, plus 1 space per service
bay (service bay may not be counted as a parking
space).
Automotive, truck, boat, or other vehicle sales or
rental
10 spaces per 1,000 square feet of indoor floor
area, plus one space per 1,000 square feet of
outdoor sales area.
Automotive fuel sales 4 spaces per 1,000 square feet of floor area,
excluding services bays, plus 1 space per fuel
pump or service bay (service bay may not be
counted as a parking space).
Automotive washes 2 spaces per washing bay (washing bay may not
be counted as a parking space).
Bars and taverns 15 spaces per 1,000 square feet.
Bed and Breakfast Establishment 2 spaces for the owner of operator, plus 1 space
for each bedroom rented to the public.
Boat harbors or boat rental establishments 1 space per 2 boat berths.
Commercial schools for dance, music, or similar uses 1 space per 2 students.
Funeral homes 1 space per 50 square feet
Hotels and motels 1 space per room or suite.
Outdoor displays, sales or storage 1 space per 750 square feet.
Personal services including barber shops and beauty
salons
6 spaces per 1,000 square feet, or 2 spaces per
station/chair, whichever is greater.
Printing and plumbing shops, laundries, dry cleaning
plants, and similar service establishments
1 space per 2 employees
Pool or billiard hall 10 spaces per 1,000 square feet.
Restaurant 10 spaces per 1,000 square feet or 1 space for
each 4 seats, whichever is greater.
Retail commercial uses 4 spaces per 1,000 square feet
Self-storage facility 1 space per two storage units.
Service commercial uses 4 spaces per 1,000 square feet.
Shopping Center 4 spaces per 1,000 square feet.
Telecommunication structures 1 space per structure.
Table 5.7: Required Parking Spaces by Use (continued)
Article 5: Development Standards
108 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
5.3 | Parking, Loading, and Access
USE OPTIMAL REQUIRED PARKING SPACES
Commercial Uses
Wholesale, bulk goods, hardware, furniture, or similar
sales
2.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet.
Office Uses
Banks or financial institutions 3 spaces per 1,000 square feet.
Broadcasting/recording studios 2 spaces per 1,000 square feet plus 1 seat per 3
fixed seats.
Medical and dental clinics or office 5 spaces per 1,000 square feet.
Office uses 3 spaces per 1,000 square feet.
Manufacturing/Industrial Uses
Industrial or manufacturing uses 1.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet.
Laboratories 2.5 spaces per 1,000 square feet.
Warehousing or storage 1 space per 2,000 square feet.
Commercial schools for dance, music, or similar uses 1 space per 2 students.
Institutional/Public/Recreational Uses
Bowling alley 5 spaces per bowling lane.
Churches, temples, and other places of worship 1 space per 5 fixed seats in the main assembly
room or 1 space per 5 persons, based on
maximum building capacity established by
Township Fire Department, whichever is greater.
Colleges, universities and other graduate institutions 1 space for each 5 classroom seats plus 1 space
for each auditorium seat.
Elementary or middle/junior schools 3 per classroom.
Golf courses 8 spaces per hole.
Golf driving ranges 2 spaces per tee.
Hospitals 1 space for every 2 patient beds plus outpatient
clinics, laboratories, pharmacies and other
similar uses shall have 4 spaces per 1,000
square feet.
Libraries, Museums and Galleries 3 spaces per 1,000 square feet.
Miniature golf courses 2 spaces per hole.
Nursery schools and day care centers 1 space for each 5 students.
Organizational clubs and lodges 10 spaces per 1,000 square feet or 1 space per
2 persons based on maximum building capacity
established by Township Fire Department,
whichever is greater.
Racquetball, handball and tennis courts 5 spaces per court.
Senior high schools 1 space per 5 students.
Skating rinks 5 spaces per 1,000 square feet.
Swimming pool 20 spaces per 1,000 square feet of pool area.
Volleyball courts 16 spaces per court.
Table 5.7 :Required Parking Spaces by Use (continued)
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 109
F. Adjustments to Required Parking: The
applicant for all uses except single-family and
two-family dwellings may vary from the optimal
number of parking spaces in accordance with the
following provisions. See Illustration 5.8.
1. Parking Spaces in Excess of Optimal Number
of Spaces
a. The applicant may provide a number of
spaces equal to the optimal number of
spaces or up to ten (10) percent more as
of right.
b. The Director of Planning and Zoning may
permit a number of spaces in excess of
ten (10) percent of the optimal number
of required spaces. The applicant shall
be required to demonstrate a need for
the additional spaces and shall meet the
additional landscaping regulations set
forth in Article 5.3,L,5.
2. Parking Spaces Less than the Optimal
Number of Spaces
a. The applicant may provide a number of
spaces equal to the optimal number of
spaces or up to ten (10) percent less as of
right.
b. The Director of Planning and Zoning
may permit a total reduction of up
to a maximum of fifty (50) percent of
the optimal number of spaces upon
compliance with all other subsections
of this Section. Ten (10) percent of the
spaces may be reduced as of right in
accordance with Article 5.3,F but the
remaining percentage, with a maximum
reduction of fity (50) percent of the
spaces may be permitted only if the
applicant complies with one or more of
the following:
i. The provision of off-site parking
spaces, shared parking spaces,
shadow parking spaces, or an
approved alternative as defined
in Article 5.3,G is equal to the
requested reduction in optimal
number of spaces.
ii. A reduction of up to ten (10) percent
of the optimal number of spaces may
be permitted provided that one access
point to the adjacent street with the
highest traffic capacity is closed. This
ten (10) percent shall be a portion
of the maximum fifty (50) percent
reduction allowed in Article 5.3,F.
Parking, Loading, and Access |5.3
Illustration 5.8: Parking Reduction
Article 5: Development Standards
110 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
iii. A reduction of up to twenty-five (25)
percent of the optimal number of
spaces may be permitted provided
that two or more access points to
the adjacent street with the highest
traffic capacity are closed thereby
creating only one access point to the
street. This twenty-five (25) percent
shall be a portion of the maximum
fifty (50) percent reduction allowed in
Article 5.3,F.
iv. A reduction of up to one (1) percent of
the optimal number of spaces may be
permitted for every twenty (20) lineal
feet of street frontage where a four
(4) foot wide paved sidewalk will be
created. There shall be no more than
a ten (10) percent reduction permitted
as a portion of the maximum fifty
percent reduction and all such
sidewalks shall be built to the design
standards as required by the Hamilton
County Subdivision Regulations.
G. Alternative Parking
1. Shadow Parking: A portion of the required
parking spaces may remain landscaped
and unpaved or paved with pervious pavers
provided that the parking and unpaved areas
complies with the following standards and is
authorized in accordance with Article 5.3,F.
See Illustration 5.9.
a. The Parking and Loading Plan submitted
with the zoning certificate application
shall denote the location and layout of
that portion of the parking area that
5.3 | Parking, Loading, and Access
Illustration 5.9: Shadow Parking
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 111
currently is deemed unrequired. The Plan
shall indicate that the “shadow” parking
spaces will be constructed according
to these regulations in the event that
the Director of Planning and Zoning
determines at any time that all or any
portion of this parking is necessary.
b. At no time shall any portion of the
required parking area that is so
designated for future construction be
used for the construction of any structure
or paved surface with the exception
that pervious pavers may be used to
provide temporary parking provided that
the pavers allow for grass and other
vegetation to grow through the material.
c. At no time shall any portion of the
required parking or loading that is so
designated for future construction as
provided herein be considered to be as
open space or other non-paved areas
required by other provisions of this
Section.
d. The current owner of record shall initiate
construction of the approved “future”
parking area(s), as identified on the
approved Parking and Loading Plan,
within three (3) months of the receipt
of a certified letter or a letter through
normal postal service (in the event that
the certified letter is not accepted) sent
to the owner of record from the Director
of Planning and Zoning, stating that such
parking is determined to be necessary.
2. Shared Parking: A portion of the required
parking spaces may be located on an
adjacent property if the parking area
complies with the following standards and is
authorized in accordance with Article 5.3,F.
a. Shared parking is encouraged and
permitted if the multiple uses that
the shared parking will benefit can
cooperatively establish and operate the
facilities.
b. Two (2) directional signs directing
vehicles to shared parking facilities may
be permitted provided that they are each
four (4) square feet or less in area.
c. The applicant shall have the burden of
proof for reduction of the total number of
parking spaces and shall document and
submit information substantiating their
request. Shared parking may be approved
if:
i. A sufficient number of spaces is
provided to meet the highest demand
of the participating uses;
ii. Evidence has been submitted by the
parties operating the shared parking
facility, to the satisfaction of the
Director of Planning and Zoning,
documenting the nature of uses and
the times when the individual uses
will operate so as to demonstrate
the lack of potential conflict between
them;
iii. The shared parking spaces will not be
located in excess of 500 feet from the
uses they are intended to serve;
iv. A shared parking agreement is
submitted and approved by the
Anderson Township Attorney or the
Prosecuting Attorney, that provides
for the rights of the respective parties
to use the shared parking areas in a
manner adequate to accommodate
multiple users or that parking spaces
will be shared at specific times of
the day (i.e., one activity uses the
spaces during daytime hours and
another activity use the spaces during
evening hours). This agreement
shall include provisions, evidence of
deed restrictions or other recorded
covenants that ensure that the spaces
will be properly maintained during the
life of the development; and
Parking, Loading, and Access | 5.3
Article 5: Development Standards
112 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
v. The approved shared parking
agreement is filed with the
application for a zoning certificate and
is filed with the County Recorder and
recorded in a manner as to encumber
all properties involved in the shared
parking agreement.
d. No zoning certificate will be issued until
proof of recordation of the agreement is
provided to the Director of Planning and
Zoning.
3. Off-Site Parking: A portion of the required
parking spaces may be located on a separate
lot from the lot on which the principal use is
located if the off-site parking complies with
the following standards and is authorized in
accordance with Article 5.3,F.
a. Off-site parking shall not be used to
satisfy the off-street parking standards
for residential uses, hospitals, bars
(if not incidental to a restaurant),
or convenience stores and other
convenience-oriented uses. Required
parking spaces reserved for persons with
disabilities shall not be located in an offsite
parking facility.
b. Two (2) directional signs directing
vehicles to shared parking facilities may
be permitted provided that they are each
four (4) square feet or less in area.
c. No off-site parking space shall be located
more than 500 feet from the primary
entrance of the use served, measured
along the shortest legal, practical walking
route. This route may include crossing
a right-of-way provided it uses a legal
crosswalk.
d. Off-site parking areas shall adhere to
the regulations of the same or a more
intensive zoning classification than that
required for the use served.
e. In the event that an off-site parking area
is not under the same ownership as the
principal use served, a written agreement
shall be required.
f. An off-site parking agreement shall be
submitted and approved as to form by
the Anderson Township Attorney or the
Prosecuting Attorney. This agreement
shall include provisions, evidence of deed
restrictions or other recorded covenants
that ensure that the spaces will be
properly maintained during the life of the
development.
g. The approved off-site parking agreement
shall be filed with the application
for a zoning certificate and shall be
filed with the County Recorder and
recorded in a manner as to encumber all
properties involved in the off-site parking
agreement.
h. No zoning certificate will be issued until
proof of recordation of the agreement is
provided to the Director of Planning and
Zoning.
4. Other Eligible Alternatives: The Board
of Zoning Appeals may approve, as a
conditional use, any other alternative to
providing off-street parking spaces on
the site of the subject development if the
applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction
of the Board of Zoning Appeals that the
proposed plan will meet the purpose of this
Section as set forth in Article 5.3,A, and
will do at least as good a job of protecting
surrounding neighborhoods, maintaining
traffic circulation patterns and promoting
quality urban design than would otherwise
result from strict compliance with otherwise
applicable off-street parking standards.
H. Vehicle Stacking Space Requirements:
Vehicle stacking spaces for drive through
facilities shall be provided according to the
following provisions:
1. Minimum Number of Stacking Spaces: The
number of required stacking spaces shall be
as provided for in Illustrations 5.10 and 5.11.
5.3 | Parking, Loading, and Access
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 113
Parking, Loading, and Access | 5.3
ACTIVITY MINIMUM STACKING SPACES
(per lane)
MEASURED FROM:
Financial Institution or Automated Teller
Machine (ATM)
4 Teller or Window
Restaurant 8 Pick up Window
Full Service Automotive Wash 7 Entrance
Self-Service Automotive Wash 2 Washing Bay
Fuel or Gasoline Pump Island 2 Pump Island
Other As determined by the Director of Planning and Zoning *(See
note below)
*Any other use shall be required to document proof that the article provided number and location of stacking spaces are adequate
to meet the purpose of this Section as set forth in Article 5.3,A.
Table 5.10: Minimum Stacking Space
Illustration 5.11: Vehicle Stacking Spaces
Fast Food Restaurant
General Restaurant
Parking
Automobile
Carwash
Separated Stacking
Lane
Overhead
Canopy
Convenience
Store
Gas Pump
Island
Minimum
(4) Stacking Spaces
Order Windowbox
Minimum
(4) Stacking Spaces
Pick-up Window
Minimum
(2) Stacking Spaces
Automatic Carwash
Minimum
(3) Stacking Spaces
Gasoline Pump
Car Wash/Fuel Pumps
Article 5: Development Standards
114 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
2. Design and Layout
a. Stacking spaces shall be a minimum
of 9 feet by 20 feet in size.
b. Stacking spaces may not impede
on- or off-site traffic movements or
movements in or out of off-street
parking spaces.
c. Stacking spaces shall be separated
from other internal driveways by
surface markings. Raised medians
may be required where deemed
necessary by staff for the purpose of
traffic movement and safety.
I. Parking and Storage of Recreational
Vehicles and Equipment:
Outside parking of recreational vehicles
and equipment are subject to the following
provisions:
1. General Requirements:
a. Vehicles or equipment stored or
parked on a trailer intended for such
use shall count as one recreational
vehicle. (For example, a boat on a
trailer)
b. No recreational vehicle or mobile
home shall be used for the purpose
of permanent habitation, living, or
housekeeping purposes in Anderson
Township.
c. There shall be a minimum setback of
three (3) feet from the side and rear
lot lines.
d. The recreational vehicle shall be
maintained and be in good condition
and safe for effective performance of
the function for which it is intended.
The exterior of the vehicle shall be
intact.
e. Recreational vehicles shall be
roadworthy. Vehicles that require a
license shall be properly licensed,
operable, and tagged.
f. The wheels or any similar transporting
devices of any trailer permitted within
any Residence District shall not be
removed, except when the trailer is
parked in a completely enclosed garage
or accessory building, nor shall any such
trailer be temporarily or permanently
affixed to the ground or attached to
something having a temporary or
permanent location on the ground.
g. One (1) recreational vehicle may be
parked or stored openly in the rear
yard or within an enclosed garage or
other permitted building on any singlefamily
lot outside the “FPM” Flood Plain
Management Overlay District.
h. The following recreational vehicles
may be parked or stored on any multifamily
lot outside the “FPM” Flood Plain
Management Overlay District:
i. One (1) recreational vehicle may be
parked or stored openly in the rear
yard or within an enclosed garage or
other permitted building, or within the
area allowed for main buildings;
ii. When located within the area allowed
for main buildings, the recreational
vehicle shall be set back a minimum
of one hundred (100) feet from the
front property line and twenty-five
(25) feet from any side property line.
i. The temporary use of one (1) or more
trailers for construction office or storage,
as well as dumpsters, for construction
purposes may be permitted on any
premises, provided such use is also
located outside the “FPM” Flood Plain
Management District and a Zoning
Certificate is issued by the Director
of Planning and Zoning specifying
location of the trailer or dumpster. The
duration of such temporary use shall be
no earlier than thirty (30) days prior to
commencement of construction and shall
5.3 | Parking, Loading, and Access
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 115
not exceed twelve (12) months during
construction, or the thirty (30) days after
the completion of construction, whichever
comes first. The Director of Planning
and Zoning may grant extensions for the
use of such temporary trailers for twelve
(12) month intervals during construction
or thirty (30) days after completion of
construction, whichever comes first,
as well as require documentation of
construction activities.
j. Portable Storage Containers – Residential
use properties are permitted one (1)
portable storage container for thirty (30)
consecutive days per year. The container
must be situated on a paved surface out
of the right of way or easement of access
and set back a minimum of ten (10) feet
from the edge of pavement, whichever
is the greater setback, and a minimum of
three (3) feet from all other property lines.
A portable storage container is intended
to provide “temporary” storage for
moving and similar short-term purposes.
A temporary/accessory residential use
zoning certificate is required before the
container is placed on-site
2. Vehicles Permitted in a Residential District
a. Parking of vehicles accessory to a
residential use shall be limited to those
vehicles actually used by the resident
for personal use, agricultural use, or
temporary parking for guests. Vehicles
not in keeping with residential character
shall not be permitted.
b. No truck, construction equipment, or
other vehicle of a business or industrial
nature shall be parked upon a residential
lot except:
i. A pickup truck not to exceed fourteenthousand
(14,000) pounds of Gross
Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR) tons
and twenty (20) feet in length with a
standard bed, special tool boxes, or
cap not to exceed a total height of
eight (8) feet in height. No tow truck,
stake body, or dump truck may be
parked on a residential lot;
ii. A passenger van not to exceed one
ton and twenty (20) feet in length.
No step van or chassis van shall be
parked on a residential lot without
approval from the Board of Zoning
Appeals.
c. In no case shall a residential zoned parcel
be used for the parking or storing of a
semi trailer or tractor.
d. Outside parking of automobiles,
station wagons, personal pick-ups, and
passenger vans shall be located not
closer than three (3) feet to a side or
rear lot line, except in the case of a legal
nonconforming driveway location.
J. Off-Street Loading Requirements
1. Minimum Number of Required Spaces: The
number of loading spaces required is as
follows:
a. Uses such as public buildings,
educational, religious and philanthropic
institutions, hospitals or other
institutions, places of assembly or for
sports or athletics, clubs, lodges, multiple
dwellings and similar uses shall be
required to have one (1) loading space
plus one (1) additional loading space for
each 100,000 square feet of floor area,
or fraction thereof in excess of 100,000
square feet.
b. Uses such as banks and financial
institutions, medical or dental clinics,
business or professional offices,
business, dancing or other commercial
schools, theaters, bowling alleys, skating
rinks or other places of amusement in
the “E” Retail Business District shall be
required to have one (1) loading space
plus one (1) additional loading space for
each 100,000 square feet of floor area,
Parking, Loading, and Access | 5.3
Article 5: Development Standards
116 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
or fraction thereof in excess of 100,000
square feet.
c. Retail and wholesale stores, eating and
drinking establishments and all other
commercial uses shall be required to
have one (1) loading space plus both of
the following:
i. One (1) additional loading space for
each 20,000 square feet of floor area,
or fraction thereof in excess of 10,000
square feet up to 50,000 square feet.
ii. One (1) additional space for each
100,000 square feet of floor area, or
fraction thereof in excess of 50,000
square feet.
d. Uses in the “ID” Industrial Development
District shall be required to have one (1)
loading space plus both of the following:
i. One (1) additional loading space for
each 20,000 square feet of floor area,
or fraction thereof in excess of 20,000
square feet up to 60,000 square feet.
ii. One (1) additional space for each
100,000 square feet, or fraction
thereof in excess of 60,000 square
feet.
2. Minimum Design Standards
a. Each loading space shall have access to a
dedicated public street or alley.
b. The minimum area for each loading
space,excluding the area needed to
maneuver, shall be ten (10) feet wide and
twenty-five (25) feet long with a height
clearance of fourteen (14) feet.
c. Loading areas shall be surfaced with an
asphalt or concrete surface.
d. No part of any truck or van that is being
loaded or unloaded may extend into the
right-of-way of a public thoroughfare.
e. Loading spaces shall be designed with
sufficient apron area to accommodate
truck-turning movements and to prevent
backing of trucks onto any street right-ofway.
f. Single-bay loading docks shall provide
sufficient area for the largest vehicle
using the facility to maneuver without
encroaching upon a street right-of-way.
g. No separate driveway shall be provided
to serve only loading areas.
5.3 | Parking, Loading, and Access
Illustration 5.12: Lighting Diagram
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 117
K. Lighting For Non-Single Family Uses
1. Height: All outdoor lighting shall be
designed, located, and mounted at heights
no greater than ten (10) feet above grade for
non-cutoff lights and twenty-four (24) feet
above grade for cutoff lights.
2. Lighting Types: Non-cutoff lights are to be
used for decorative purposes only. Interior
lighting of parking and loading areas shall be
accomplished by using cutoff lights, with flat
lenses to reduce glare. See Illustration 5.12.
3. Illumination
a. See Table 5.13 for the maximum
illumination permitted at the property line
in each district type, as demonstrated by
a photometric drawing.
b. Where a zoning district abuts another
district with a different maximum
illumination requirement, the maximum
illumination permitted at the property line
shall be that of the less intense district.
4. Shielding: All outdoor lighting for nonresidential
uses shall be located, screened,
or shielded so that adjacent lots located
in residential districts are not directly
illuminated.
5. Color and Glare
a. No outdoor lighting shall be of such an
intensity or color distortion as to cause
glare or to impair the vision of drivers or
pedestrians.
DISTRICT TYPE Maximum Illumination (Foot Candles)
Non-Cutoff Lighting Cutoff Lighting
Residential Districts 0.10 0.10
Office Districts 0.30 0.50
Business, Industrial, and “EF” Districts 0.30 0.75
“FPM”, “H” and “HD” Districts 0.30 0.30
b. Uniform lighting shall be provided to
prevent various intensities of lighting
throughout the parking area.
L. Landscaping and Buffering: Parking and
loading areas shall be designed to minimize
the visual impact of parked cars as viewed
from public right-of-ways and adjacent
properties through the use of plantings and
earth berms in accordance with the following
provisions:
1. Plant Protection: All planting beds shall
be provided with weed barriers, mulched,
and provided with a permanent edge or
curbing.
2. Plant Sizes: At the time of installation,
plantings required by this Subsection L
shall be no smaller than the following:
a. All deciduous trees shall have a
minimum size of 2 inches Diameter at
Breast Height (DBH).
b. All evergreen trees shall have a
minimum height of 6 feet.
c. All ornamental trees shall have a
minimum size of 2 inches DBH.
d. All shrubs shall be from 5 gallon or
greater containers.
3. Location
a. All required landscaping shall be
located outside of any adjacent right-of-way.
b. All required landscaping elements shall
be located on the property it serves.
Parking, Loading, and Access | 5.3
Table 5.13 Illumination Permitted
Article 5: Development Standards
118 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
4. Maintenance
a. The owner shall be responsible for the
upkeep and continued maintenance
of the required landscape materials
pursuant to the maintenance standards
set forth in this provision.
b. The owner shall be responsible for
regular maintenance of all required
landscape areas and plant materials in
a vigorous and healthy condition, free
from diseases, pests, weeds, and litter,
that shall include weeding, watering,
fertilizing, pruning, mowing, edging,
mulching or other needed maintenance
in accordance with generally accepted
horticultural practices.
c. The owner shall be responsible for the
maintenance, repair or replacement
of landscape structures (walls,
architectural features, etc.) to a
structurally sound condition.
d. Required plant materials, if dead,
diseased, or severely damaged, shall
be removed and replaced by the owner
as soon as possible, but no later
than thirty (30) days after receipt of
a certified letter or a letter through
normal postal service (in the event that
the certified letter is not accepted)
notifying the owner of violation of this
provision from the Director of Planning
and Zoning. If notification occurs
outside of a typical planting season, the
owner shall be required to remove the
plant materials within thirty (30) days of
notification but may postpone planting
until the next earliest planting season.
e. Replacement plants must be of the
same sizes and species as shown
on the approved landscape plan or
must be equivalent in terms of quality
and size. Such replacement will not
be considered an amendment to the
approved plan.
f. Failure to regularly maintain as described
in these maintenance requirements shall
constitute a violation of this provision.
5. Parking Perimeter Landscaping
a. Applicability: All parking lots containing
five (5) or more spaces shall provide
perimeter landscaping pursuant to this
Section. Single-family and two-family
dwellings shall be exempt from these
requirements.
b. Minimum Planting Requirements
i. A minimum of one (1) shade or
evergreen tree per thirty (30) lineal feet
of parking surface frontage and one (1)
shrub per ten (10) lineal feet of parking
surface frontage shall be planted along
the perimeter of any parking area when
adjacent to all dedicated streets.
ii. For parking areas adjacent to a side
or rear lot line of a residence district
or property devoted to residential use,
a minimum of one (1) evergreen or
shade tree per 30 lineal feet of parking
surfaces and one (1) shrub per five (5)
lineal feet of parking surfaces shall
be planted along the perimeter of the
parking area.
iii. All fences utilized for screening shall
be oriented so as to face the better
side toward the residential district.
c. General Requirements
i. Perimeter planting areas shall be
designed to maintain and protect
visibility at driveways and access
points.
ii. Perimeter landscaping shall provide a
semi-opaque screen during the winter
season.
iii. Berms may be utilized as part of the
perimeter landscaping provided there
is no adverse impact on visibility at
5.3 | Parking, Loading, and Access
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 119
driveways and access points
iv. Where walls or fences are utilized
within perimeter landscaping, a
minimum of one (1) evergreen tree
and three (3) shrubs shall be required
for every forty (40) linear feet of wall
or fence and shall be planted on the
side of the fence or wall facing the
surrounding streets, walks, parks, trails
and other public use properties.
v. Where a lot is surrounded on the rear
and/or side lot lines by a similarly
intense use or where it is part of a
larger development, the requirement
of perimeter landscaping on the lot
line adjacent to the similar use or
development shall be waived.
d. Additional Perimeter Landscaping
Requirements: In cases where the parking
and loading plan illustrate a number of
spaces that exceed the optimal number of
spaces by more than ten (10) percent, the
applicant shall be required to provide the
following for perimeter landscaping:
i. Two (2) times the minimum required
setback and/or planting area as
required in this Subsection 5.
ii. One (1) additional shade or evergreen
tree for every thirty (30) lineal feet of
parking area and one (1) additional
shrub for every ten (10) lineal feet
of parking area, or the landscaping
requirements of any adopted Township
policy or plan, whichever is greater.
6. Parking Lot Interior Landscaping
a. Applicability: All parking lots with twenty
(20) or more parking spaces shall comply
with these interior parking lot landscaping
requirements. Landscaping used to fulfill
the perimeter parking lot landscaping
requirements as outlined in Article 5.3,L,4
shall not be considered for products
of satisfying these interior parking lot
landscaping requirements.
b. Minimum Planting Requirement: A
minimum of 10 percent of the total
interior parking lot area shall be
landscaped with planted islands. A
minimum of 1 tree and 2 shrubs shall be
planted in interior islands for every 2,500
square feet of parking lot.
c. General Requirements:
i. Each individual landscaped island
shall include a minimum of 1 tree and
2 shrubs.
ii. Landscaped islands shall be at
least 170 square feet in size with
the smallest dimension of pervious
surface being 6 feet to allow for
adequate root aeration and expansion.
Any landscaped island that is less
than 170 square feet in area may not
be used in the minimum 10% interior
landscaping requirement calculation.
iii. Plant materials shall be chosen and
arranged to maximize the shading of
parking spaces.
iv. Plant materials shall be arranged
to minimize obstruction of parking
spaces as well as visibility and access
on- and off-site.
v. Landscaped islands shall be dispersed
throughout the parking area in order
to break up large areas of surfaced
parking.
vi. Landscaped islands shall be installed
with curbs made of asphalt, concrete,
stone or other similar material and
shall have a minimum height of six (6)
inches and a minimum width of six (6)
inches
M. Definitions: See Article 6
Parking, Loading, and Access | 5.3
Article 5: Development Standards
120 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
5.4 Conditional Uses in Single and
Multi-Family Residence Districts
A. Definition: Conditional uses are those uses
having some special uniqueness which requires
a careful review of their location, design,
configuration and special impact to determine in
accordance with fixed standards, the desirability
of permitting their establishment on a specific
site. They are considered provisional in nature
and established at the discretion of the Board of
Zoning Appeals.
B. Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to
enable new uses which may be appropriate in
a particular district after balancing the public
benefit against the local impact, the reduction of
any adverse impact through special site planning,
development techniques, and contributions to the
public improvements and rights-of-ways.
C. Authority: The Board of Zoning Appeals may, in
accordance with the procedures and standards
set out in this Section, and other regulations
applicable to the district in which the subject
property is located, grant a conditional use
zoning certificate for those uses listed as
conditional uses in Article 5.4,I, or in any other
part of this Resolution.
D. Effect Of Conditional Use Listing
1. Compliance with Zoning Requirements - The
listing of a conditional use in this section
or in any other part of this Resolution does
not constitute an assurance or presumption
that such conditional use will be approved
except as provided in Article 5.4,D,2. Rather
each proposed conditional use shall be
evaluated by the Board of Zoning Appeals
on an individual basis. This shall be done in
relation to its compliance with the standards
and conditions set forth in this Article and
with the district in which it is located, in
order to determine whether approval of
the conditional use is appropriate at the
particular location and in the particular
manner proposed.
2 Compliance with other requirements:
Nothing in this Article shall be deemed
to prohibit or unreasonably limit any use
guaranteed by state or federal law. However,
reasonable conditions may be required by
the Board of Zoning Appeals in order to
satisfy the purposes as outlined in
Article 5.4,B.
E. Review Procedure For Conditional Use
Applications
1. Applicant - An application for a Conditional
Use Zoning Certificate may be filed with
the Board of Zoning Appeals by the owner,
lessee, or other person having a legal or
equitable interest in the subject property.
2. Application - An applicant for a conditional
use shall file a plan and an application on
forms provided by the Zoning Administrator.
The plan for the use and development of the
tract shall demonstrate that the general and
specific criteria have been met.
3. Scheduling of Hearing and Transmittal
of Application - Within five (5) days after
filing of an application determined to be
complete pursuant to Article 2.12, the
Zoning Administrator shall: (a) set a date for
a public hearing not less than thirty (30) nor
more than sixty-two (62) days after filing of
a complete application. (b) transmit a copy
of the application and plan, together with
the date of the scheduled hearing, to the
Board of Zoning Appeals for staff review and
recommendation.
4. Staff Report - Within forty (40) days after
the filing of a complete application, the
Zoning Administrator shall prepare and
transmit to the Board of Zoning Appeals a
written report incorporating or summarizing
comments of other departments, agencies,
and officials as may be appropriate to the
5.4 | Conditional Uses in Single and Multi-Family
Residence Districts
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987
scope of development. A recommendation
shall be included, setting forth whether the
application for a conditional use should be
approved, approved with modifications, or
denied and set forth findings of fact and
conditions for such recommendation.
5. Notice and Hearing - The Board of Zoning
Appeals (BZA) shall hold a public hearing in
accordance with the adopted Procedures,
Rules and Regulations of the BZA. Notice
of the hearing shall be given at least ten
(10) days before the hearing by notice in
writing sent by the BZA Administrator to:
the applicant, the Board of Trustees, and
the owners of property within two hundred
(200) feet in all directions. Notice shall also
be published in one or more newspapers of
general circulation in the County. Upon the
hearing, any party may appear in person or
by attorney.
6. Decision - Within forty (40) days after the
close of the public hearing, the BZA shall, (1)
grant a conditional use certificate; (2) grant
the conditional use certificate subject to
further specified approvals or modifications
necessary to achieve full compliance with all
standards; or (3) disapprove the conditional
use.
7. Notification of Decision - Following the
decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals,
the BZA shall return to the applicant one
copy of the resolution and submitted
plans permanently marked to show either
(1) granting of the conditional use; (2)
granting of the conditional use subject to
either specified approvals or modifications
necessary to achieve full compliance with
all standards; or (3) denial of the conditional
use.
F. Coordinated Review And Approval of
Applications: When an application for a
Conditional Use Zoning Certificate is filed,
applications shall be filed with the Board of
Zoning Appeals for all other required approvals,
including variances.
1. Notice of Applications for Additional
Approvals - Whenever an applicant files an
application for other approvals pursuant to
thi Subsection F, all required notices shall
include reference to the request for any and
all additional approvals.
2. Procedures and Action by Board of Zoning
Appeals - Whenever an applicant files
applications for other approvals pursuant
to this Section, the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall review and process all such
applications at the same public hearing.
In reviewing such combined applications
the Board of Zoning Appeals shall, except
as hereinafter provided with respect to
limitations on the time for taking action,
comply with all of the provisions of this
Resolution applicable to each of the
applications.
3. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall act on
any such combined application within the
longest time period applicable to any one
of the individual applications or within such
further time as may be consented to by
the applicant. The Secretary of the Board
of Zoning Appeals shall issue notices and
certificates of such action in accordance with
the provisions of this Resolution applicable
to the various applications involved.
G. General Considerations for
Conditional Uses
1. In approving an application for a Conditional
Use Zoning Certificate, the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall make a finding that the
proposed conditional use is appropriate in
the location proposed. The finding shall be
based upon the general considerations set
forth in Article 2.12,D,8, as well as the
designated specific criteria for specific uses
contained in Article 5.4, H.
| 5.4 Conditional Uses in Single and Multi-Family
Residence Districts
Article 5: Development Standards | 121
122 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
H. Specific Criteria Pertaining to Conditional
Uses: In addition to the general considerations
contained in this section each conditional use
is subject to one or more specific criteria as
identified in this Section. The following list
contains all the specific criteria with each
preceded by a letter for reference in
Article 5.4,I.
1. Conditional Use Criteria:
a. Site shall contain a minimum of 5
acres and all buildings shall not occupy
over 10 percent of the total area of the
site.
b. Site shall contain a minimum of 20
acres.
c. Site shall contain a minimum of 30
acres.
d. Any structure (except fences), parking
area, or storage area shall be setback
at least 100 feet from every property
line.
e. Setbacks from any adjacent
residential property line shall be a
minimum of 50 feet for all buildings
and 25 feet for all parking areas.
f. Parking shall not be permitted in the
area defined as the front yard setback
of the existing zone district.
g. Use shall have direct access to a
collector or arterial street.
h. The vehicular use area shall be
located and designed so as to
minimize impact on the neighborhood.
i. Any use for which drop-off or pickup
of children, residents, visitors,
products, or emergency vehicles is
a common occurrence shall provide
for the separation of incoming and
outgoing vehicles so as not to impede
other traffic.
j. No building shall be located within
the floodway.
k. The facility shall be reasonably
accessible, either by its location
or transportation provided by the
applicant, to medical, recreational,
and retail services as well as to
employment opportunities that may
be required by its residents.
l. Measures shall be taken to minimize
the impact of potential nuisances
such as noise, odor, vibration, and
dust on adjacent properties.
m. No exterior alterations of an existing
structure shall be made that depart
from the residential character of the
building. All new structures shall
be compatible in residential design
with the surrounding neighborhood.
However, any improvement required
by code or necessitated by licensing
requirements shall not be deemed
incompatible.
n. The architectural design and site
layout of the structure and the
location, nature, and height of any
walls, screens, and fences are to be
compatible with adjoining land uses
and the residential character of the
neighborhood.
o. Landscaping shall be installed in
accordance with one of the following
buffers:
i. Boundary Buffer of 10 feet with
3.3 canopy trees and 10 shrubs at
per 100 l.f.
ii. Boundary Buffer of 20 feet with
2.8 canopy trees and 8 shrubs at
per 100 l.f.
p. Signage shall be regulated as follows:
i. No signs shall be erected except
5.4 | Conditional Uses in Single and Multi-Family
Residence Districts
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987
those exempt under Article 5.5,D,3,
ii. One sign permitted subject to sign
standards in Article 5.5,F,3.
iii. Subject to sign standards in Article
5.5,F,4.
q. The conditional use shall be subordinate
to the principal permitted use with regard
to usage and character.
r. Outdoor playgrounds, tot lots, exercise
areas, and pools shall be fully enclosed
by a fence.
s. All exterior lighting shall be directed
away from adjacent residential
properties.
t. Documentation indicating the need for
the facility, the specific clientele it will
serve, and the location and type of similar
facilities operated by the applicant shall
be submitted as part of the application.
u. Proposed Security Measures shall be
submitted as part of the application.
v. The applicant shall provide a plan
indicating the manner in which the
facility will maintain contact with
neighborhood residents along with a
structured procedure whereby resident’s
grievances may be filed with the
Township and resolved by the facility.
w. A refuse collection plan shall be
submitted as part of the application.
x. Meals shall be served only to guests or
residents of the facility and not to the
general public.
y. The intensity of the particular use shall
be evaluated with regard to the location,
size, and configuration of the tract.
z. An emergency response plan shall be
submitted detailing safety measures and
response procedures.
aa. No structure, storage area, or vehicular
use area shall be located closer than:
i. 100 feet to a residential use or
district.
ii. 200 feet to a residential use or
district.
bb. The facility shall be centrally located
and surrounded on all sides by the
development the facility serves.
cc. Coverage of the required rear yard by
the accessory unit shall not exceed 10
percent, and coverage of the entire lot by
the accessory unit and the principal unit
shall not exceed 20 percent.
dd. The unit shall contain a maximum of 900
sq. ft. and not exceed 15 ft. in height.
ee. The terms of continuation of this use and
those under which it shall eventually be
removed or terminated are to be specified
in the application and contained within
the approving Resolution.
ff. There shall be central management of the
use to assure seasonal occupancy only.
I. Uses Requiring Conditional Use Certificate
In Single Family And Multi Family
Residence Districts: The following uses shall
require a conditional use zoning certificate. The
specific criteria that are required for each area
identified with letters corresponding to the items
found in Article 5.4,H,1:
1. Accessory Apartment – (m), (p,i), (q) ,(y);
2. Bed and Breakfast – (f),(h),(p,ii),(s),(x);
3. Day Care, Type A or Day
Care Center, Adult or Child –
(e),(g),(h),(i),(j),(n),(p,ii),(r),(s),(y);
4. Granny Cottage – (n),(p,i),(cc),(dd),(ee);
Article 5: Development Standards | 123
| 5.4 Conditional Uses in Single and Multi-Family
Residence Districts
124 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
5. Group Home – (f), (k), (m), (n), (p,i), (s),(t),
(v)
6. Cemetery – (b),(d), (g), (o,i), (p,iii), (s);
7. Church, Sunday School, and other places of
worship – (h). (l), (o,i), (p,iii), (s);
8. Government facility, including, but not
limited to community fire house, library, park
and ride facility, etc. – (e), (f), (h), (i), (o,i),
(p,iii);
9. Hospitals and institutions of an educational,
religious, charitable, philanthropic nature –
(a), (e), (f), (g), (h),(i),(o,i), (p,iii), (s), (y);
10. Schools, public and private, having a
curriculum equivalent to that ordinarily
given in public elementary and high
schools, proded no rooms are regularly
used for housekeeping or sleeping rooms –
(h),(l),(o,i),(p,iii), (s);
11. College or University – (d), (h),(l), (o,i),
(p,iii),(s);
12. Campground, Public or Private –
(h),(l),(p,iii),(u),(z),(ff);
13. Cultural facility, including, but not limited to:
a. Botanical garden – (e), (f), (h), (p,iii), (s);
b. Museum – (g),(h),(l),(o,ii),(p,iii),(s),(y);
c. Outdoor drama theaters (not drive in’s) –
(a), (d), (h),(l), (o,i), (p,iii), (s), (y);
d. Zoo – (a),(b), (g), (h), (l),(o,i), (p,iii), (s),
(x), (y),(z), (aa,i);
14. Recreation, Private or Public Community
Facility, including, but not limited to:
a. Athletic/play field – (h), (l), (o,i), (p,iii),
(s), (u), (v), (w), (y);
b. Country clubs – (d),(f),(g), (h), (n), (o,ii),
(p,ii), (s), (y);
c. Swimming and tennis clubs – (d), (e),
(h), (i), (l), (n), (o,ii), (p,iii), (q), (r), (s),
(u), (y);
d. Golf course – (b), (d),(f), (h), (p,iii), (s),
(x);
e. Recreation center-internal – (d), (h), (l),
(n), (o,i), (p,ii), (s);
f. Summer camp –(b),(j), (k), (p,iii), (s),
(u), (z), (ff);
J. Accessory Uses To Conditional Uses
1. Any use or structure that is accessory to a
conditional use shall be processed in the
same manner as prescribed in this article
for conditional uses. If an application for an
accessory use is made concurrently with
an application for the primary conditional
use, they may be considered together as
one application. Whether processed in
conjunction with a primary conditional use
or as a later supplement to an existing
primary conditional use, the accessory use
shall meet the appropriate specific criteria
listed in Article 5.4,H as well as the general
conditions contained in Article 5.4,G.
K. Additional Regulations Pertaining To
Conditional Uses: In addition to the general
standards contained in Article 5.4,G the specific
criteria contained in Article 5.4,H all conditional
uses are subject to the following regulations.
1. Additional Conditions: The Board of Zoning
Appeals may impose additional conditions
and limitations concerning use, construction,
character, location, landscaping, screening,
timing of implementation, and other matters
relating to the purposes and objectives of
this Resolution upon the premises benefited
by a conditional use. Such conditions
are intended to prevent or minimize
adverse effects upon other property and
improvements in the vicinity of the subject
property or upon public facilities and services
or to assure compliance with general or
specific standards. However, such conditions
shall not be used as a device to authorize as
a conditional use that which is intended to
be temporary in nature. All such conditions,
including the designated specific criteria for
a particular use, shall be expressly set forth
5.4 | Conditional Uses in Single and Multi-Family
Residence Districts
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 125
in the resolution granting the Conditional
Use Zoning Certificate. Violation of any such
condition, limitation, or specific criteria shall
be a violation of this Resolution and shall
constitute grounds for revocation of the
Conditional Use Zoning Certificate.
2. Effect of Approval of Conditional Use: The
granting of a proposed conditional use zoning
certificate by the Board of Zoning Appeals
shall not authorize the establishment or
extension of any use nor the development,
construction, reconstruction, alteration or
moving of any building or structure, but shall
merely authorize the preparation, filing and
processing of applications for any permits
or approvals that may be required by the
regulations of the County, including but not
limited to, a Conditional Use Compliance
Plan Certification, a building permit, a
certificate of occupancy and subdivision
approval.
3. Certification of Conditional Use Plan
Compliance - Upon receipt from the applicant
of an application for a Zoning Compliance
Plan certification, the Zoning Administrator
shall review the application to determine
if it is complete pursuant to Article 2.1
including any additional conditions required
in conjunction with the approval by the Board
of Zoning Appeals. Within seven (7) days
of receipt of the completed application, the
Administrative Official shall either (1) certify
that the Zoning Compliance Plan complies
with the BZA approval; or (2) refuse to certify
the Zoning Compliance Plan for lack of
compliance with the BZA approval.
4. Affidavit of Compliance with Conditions:
Whenever any proposed conditional use
authorized pursuant to this Article is made
subject to conditions or limitations to be met
by the applicant, the applicant shall, upon
meeting such conditions, file an affidavit
with the Township Zoning Inspector so
stating. Such affidavit shall be accompanied
by a nonrefundable fee as established by the
Board of Trustees upon recommendation of
the Administrative Official, to recover the
Township’s actual direct cost of an inspection
to verify that such conditions and limitations
have been met.
5. Limitations on Conditional Use Approva:
The approval of a proposed conditional
use by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall
be deemed to authorize only the particular
use for which it was issued, and such
authorization shall automatically expire and
cease to be of any force or effect if such
use shall, for any reason, be discontinued
for a period of twenty four (24) consecutive
months or more. Except when otherwise
provided in the Resolution for approving a
conditional use, a conditional use shall be
deemed to relate to, and be for the benefit
of the use and lot in question rather than the
owner or operator of such use or lot.
6. Amendments to Conditional Uses:A
Conditional Use Zoning Certificate may be
amended, varied, or altered only pursuant to
the procedures and subject to the standards
and limitations provided in this Article for its
original approval.
L. Period of Validity: Subject to an extension of
time granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals, no
Conditional Use Zoning Certificate shall be valid
for a period longer than one (1) year unless a
building permit is issued.
M. Appeal of Decision: Any party aggrieved by
the decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals may
appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of Hamilton
County as authorized by Chapter 2506 of the Ohio
Revised Code.
Conditional Uses in Single and Multi-Family
Residence Districts | 5.4
Article 5: Development Standards
126 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
5.4 | Conditional Uses in Single and Multi-Family
Residence Districts
Table 5.14 Conditional Use Criteria Chart
Conditional Use Criterial Letter Code: 5.4,H,1
Accessory Apartment (m), (p,i), (q) ,(y)
Bed and Breakfast (f),(h),(p,ii),(s),(x)
Day Care, Type A, or Day
Care Center (adult or child)
(e),(g),(h),(i),(j),(n),(p,ii),(r),(s),(y)
Granny Cottage (n),(p,i),(cc),(dd),(ee)
Group Home (f), (k), (m), (n), (p,i), (s),(t), (v)
Cemetery (b),(d), (g), (o,i), (p,iii), (s)
Church, Sunday School, and
other places of worship
(h). (l), (o,i), (p,iii), (s)
Government facility, including,
but not limited to community
fire house, library, park and
ride facility, etc
(e), (f), (h), (i), (o,i), (p,iii)
Hospitals and institutions of
an educational, religious,
charitable, philanthropic
nature
(a), (e), (f), (g), (h),(i),(o,i), (p,iii), (s), (y)
Schools, public and private,
having a curriculum equivalent
to that ordinarily given
in public elementary and
high schools, proded no
rooms are regularly used for
housekeeping or sleeping
rooms
(h),(l),(o,i),(p,iii), (s)
College or University (d), (h),(l), (o,i), (p,iii),(s)
Campground, Public or Private (h),(l),(p,iii),(u),(z),(ff)
Cultural facility, including, but
not limited to:
Botanical garden (e), (f), (h), (p,iii), (s)
Museum (g),(h),(l),(o,ii),(p,iii),(s),(y)
Outdoor drama theaters (not
drive in’s)
(a), (d), (h),(l), (o,i), (p,iii), (s), (y)
Zoo (a),(b), (g), (h), (l),(o,i), (p,iii), (s), (x),
(y),(z), (aa,i)
Recreation, Private or Public
Community Facility, including,
but not limited to:
Athletic/play field (h), (l), (o,i), (p,iii), (s), (u), (v), (w), (y)
Country clubs (d),(f),(g), (h), (n), (o,ii), (p,ii), (s), (y)
Swimming and tennis clubs
(d), (e), (h), (i), (l), (n), (o,ii), (p,iii), (q),
(r), (s), (u), (y)
Golf course (b), (d),(f), (h), (p,iii), (s), (x)
Recreation center-internal (d), (h), (l), (n), (o,i), (p,ii), (s)
Summer camp (b),(j), (k), (p,iii), (s), (u), (z), (ff)
Criteria
a. Site shall contain a minimum of 5 acres and all buildings
shall not occupy over 10 percent of the total area of the
site.
b. Site shall contain a minimum of 20 acres.
c. Site shall contain a minimum of 30 acres.
d. Any structure (except fences), parking area, or storage
area shall be setback at least 100 feet from every
property line.
e. Setbacks from any adjacent residential property line shall
be a minimum of 50 feet for all buildings and 25 feet for
all parking areas.
f. Parking shall not be permitted in the area defined as the
front yard setback of the existing zone district.
g. Use shall have direct access to a collector or arterial
street.
h. The vehicular use area shall be located and designed so
as to minimize impact on the neighborhood.
i. Any use for which drop-off or pick-up of children,
residents, visitors, products, or emergency vehicles is a
common occurrence shall provide for the separation of
incoming and outgoing vehicles so as not to impede other
traffic.
j. No building shall be located within the floodway.
k. The facility shall be reasonably accessible, either by its
location or transportation provided by the applicant, to
medical, recreational, and retail services as well as to
employment opportunities that may be required by its
residents.
l. Measures shall be taken to minimize the impact of
potential nuisances such as noise, odor, vibration, and
dust on adjacent properties.
m. No exterior alterations of an existing structure shall
be made that depart from the residential character of
the building. All new structures shall be compatible in
residential design with the surrounding neighborhood.
However, any improvement required by code or
necessitated by licensing requirements shall not be
deemed incompatible.
n. The architectural design and site layout of the structure
and the location, nature, and height of any walls, screens,
and fences are to be compatible with adjoining land uses
and the residential character of the neighborhood.
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 127
Conditional Uses in Single and Multi-Family
Residence Districts | 5.4
Article 5: Development Standards o. Landscaping shall be installed in accordance with one of the following buffers:
i. Boundary Buffer of 10 feet with 3.3 canopy trees and 10 shrubs at per 100 l.f.
ii. Boundary Buffer of 20 feet with 2.8 canopy trees and 8 shrubs at per 100 l.f.
p. Signage shall be regulated as follows:
i. No signs shall be erected except those exempt under Article 5.5, D,3,
ii. One sign permitted subject to sign standards in Article 5.5,F,3.
iii. Subject to sign standards in Article 5.5,F,4.
q. The conditional use shall be subordinate to the principal permitted use with regard to usage and character.
r. Outdoor playgrounds, tot lots, exercise areas, and pools shall be fully enclosed by a fence.
s. All exterior lighting shall be directed away from adjacent residential properties.
t. Documentation indicating the need for the facility, the specific clientele it will serve, and the location and type of
similar facilities operated by the applicant shall be submitted as part of the application.
u. Proposed Security Measures shall be submitted as part of the application.
v. The applicant shall provide a plan indicating the manner in which the facility will maintain contact with
neighborhood residents along with a structured procedure whereby resident’s grievances may be filed with the
Township and resolved by the facility.
w. A refuse collection plan shall be submitted as part of the application.
x. Meals shall be served only to guests or residents of the facility and not to the general public.
y. The intensity of the particular use shall be evaluated with regard to the location, size, and configuration of the tract.
z. An emergency response plan shall be submitted detailing safety measures and response procedures.
aa, No structure, storage area, or vehicular use area shall be located closer than:
i. 100 feet to a residential use or district.
ii. 200 feet to a residential use or district.
bb. The facility shall be centrally located and surrounded on all sides by the development the facility serves.
cc. Coverage of the required rear yard by the accessory unit shall not exceed 10 percent, and coverage of the entire
lot by the accessory unit and the principal unit shall not exceed 20 percent.
dd. The unit shall contain a maximum of 900 sq. ft. and not exceed 15 ft. in height.
ee. The terms of continuation of this use and those under which it shall eventually be removed or terminated are to
be specified in the application and contained within the approving Resolution.
ff. There shall be central management of the use to assure seasonal occupancy only.
128 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
5.5 Signage
A. Purpose and Intent. All subsections in
this Section are to be construed, whenever
possible, in favor of vigorous political debate
and accommodation of the rights of residents
and visitors to speak freely. Sign regulations,
including provisions to control the type, design,
size, location, motion, illumination, enforcement
and maintenance thereof, are established in
order to achieve, among others, the purposes
listed below. These regulations do not intend to
infringe on the rights of free speech as protected
by the First Amendment to the United States
Constitution and Article I, § 11 of the Ohio
Constitution.
1. It is the intent of this Section to establish
reasonable regulations governing the size,
character, and location of signs within the
Township in the interest of the safety and
general welfare of the citizens, business
concerns, and other affected sectors of the
community, in order to:
a. Minimize the possibility that sign size,
location, or character will create hazards
adversely affecting the public safety, and
to eliminate any conflict between traffic
control signs and other signs which
would be hazardous to the safety of the
motoring public or pedestrians.
b. Establish sign limitations which allow a
reasonable capability for identification
and advertisement.
c. Provide sign regulations which are
directly related to land use and therefore
to the functional and economic need
for signs of varying sizes, types, and
locations.
d. Create a more aesthetic environment,
and to preserve property values,
without unreasonably limiting the right
of individuals to employ signs in the
legitimate use of their property, while
also being aesthetically harmonious with
an overall urban design for the area, in
accordance with commonly accepted
community planning and design practices,
and Township plans.
e. Provide for the size, lighting and spacing
of off-premise advertising signs according
to customary use and to provide special
rules for retail areas which are abutting
residential districts.
f. Facilitate the effective enforcement
and prosecution of this Article while
preserving the right of the individual to
due process.
g. Provide for reasonable and appropriate
methods for identifying establishments
by relating the size, type and design of
signs to the size, type and design of the
establishment.
B. Definitions. See Article 6.
C. General Rules, Regulations and Limitations.
1. All signs shall be deemed accessory uses.
2. A sign shall be erected, maintained or
continued only if it is in full compliance
with the regulations for the Zone in which
it is located, and all applicable provisions
and regulations of this Section, except that
nonconforming signs may be maintained or
continued pursuant to Article 5.5,C,3.
3. Compliance with the provisions of this
Article shall be according to the following:
a. When erected all signs shall comply with
plans approved by Anderson Township
and the subsections contained within this
section.
b. Within thirty (30) days upon vacation of
a business from a premises, any sign
face referencing such business shall be
covered, painted, removed or otherwise
modified to obscure or conceal the sign
message.
5.5 | Signage
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 129
c. A nonconforming sign shall immediately
lose its nonconforming designation and
shall be immediately removed in its
entirety, including supporting structure
above finished grade level, or modified to
conform if:
i. The sign is relocated;
ii. The sign identifies one or more
businesses or other activities
conducted on the premises on which
the sign is located and all businesses
and other activities conducted on the
entire premises cease for a period
of three (3) months, or in the case
of a multi-tenant center, if the use
of more than 50% of the square
footage of such property has ceased.
For the purposes of this section, the
annual closing of a purely seasonal
business or other activity shall not
be considered a cessation of such
business or other activity; however,
temporary uses of the site for less
than ninety (90) consecutive days
in operation shall not constitute an
activity;
iii. The sign is structurally altered to an
extent greater than fifty (50%) percent
of the estimated replacement value;
iv. The sign is enlarged;
v. The sign is damaged or replaced to
an extent of greater than fifty (50%)
percent of the estimated replacement
value;
vi. The sign is a temporary sign;
vii. The sign violates Article 5.5,C,7;
Article 5.5,C,9; Article 5.5,C,10;
Article 5.5,C,15; Article 5.5,C,20; or
Article 5.5,C,21.
4. A sign shall lose its nonconforming
designation and shall be immediately
removed or modified to conform if it is
damaged fifty (50%) percent or less of its
estimated replacement value and repairs or
reconstruction is not completed within one
hundred twenty (120) days from the date of
such damage or destruction.
5. No sign except for signs authorized by a
government agency shall be located, or shall
be permitted in the traveled way, or within
a vision clearance area as defined within
this Subsection 5. A vision clearance area is
a triangular area formed by the intersection
of any combination of right-of-way, private
roads, public roads, alleys or driveways
and extending vertically from a height of 36
inches above grade to ten (10) feet above
grade. The triangular area is formed with the
apex at the intersection of the curb lines or
edge of pavement extended, with the sides
of the triangle extending along the curb line
twenty (20) feet from the apex, and with a
line connecting the ends of the sides to form
the third side. No support structure for a sign
may be located in a vision clearance area
unless the combined total width is twelve
(12) inches or less and the combined total
depth is twelve (12) inches or less.
6. Except as otherwise provided for in this
Section, no sign shall be permitted which
displays flashing, moving or intermittent
lights and symbols or lights, letters and
symbols of changing degrees of intensity.
Flashing, intermittent or moving lights
by themselves, with or without written
messages or graphics, are prohibited when
placed so as to be open to the outdoor public
view.
7. No sign shall be erected, maintained or
continued which is fraudulent or obscene.
8. No off-premise sign shall be permitted
Signage
Article 5: Development Standards | 5.5
130 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
except as specifically permitted in Article
5.5,G,6.
9. No sign shall be erected, maintained or
extended over or into any street, right-ofway,
public way or alley right-of-way, unless
specifically provided for within this Article.
10. No sign shall be erected, maintained or
continued which constricts the access or
the flow of air through any window or door
which is required by applicable building or
fire codes.
11. Except as otherwise provided for in
this Section, no sign, handbill, poster,
advertisement or notice of any kind, whether
political or otherwise, shall be fastened,
placed or painted on or to any curbstone
(except address numbers 4” high), utility
service equipment, hydrant, bridge, culvert,
drinking fountain, trash container, courtesy
bench, rest station building, tree, sidewalk,
street, street sign, or other structure which
is in the public right-of-way or which
constitutes public property.
12. All signs must be capable of being removed
without altering the building structure or
affecting its integrity.
13. If a free-standing sign identifies one or more
businesses or other activities conducted on
the premises on which the sign is located
and all businesses and other activities
conducted on the entire premises cease for
a period of three (3) months, then such freestanding
sign shall be immediately removed
in its entirety, including supporting structure
above finished grade level. For the purpose
of this section, the cyclical cessation of a
purely seasonal business or other activity
shall not be considered a cessation of such
business or other activity.
14. If more than one free-standing sign exists on
a premises, and such sign does not conform
to the requirements of Article 5.5.G,1 of the
Anderson Township Zoning Resolution, and
such sign is no longer being maintained or
used for a period of three (3) months, then
such free-standing sign shall be immediately
removed in its entirety, including supporting
structure above finished grade level. For the
purpose of this section, the annual closing
of a purely seasonal business or other
activity shall not be considered a cessation
of such business or other activity; however,
temporary uses of the site for less than
ninety (90) consecutive days in operation
shall not constitute a business or activity.
Also, in the case of a multi-tenant center,
if the use of more than 50% of the square
footage of such property has ceased, then
this Subsection 14 shall apply.
15. No radio, phonograph, tape recorder, whistle,
bell, gong, siren, or other sound or noisemaking
or transmitting device or instrument
shall be allowed, permitted or continued
in connection with any sign, nor may it be
used separately for advertising purposes
in any district or for attention-gaining for
commercial purposes.
16. Any sign using electronic technology for
changeable copy message boards which
malfunctions, fails, or ceases to operate
in its usual or normal programmed manner
causing motion, movement, flashing or any
other similar effects, shall be repaired or
disconnected within 24 hours by the owner
or operator of such sign.
17. All signs herein permitted shall be
constructed and maintained in a professional
manner. The owner of such signs, as well
as the owner of the premises where such
signs are located, shall maintain said signs
free from dirt and other such debris. All
lettering, illustrations, and other such art
work contained on said signs, including any
structure used to support a sign, shall be
constructed and maintained in a professional
manner, free from fading and illegibility and
not exhibiting any signs of disrepair.
18. Signs Associated with Nonconforming Land
Uses: All signs associated with a legal
nonconforming land use shall be permitted
as if the business or use were located in
5.5 | Signage
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 131
the most restrictive zoning district allowing
such land use. No new signs associated with
nonconforming land uses may be erected,
except replacements which are the same or
smaller in size than the sign being replaced.
In the event that a sign associated with
a nonconforming land use is moved, its
new location must conform to the setback
requirements for a primary building in the
district in which the nonconforming land use
is located.
19. The Zoning Commission shall have the
authority to amend the regulations in this
Section after review by the Commission to
address the needs of the owner and public
in “DD”, “EE”, “FF”, “GG” and “OO” Planned
Zoning Districts and Community Unit Plans.
20. Illumination of Signs. Light Sources to
illuminate signs shall be shielded from all
adjacent residential districts and all streets.
In no case shall the lighting fail to comply
with the standards specified in Chapter 17,
in the section labeled “Floodlighted Signs”
of the “I.E.S. LIGHTING HANDBOOK 1987
APPLICATIONS VOLUME’, Published by:
Illuminating Engineering Society of North
America, Copyrighted in 1987, Editor: John
E. Kaufman, P.E. FIES or lighting/illumination
standards found in Article 5.3,K,3; 4; and 5,
of this Resolution.
21. No search lights, strobe lights or beacons are
permitted in any district.
22. In the event of any conflict between this
Section and the remainder of the Zoning
Resolution, this Section shall control.
D. Exemptions to the Certificate Requirement
1. Transportable signs and other signs that are
affixed to a service or other delivery vehicle,
parked within Anderson Township, are limited
in size to two (2) square feet, and must not
extend any higher than 18” above the vehicle
surface to which they are affixed.
2. Window signs - Window signs shall be
permitted in any zone district, but shall not
exceed 20% of a glass door panel or 50% of a
window area.
3. The following signs described in this
Subsection 3 shall be permitted in any district
without a fee, in addition to any other sign
permitted in thi Section. All signs in this
Sebsection 3 shall be set back a minimum of
10 feet from the edge of pavement, or at the
edge of right-of-way, whichever is the greater
setback, and 5 feet from all other property
lines, and shall not create a safety hazard.
a. Signs that are an integral part of the
original construction of vending or similar
machines, fuel pumps or similar devices.
b. Signs which are an integral part of the
historic character of a structure that has
been designated an official landmark
or historic structure by any agency or
body of the governments of the United
States, State of Ohio, Hamilton County or
Anderson Township.
c. Hand-held signs not set on or affixed to
the ground.
d. Monuments and markings within a
cemetery.
e. Any address numbers required by
Anderson Township or other safety
organization, unless larger than twelve (12)
inches in height.
f. Two permanent signs not to exceed one (1)
square foot per side and a maximum of 2
sides are allowed in any zone district. Said
signs shall not be animated or illuminated.
Signage (Temporary Signs) | 5.5
Article 5: Development Standards
132 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
E. Temporary Signs. The following restrictions
apply to temporary signs:
1. No temporary sign shall be mounted,
attached, affixed, installed or otherwise
secured by any permanent means to any
building, permanent sign, other structure or
improvement, or to the ground upon which it
is erected.
2. No temporary sign shall be mounted,
attached, affixed, installed or otherwise
secured so as to protrude above the roof of a
structure.
3. No temporary sign, which is eight (8) square
feet or less in size, shall be illuminated by
anything other than non-reflected daylight,
except by variance issued by the Board of
Zoning Appeals
4. Temporary signs shall be set back a minimum
of ten (10) feet from the edge of pavement,
or at the edge of right-of-way, whichever
is the greater setback, five (5) feet from all
other property lines, five (5) feet from any
other temporary sign, and shall not create a
safety hazard.
5. The maximum overall height limit
of temporary signs shall not exceed
the maximum allowable height for a
freestanding sign in the district in which
the property is located, or ten (10) feet
in districts where freestanding signs are
prohibited.
6. Violations of zoning regulations applying to
temporary signs shall be corrected within 24
hours of written notification of the violation
or be subject to citation. Use of temporary
displays on days without approval by zoning
certificate, when required, or beyond the
stated date of approval, when applicable,
shall be deducted from the allotted number
of days.
7. Temporary signs that are eight (8) square
feet or less in size shall be permitted in
single family and multi family residence
districts without a fee, in addition to any
other sign permitted in this Section, and such
signage does not require a zoning certificate.
8. Each premises in “O”, “O-1”, “OO”, “E”,
“EE”, “H”, “ID”, “FF”, and “GG” Districts,
may display temporary signs, the total size
being sixteen (16) square feet or less per
premises, to be displayed in a maximum of
two (2) signs, and not to exceed ten (10) feet
in height, without a fee, in addition to any
other sign permitted in this Section, and such
signage does not require a zoning certificate.
9. Temporary signs described below require a
zoning certificate, and shall be permitted in
addition to any other sign permitted in this
Section.
10. Temporary signs greater than eight (8) square
feet in size are permitted in single family and
multi family residence districts. Such signs
shall be limited to one sign per premises and
shall not exceed thirty-two (32) sq. ft. per
side with a maximum of two (2) sides, and
shall not be illuminated. Such signs shall be
displayed for not more than twelve (12) days
per zoning certificate, and not to exceed
forty-eight (48) days per year.
11. Temporary signs greater in square footage
than those exempted in Article 5.5,E,7 and
8 are permitted in any office, retail, industrial
or riverfront district, subject to the following
limitations:
a. Such signs shall be limited to one sign
per premises and shall not exceed thirtytwo
(32) sq. ft. per side with a maximum
of two (2) sides. A property having more
than 400 feet of street frontage shall be
allowed to display one sign for each 400
feet of street frontage or part thereof,
with a minimum distance of 175 feet
between signs. Corner properties may
use either street frontage, but not both
street frontages, to determine the total
length of the developed property.
b. Such signs shall be displayed for not
5.5 | Signage
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 133
more than twelve (12) days per zoning
certificate, and not to exceed forty-eight
(48) days per year, per establishment.
c. New businesses shall be allowed an
additional promotional display period
of up to twenty (20) consecutive days,
during which a temporary sign may be
displayed. This display period allowed for
new businesses shall not run concurrently
with display periods otherwise allowed in
this section, but signage is subject to the
same limitations of this section.
d. Temporary signage in lieu of permanent
signage. Except as otherwise specified
in this Section, the use of one temporary
sign per premises shall be permitted
only for periods not to exceed forty
(40) consecutive days (extensions may
be granted by the Zoning Inspector,
maximum of 2 extensions, totaling a
maximum of 120 days per year) and only
with the issuance of a Special Temporary
Use Zoning Certificate from the Zoning
Inspector. The Special Temporary Use
Zoning Certificate will be issued only
under the following conditions:
i. When new construction of
improvements on the premises has
been completed, in total compliance
with this Zoning Resolution, and
the permanent sign has not been
installed, or installed but not
completed.
ii. When an existing sign has been
damaged and is being repaired, and
said sign is the principal means of
visual advertisement for the premises.
iii. The temporary sign must be removed
upon the installation of the a
permanent sign;
iv. The maximum size of temporary signs
under this section shall not exceed the
total square footage of that allowed
by this resolution for the proposed
new sign or damaged existing sign.
e. No property shall display temporary
signage, except as otherwise allowed
or exempted by another section of this
Resolution, for more than six (6) months
per calendar year.
F. Residential Districts. The following restrictions
apply to signs in residential districts:
1. Signs in this section may be lighted between
6:00 A.M. and 11:00 P.M., the source of
which is not visible from off the premises.
Except as otherwise provided in this Article,
signs permitted in the “A-A”, “A-30”, “A”,
“A-2”, “B”, “B-2”, “C”, “D”, “DD” Districts
and Community Unit Plans shall be limited to
the following.
2. Signs that identify residential subdivisions
or other single, two-family, or multi-family
premises of two acres or more in total land
area are permitted, subject to a maximum of
twenty (20) sq. ft. of surface area for each
main entrance into the premises; maximum
overall height of the sign shall not exceed
ten (10) feet. Surface area within the above
limitations may be allocated between both
sides of an entrance street if both sides are
on the premises.
3. Signs that identify single, two-family, or
multi-family premises of less than two acres
in total land area having six or more dwelling
units, as well as selected Conditional Uses
(identified in Article 5.4), are permitted,
subject to a maximum of twelve (12) sq. ft. of
surface area per premises, maximum overall
height not to exceed ten (10) feet. Surface
area within the above limitations may be
allocated between both sides of an entrance
street if both sides are on the premises.
Signage | 5.5
Article 5: Development Standards
134 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
4. Signs that identify churches, non-profit
organizations, swim clubs, tennis clubs,
schools, parks, golf courses, public buildings,
agricultural uses, and similar permitted uses
are allowed, subject to one (1) freestanding
sign per premises, with a maximum of forty
(40) square feet of surface area per side,
maximum of two (2) sides. Such freestanding
signs shall not exceed ten (10) feet in height
and shall be setback at least ten (10) feet
from edge of pavement and out of right-ofway
and at least five (5) feet from all other
property lines. In addition, wall signs are
allowed, subject to a maximum of twenty
(20) square feet per building. Wall signs may
project up to six (6) feet from the building
wall, and a minimum ground clearance above
pedestrian areas shall be eight (8) feet.
G. Sign Allocations:
1. Freestanding Signs. The following
restrictions apply to freestanding signs:
a. One free-standing sign is permitted per
premises in “O”, “O-1”, “OO”, “E”, “EE”,
“H”, “ID”, “FF”, and “GG” Districts only,
except that on premises with developed
property having more than 400 feet of
street frontage, additional signs are
permitted on a single premise subject to
a maximum of one free-standing sign for
each 400 feet of street frontage or part
thereof and a minimum distance of 175
feet between signs. Corner properties
may use either street frontage, but not
both streets, to determine total length
of developed property. Businesses shall
be allowed to retain one existing legal
freestanding sign if adjoining properties
become integrated into a single premise.
To the maximum extent feasible,
freestanding signs shall be located within
a landscaped area, equal to or greater
than the surface area of the sign.
b. Minimum front yard setback of leading
edge of sign is ten (10) feet from edge of
pavement or at the edge of right-of-way,
whichever is the greater setback.
c. Minimum side and rear yard setbacks of
leading edge of a sign is to be ten (10)
feet from property line.
d. Maximum height from finished grade
level is ten (10) feet in “O”, “O-1” and
“OO” Districts, fifteen (15) feet in “E” and
“EE” Districts, and twenty-five (25) feet in
“H”, “FF”, “ID” and “GG” Districts.
e. Maximum surface area per side (limit
2 sides) is to be thirty-two (32) sq. ft.
in “O”, “O-1” and “OO” Districts, one
hundred (100) sq. ft. in “E”, “EE” Districts
and one hundred fifty (150) sq. ft. in “H”,
“FF”, “ID” and “GG” Districts or zero
point five (O.5) sq. ft. per side of sign for
each lineal foot of developed property
along a public street frontage, whichever
is less. Corner properties may use either
street frontage to determine surface area
of the sign.
f. A property owner shall be permitted up to
fifty (50) sq. ft. per side of signage even
if the property frontage falls below the
100 lineal feet in the “E”, “EE”, “H”, “FF”,
“ID” and “GG” Districts only.
g. Any freestanding sign being permitted
shall include the street number of the
property (not less than 4 inches high).
h. In order to use a bonus formula, an
applicant for a permit must present all
relevant bonus calculations. An owner of
premises may elect one of the following
three sign area bonus formulas:
i. Bonus Formula 1: For premises where
the full allowed sign area (single face)
of freestanding sign is not utilized, the
unused area may be multiplied by two
(2) and added to the permissible wall
sign area, not to exceed the maximum
per structure allowed in Article
5.5,G,2,a.
ii. Bonus Formula 2: For premises with
multiple businesses or other users,
where the freestanding sign has a
5.5 | Signage
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 135
minimum of 75% of the allowable
sign area permanently allocated
as main center identification
and a maximum of 25% as user
identification, then the main center
identification portion of the sign may
be increased by a maximum of 25% of
the allowable sign area.
iii. Bonus Formula 3: To encourage the
use of monument style signs, for
premises where the owner chooses
to limit the maximum height of a
freestanding sign to 6 feet, the
sign support structure shall not be
calculated in determining the total
surface area of the sign.
iv. For the purpose of this Subsection h:
Main Center Identification is defined
as identification of the premises as a
whole.
User Identification is defined as
identification of individual businesses
or other users on the premises.
2. Wall Signs. The following restrictions apply
to wall signs:
a. Maximum sign area in “O”, “O-1”, “OO”
Districts is 20% of the facade area or
forty (40) sq. ft. of total surface area
per facade, whichever is less, except as
specified in Article 5.5,G,1,h. Maximum
sign area in “E”, “EE”, “H”, “FF”, “ID”
and “GG” Districts is 20% of facade area
or two hundred fifty (250) sq. ft. of total
surface area per structure, whichever
is less, except as specified in Article
5,5,G,1,h. Façade areas greater than
2,500 sq. ft. shall be permitted to have
up to 375 sq. ft. of sign area, and facade
areas greater than 5,000 sq. ft. shall
be permitted to have up to 500 sq. ft.
of sign area. The number of signs or
their placement on the structure is not
restricted to the facade used for surface
area calculation.
b. Maximum projection from facade surface
shall be six (6) feet. Minimum ground
clearance above pedestrian areas shall
be eight (8) feet.
c. Wall signs are prohibited in residential
districts, except for permitted
nonresidential uses located in residential
districts, such as churches, non-profit
organizations, swim clubs, tennis
clubs, schools, parks, golf courses,
public buildings and similar permitted
uses. Where wall signs are allowed in
residential districts, they shall not exceed
twenty (20) square feet per building. Wall
signs may project up to six (6) feet from
the building wall, and a minimum ground
clearance above pedestrian areas shall
be eight (8) feet.
3. Variable Message Signs. The following
restrictions shall apply to variable message
signs:
a. One variable message sign per street
frontage per premises is permitted in “E”,
“EE”, “H”, “FF”, “ID”, “O-1”, “O”, “OO”,
and “GG” Districts only.
b. Variable message signs are prohibited
in residential districts, except signs that
identify conditional uses found in
Article 5.4.
c. Any sign using electronic technology for
changeable copy message boards which
malfunctions, fails, or ceases to operate
in its usual or normal programmed
manner causing motion, movement,
flashing or any other similar effects, shall
be repaired or disconnected within 24
hours by the owner or operator of such
sign.
d. Maximum height from finished grade
level shall not exceed that allowed in
Article 5.5,G,1,d and minimum front,
side and rear yard setbacks shall not
exceed those allowed in
Article 5.5,G,1,b and c.
Signage (Wall Signs & Variable Message Signs) | 5.5
Article 5: Development Standards
136 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
e. Maximum sign area per sign side, limit
2 sides, is 50% of the permitted total of
freestanding or wall signage per side.
f. No message, graphic, display or part
thereof shall be visible for less than ten
(10) seconds. During such interval, the
entire message, graphic or display shall
not be moving, flashing, scintillating,
animating nor changing in color or light
intensity or visibly changing in any other
manner. Maximum brightness levels for
variable message signs shall not exceed
twelve (12) foot-candles, measured
from the nearest point of any highway
or public road. All such signs shall be
equipped with a dimmer control and a
photo cell which shall constantly monitor
ambient light conditions and adjust
brightness accordingly.
g. The display change interval, which is
defined as the time period between when
one message, graphic or display becomes
illegible and the next message graphic or
display first reaches legibility, shall be .3
seconds or less.
h. Variable message signs shall not be
permitted on or as part of an off-premise
advertising sign.
4. Directional Signs. The following
restrictions apply to directional signs:
a. One (1) directional sign is permitted per
driveway for uses as described in Article
5.5,F,4 and in “O”, “O-1”, “OO”, “E”,
“EE”, “H”, “FF”, “ID” and “GG” Districts
only.
b. Minimum side yard setback of leading
edge of sign is five (5) feet.
c. Maximum height shall not be more than
three (3) feet above finished grade level
of the adjoining pavement surface.
d. Maximum sign area per sign side, is four
(4) sq. ft., limit 2 sides per sign, for uses
as described in Article 5.5,F,4 and in
“O”, “O-1” and “OO” Districts and six (6)
sq. ft. in “E”, “EE”,”H”, “FF”, “ID” and
“GG” Districts.
5. Private Traffic Control Signs. The
following restrictions apply to private traffic
control signs:
a. Private Traffic Control Signs are permitted
in all Zoning Districts. There is no limit
to the number of Private Traffic Control
Signs.
b. Minimum setback is ten (10) feet from
edge of pavement or at the edge of rightof-
way, whichever is the greater setback,
and five (5) feet from all other property
lines.
c. Maximum height from finished grade
level is eight (8) feet.
d. Maximum sign area per sign side is four
4 sq. ft., limit 2 sides.
6. Off-Premise Business Signs. Permanent
off-premise business signs shall be allowed
only if permitted by the State of Ohio
(O.D.O.T.).
a. An off-premise business sign allowed
under this Subsection 6 may be used as
a political sign in addition to any other
permitted use.
b. Off-Premise business Signs are permitted
in “E”, “EE”, “H”, “FF”, “ID” and “GG”
Districts and are subject to the limitations
of this Article.
c. Maximum sign area is three hundred
(300) sq. ft. per side (limit 2 sides) except
that in neighborhood retail areas the
maximum sign area is seventy-two (72)
sq. ft. per side (limit 2 sides).
d. Minimum front yard setback of leading
edge of sign is the same set back as
building regulations provide for permitted
building in the district in which the sign
is located. No leading edge of any sign
shall be closer than fifty (50) feet to a
residential district.
5.5 | Signage
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 137
e. Maximum height from finished grade
level is thirty-five (35) feet.
f. Minimum distance between off-premise
advertising signs measured by radius from
all existing off-premise advertising signs,
wherever located, is 500 radial feet, but
not more than one sign within 1000 radial
feet from the center point of any 4 way
intersection as defined in this article.
g. Operating time for lighting is 6:00 A.M. -
12:00 Midnight.
h. Minimum side and rear yard setbacks of
leading edge of sign to nearest property
line is fifteen (15) feet (except that no
leading edge shall be closer than fifty
(50) feet to a residential zone).
i. Variable message signs shall not be
permitted on or as part of an off-premise
advertising sign.
j. Illumination of signs: Light sources to
illuminate signs shall be shielded from
all adjacent residential districts and
all streets. In no case shall the lighting
exceed standards specified in Chapter
17, in the section labeled “Floodlighted
Signs” of the “I.E.S. LIGHTING
HANDBOOK 1987 APPLICATIONS
VOLUME”, Published by: Illuminating
Engineering Society of North America,
Copyrighted in 1987, Editor: John E.
Kaufman, P.E. FIES.
k. Prohibited Advertising. No person shall
advertise any tobacco product, alcohol
or alcoholic beverage on any off-premise
advertising sign, whether constructed
prior to or since the adoption of this
section and located within 500 feet of
any school, hospital, park or church.
l. Scenic Riverfront View. There shall be no
off-premise advertising signs erected on
the south side of State Route 52, from
500 feet east of the eastbound ramp from
the I-275 Connector, thence eastward
to the township line, or on the north
side of Roundbottom Road at any point
where the road is 400 feet or closer to
the Little Miami River, regardless of zone
classification.
H. Zoning Certificates, Fees & Administration.
1. Every sign requiring a Zoning Certificate
in existence at the time of adoption of
this Resolution shall be registered by the
owner within one hundred-eighty (180)
days after the adoption of this Resolution,
on forms provided by the Township Zoning
Department.
2. Except as otherwise provided within this
Resolution, it shall be unlawful to display,
erect, relocate, or alter any sign without first
filing with the Township Director of Planning
and Zoning an application in writing and
obtaining a Zoning Certificate.
3. When a Zoning Certificate has been issued
by the Zoning Inspector, it shall be unlawful
to change, modify, alter or otherwise deviate
from the terms and conditions of said Zoning
Certificate.
4. The following changes shall require a Zoning
Certificate, but no fee:
a. The electrical maintenance, or repainting
of a conforming sign.
b. The repair of a conforming sign.
5. Application for a Zoning Certificate shall be
made upon the forms provided by the Zoning
Inspector and shall include, but not be
limited to, the following information:
a. Name, address, and telephone number
of applicant, property owner and sign
contractor.
b. Location by street address of the
proposed sign.
c. Drawing to scale showing the design
proposed; the size & style of letters, lines
and symbols; method of illumination;
details and specifications of construction.
Signage (Zoning Certificates, Fees & | 5.5
Administration)
Article 5: Development Standards
138 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
d. Site Plan showing the exact location of
the sign in relation to the building, all
property lines, and rights-of-way lines
and plans.
e. Any other information or requirements as
requested by the Zoning Inspector (such
as Ohio Department of Transportation
approval).
6. The Township shall have the right to assess
a Zoning Certificate fee for each sign,
which is nonrefundable and set by separate
resolution.
7. It shall be the duty of the Signage Inspector
or Zoning Inspector, who shall be the
enforcing officer, upon the filing of an
application for a Zoning Certificate, to
examine such plans and specifications and
the premises upon which it is proposed to
erect the sign. If it shall appear that the
proposed structure is in compliance with
all the requirements of this Resolution, the
Signage Inspector or Zoning Inspector shall
then issue the Zoning Certificate within
fifteen (15) business days. If not, he shall
state in writing to the applicant his reason(s)
for denial within ten (10) business days of
the date of application.
8. If an otherwise lawful sign is erected,
altered or relocated without a Zoning
Certificate as required by this Resolution, the
owner of such sign may subsequently obtain
a Zoning Certificate for such sign upon
compliance with all applicable provisions
of this Resolution and the payment of all
applicable fees, together with a late filing
fee to be established by the Anderson
Township Board of Trustees.
9. It shall be the responsibility of the Zoning
Inspector to register and keep records of all
conforming and nonconforming signs.
10. The Signage Inspector or Zoning Inspector is
authorized to remove any illegal sign located
in the right of way or on public property in the
interest of public safety and welfare and cite
the owner of such sign. Signs removed by the
Zoning Inspector will be held in storage on
Township premises and may be disposed of
unless claimed within two (2) weeks.
5.5 | Signage
20’
20’
20’
20’
20’
Apex
Curb Line or Edge Of Pavement
Drive/Street
Drive/Street
36”
10’
20’
Drive/Street
Drive/Street
Vision
Clearance
Area
Illustration 5.15: Site Vision Triangle
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 139
Illustration 5.16: Sign Area Measurement Calculations
Signage | 5.5
Article 5: Development Standards Monument Signage | Area = A x B
Wall Signage | Area = A x B
Pole Signage | Area = A x B
A
B
B
If Pole Width > 1’
Then Pole Area Is Calculated
as Part of Sign Area
A
B
A
If Channel Letter Signage Then Draw
Box Around Letters and Calculate Area Within
140 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
ARTICLE 6
Definitions
6.1 Definitions................................................................... 140
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 141
6.1 General Definitions
General Definitions: Words, terms, and phrases not
otherwise defined in this Article shall have, for the
purpose of this Resolution, the meaning or meanings
attributed to them in current English usage. Words
used in the present tense shall include the future; the
singular number shall include the plural, and the plural
singular; the word “building” shall include the word
“structure”; and the word “shall” is mandatory and not
directory.
A
ATZC: Anderson Township Zoning Commission.
Abutting or Adjoining: To physically touch or border
upon; or to share a common property line or border.
Accessory Apartment: A single dwelling unit
apartment intended for use as a complete independent
living facility that is in the same structure as, under the
same ownership as, and subordinate to a residence
constructed as a single-family residence, and with one
of the two dwelling units occupied as the principal
residence of the owner.
Accessory Building or Use: A subordinate building,
structure or use which is naturally and normally
incidental to the main building or use and erected at
the same time or after the construction of the main
building. An accessory building attached to the main
building in a substantial manner by a wall or roof shall
be considered part of the main building.
Adjacent: The same as “Abutting or Adjoining.”
Adult Arcade: An establishment where for any form
of consideration, one or more still or motion picture
projectors, slide projectors or similar machines, or
other image producing machines, for viewing by five
or fewer persons each, are regularly used to show
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions which are characterized
by the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
ARTICLE 6
Definitions
Article 6: Definitions Accessory Building Diagram
Accessory
Building
Property
Line
Rear Yard
Area
142 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
Adult Bookstore, Adult Novelty Store or Adult
Video Store: An establishment which derives fifty
percent or more of its revenue from, or maintains
fifty percent or more of its in-store inventory (either
measured by display area or retail value) in, one or
more of the following:
1. Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed
matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides, or other visual representations which
are characterized by the depiction of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas;
2. Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia
which are designed for use or marketed primarily
for stimulation of human genital organs or related to
sexual activities.
3. An establishment may have other principal
business purposes that do not involve the offering
for sale, rental or viewing of materials depicting or
describing specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas, and still be categorized as adult
bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video store.
Such other business purposes will not serve to
exempt such an establishment from being categorized
as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store or adult
video store so long as one of its principal business
purposes is offering for sale or rental, for some
form of consideration, thematerials which depict
or describe specified anatomical areas or specified
sexual activities and one or more of the fifty percent
thresholds in this definition is met.
4. Beverages are served, in which persons
appear in a state of nudity in the performance of their
duties.
Adult Family Home: A residence or a facility that
provides accommodations for three to five unrelated
adults with supervision and personal care services
to at least three of these unrelated adults. This
definition shall include paid professional support staff
provided by a sponsoring agency either living with the
residents on a 24-hour basis or present on shifts, who
live together as a single housekeeping unit in a longterm,
family-like environment in which staff persons
provide care, education, and participation in community
activities for the residents in order to enable them
to live as independently as possible in a residential
environment. The definition shall not include an
alcoholism or drug treatment center, a work release
facility for convicts or ex-convicts, or other housing
facilities serving as an alternative to incarceration
Adult Motel: A motel, hotel or similar commercial
establishment which:
1. Offers public accommodations, for any form
of consideration, which provide patrons with
closed-circuit television transmissions, films,
motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or
other photographic reproductions which are
characterized by the depiction or description
of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas and which specifically
advertises the availability of this sexually
oriented type of material by means of a
sign visible from the public right-of-way, or
by means of any off-premises advertising,
including but not limited to, newspapers,
magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or
television; or
2. Offers a sleeping room for rent for a period
of time less than ten hours; or
3. Offers a sleeping room for rent on a prorated
hourly basis; or
4.. Allows a tenant or occupant to sub-rent the
sleeping room for a time period of less than
ten hours.
Adult Motion Picture Theater: A commercial
establishment used for a principal purpose of
presenting motion pictures characterized by their
emphasis on portrayals of specified anatomical areas
or on specified sexual activities.
Adult Theater: A theater, concert hall, auditorium,
or similar building used for a principal purpose of
presenting live acts characterized by their emphasis on
individuals in a state of nudity or in specified sexual
activities.
6.1 | General Definitions
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 143
Agriculture: Farming; ranching; algaculture meaning
the farming of algae; aquaculture; apiculture;
horticulture; viticulture; animal husbandry, including,
but not limited to, the care and raising of livestock,
equine, and fur-bearing animals; poultry husbandry
and the production of poultry and poultry products;
dairy production; the production of field crops, tobacco,
fruits, vegetables, nursery stock, ornamental shrubs,
ornamental trees, flowers, sod, or mushrooms;
timber; pasturage; any combination of the foregoing;
and the processing, drying, storage, and marketing
of agricultural products when those activities are
conducted in conjunction with, but are secondary to,
such husbandry or production provided, however that:
1. The operation of any such accessory uses shall be
secondary to that of normal agricultural activities;
and
2. The above uses shall not include the feeding
or sheltering of animals or poultry in penned
enclosures within 100 feet of any residential
zoning district. Agriculture does not include the
feeding of garbage to animals or the operation or
maintenance of a commercial stockyard or feedyard.
Alley: A strip of land, dedicated to public use, primarily
to provide vehicular service access to the side or rear of
properties otherwise abutting on a street.
Alter: To change in any way, including but not limited
to reconstruction, redesign, re-illumination that changes
the lighting design, sign face replacement that changes
the sign face design, sign face change, and painting in a
different color than the existing color, excluding changes
in changeable copy on signs.
Apartment: A room or a suite of rooms in a dwelling
intended, designed or used as a residence by a single
family.
Apartment, Efficiency: An apartment consisting of a
single room for living and sleeping purposes, together
with kitchen and sanitation facilities.
Apartment House: See Dwelling, Multiple.
Applicant: Unless otherwise specified, an owner or
other person with a legal property interest, including, a
subdivider, developer, or other agent of the landowner,
who has filed an application for subdivision or
development.
Article: A section of the Anderson Township Zoning
Resolution.
B
Base Flood: The flood having a one (1) percent chance
of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
Basement: A story having part but not more than
one- half (1/2) its height below grade. A basement is
counted as a story for the purpose of height regulation.
Bed and Breakfast: A private owner-occupied
residence with one to three guest rooms contained
within that structure and operated so that guests reside
at the home for not longer than two continuous weeks.
No kitchen facilities may be provided for use by guests.
Berm: In the context of landscaping, bufferyard, or
screening requirements, shall mean a mound of earth
typically used to shield, screen, and buffer undesirable
views and to separate potentially incompatible uses.
Board: The Township Board of Zoning Appeals as
created by this Resolution.
Boarding House: A building other than a hotel where,
for compensation, meals, or lodging and meals, are
provided for three (3) but not more than twenty (20)
persons.
Brewery: A large-scale facility for the brewing of beer
for sale on the premises, as well as for off-site sales
and distribution, that produces more than 10,000 barrels
annually and may include restaurant/bar space, tasting
or retail space. The brewing operation processes the
ingredients to make beer and ale by mashing, cooking
and fermenting. The brewing operation does not
include the production of any other alcoholic beverage.
Buffer: A landscaped area adjoining or surrounding a
land use and unoccupied in its entirety by any building,
structure, paving or portion of such land use, for the
purposes of screening and softening the effects of the
land use, no part of which buffer is used for recreation
or parking.
General Definitions | 6.1
Article 6: Definitions
144 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
Buildable Area: Space remaining on a lot after the
minimum zoning requirements for yards, setbacks,
building width, and allowance for panhandles and
other restrictions have been met.
Building: Any structure designed or intended for the
support, enclosure, shelter or protection of persons,
animals, chattels or property and when separated,
except by dividing walls, each portion of such building
so separated shall be deemed a separate building.
Building Frontage: Total lineal feet of the building
length of that facade which fronts the principal
dedicated street, or that facade upon which the main
entrance to the building is situated.
Building Line: The line indicating the minimum
horizontal distance required between the street line
and the building or any projection thereof other than a
step or uncovered porch..
Building, Height of: The vertical distance from the
average grade to the highest point of the coping of a
flat roof or to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the
mean height level between eaves and ridge for gable,
hip and gambrel roofs.
Building Height Diagram
Building, Public: Any facility intended for use by the
public and owned by or leased or rented to the Forest
Hills Local School District, the Anderson Township Park
District, the Hamilton County Park Board, the Board of
Township Trustees or any other political subdivision.
Business Day: Any day other than Saturday, Sunday
or a state or federally designated holiday.
Business, New: A business which begins commercial
activity at a new location or a business which changes
its name.
Business Sign: A permanent sign which directs
attention to a business, profession or industry or
to products sold, manufactured or assembled or to
services or entertainment offered upon the premises
where such sign is displayed.
C
Campground: Any land or open-air location where
one or more persons erect or occupy a temporary
shelter, such as a tent or recreational vehicle, providing
outdoor recreational facilities, for a temporary period
of time; includes camps and summer camps.
Cellar: A story having more than one-half (1/2) of its
height below grade. A cellar is counted as a story
for the purpose of height regulation only if used for
purposes other than storage, utilities or the quarters of
a janitor or watchman employed on the premises.
Cellar Diagram
Cemetery: An area of land set apart for the sole
purpose of the burial of bodies of dead persons or
animals, and for the erection of customary markers,
monuments, and mausoleums.
6.1 | General Definitions
One-Story
Building
Cellar
Basement
Average Grade
Two-Story
Building
When “A” is equal to or greater than “B”
Then “C” is a basement.
When “A” is less than “B”, then
“C” is a cellar.
A
B
C
A
B
C
Buffer Diagram
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 145
Church / Place of Worship: A building or site used
principally for religious worship.
Clinic: An office or a group of offices where
physicians, surgeons or dentists practice together in
treating the sick or injured, but not including rooms for
overnight lodging of patients.
Club: A building or portion thereof or premises owned
or operated by a corporation, association, or group
of persons for a social, educational or recreational
purpose, but not primarily for profit or to render a
service which is customarily carried on as a business.
Club, Country: A golf course, including a clubhouse
and incidental facilities, owned or operated by a club.
College or University: An institution of higher
education authorized by the State to offer associates,
baccalaureate or graduate degrees.
Commemorative Plaque: A permanent sign which
memorializes the historical, political, social, religious,
scientific or educational significance of the premises.
Construction, Beginning of: Completion of the
in-ground permanent foundations for one or more
buildings of a Development Plan.
Contiguous: See “Abutting or adjoining.”
Cultural Facility: Establishments providing cultural,
historic, or educational services to the public and
which are not operated for profit. Typical uses
include museums, outdoor drama theaters (not driveins),
botanical gardens, and zoos.
D
Day Nursery or Day Care Center: Any place which
provides care for five (5) or more children for a fee, but
not including overnight lodging.
1. Day Care Center, Adult: A place that provides
community based programs designed to meet the
health, social and related needs of functionally
impaired adults during daytime hours.
2. Day Care Center, Child: Any place in which
child day care is provided, with or without
compensation, for thirteen (13) or more
children at one time or any place that is not
the permanent residence of the licensee or
administrator in which child day care is provided,
with or without compensation, for seven (7) or
more children at one time or four (4) or more
children under two years of age at one time. For
the purposes of this definition, any children under
six years of age who are related to the provider
of child day care and who are on the premises
shall be counted.
3. Day Care Center, Type A: A permanent residence
of the administrator in which child day-care is
provided for seven (7) to twelve (12) children at
one time or for four (4) to twelve (12) children at
one time if for the latter four (4) or more children
are under two years of age. Any children under
six years of age who are related to a licensee,
administrator, or employee and who are on the
premises shall be counted.
4. Day Care Center, Type B: A permanent residence
of the provider in which child day-care is
provided for one (1) to six (6) children at one time
and in which no more than three (3) children
may be under two years of age at one time. Any
children under six years of age who are related to
the provider and who are on the premises shall
be counted.
DBH: See “Diameter at Breast Height.”
Developed Property: All real property or a portion
thereof that is improved with buildings, paved parking
or storage areas, or that is actively and directly used
for agriculture, lumbering, mining, recreation or similar
activities. “Buffering” and similar open space areas
shall not be included in the developed portion of the
property except where such areas are required as
setbacks.
Development Plan: A plan for the specific
development and specific use of a parcel or tract
of real estate, illustrated by a plat showing the
boundaries of such parcel or tract, the location, size,
height, and use of all structures, all vehicular and
General Definitions | 6.1
Article 6: Definitions
146 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
pedestrian ways and parking areas, both public and
private, and all landscaped areas to be erected and
maintained thereon; and further explained by such
specifications, conditions and limitations as may be
imprinted on the plat, or contained in the Amendment
or Supplement to the Resolution incorporating the
development plan as an integral part of the zoning
regulations applicable to the real estate.
Development: Any manmade change to improved or
unimproved real estate, including but not limited to
buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling,
grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.
Diameter at Breast Height (DBH): Shall mean
the trunk diameter of a tree, measured in inches at a
height of 4.5 feet from the ground, or in the case of a
tree that is divided into multiple trunks below 4.5 feet,
as measured at the most narrow point beneath the
point of trunk division.
Directional Sign: A permanent sign designed to
direct the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic in or
out of a premises.
Director of Planning and Zoning: Shall mean the
Director of the Anderson Township Department of
Planning and Zoning or his or her designee.
Distillery: A large-scale facility for distilling of liquor
for sale on the premises, as well as for off-site sales
and distribution, that produces more than 50,000 proof
gallons annually and may include restaurant/bar space,
tasting or retail space.
District: A section or sections of the unincorporated
territory of Anderson Township, Hamilton County, for
which the regulations governing the use of buildings
and premises, the height of buildings, size of yards and
the area of lots are uniform.
Drive-in Establishment: One in which persons are
served in cars or food is eaten or can be eaten in
cars or where services are provided to or operations
conducted for persons in cars.
Drive Through Facility: Shall mean an establishment
that encourages or permits customers to receive
services, obtain goods, or be entertained while
remaining in their motor vehicles.
Driveway: Shall mean a private roadway providing
access to a street or highway from a building or
structure.
Dwelling: A building or portion thereof designed,
intended or used exclusively for residence purposes
and including kitchen and sanitation facilities. The
term “dwelling” does not include a tent, cabin or
trailer.
Dwelling, Single-Family: A building designed for or
occupied exclusively by one family.
Dwelling, Two-Family: A building designed for or
occupied exclusively by two families.
Dwelling, Multiple: A building or portion thereof
designed for or occupied by more than two families,
including housing for the elderly.
E
EPA: Environmental Protection Agency.
Erect: To build, construct, reconstruct, alter, relocate,
modify, attach, hang, place, suspend, or affix, and shall
also include the painting of signs, except the repainting
of signs in the same color (s).
Escort Agency: A person or business association who
or which furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to
furnish escorts as one of its primary business purposes
for a fee, tip, or other consideration. Escort means
a person who, for any form of consideration, agrees
or offers to act as a companion or date for another
person, to privately model lingerie or to privately
perform a striptease for another person, or to provide
sexual activities for another person.
Establishment: A distinct office or distinct place
of business from which a business or other activity,
or more than one related business or activity, is
conducted. Single offices in which more than one
business activity is conducted are considered one
establishment.
Estimated Replacement Value: The cost which
6.1 | General Definitions
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 147
would be currently incurred by a sign owner to replace
the existing sign with a new sign of substantially the
same size, copy, materials and other characteristics.
F
Facade: That portion of a building including a canopy
or awning facing the street or that wall of a building
through which there is primary access for customers.
Where more than one business occupies the same
building, the facade for each business shall be that
portion of the building occupied by the business which
faces the street or which provides the primary access.
Family: A person or a group of persons occupying a
premises and living as a single housekeeping unit,
as distinguished from a group occupying a boarding
house, lodging house or hotel, as herein defined.
Federal Aid Primary (FAP): See Primary System.
Finished Grade Level: The normal grade of premises
after development. Any mounding at the base of a sign
above the normal grade shall not be considered as
raising finished grade level.
Flood or Flooding: A general and temporary condition
of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land
areas from the overflow of inland waters; the unusual
and rapid accumulations or run off of surface waters
from any source.
Floodplain: Any land area susceptible to being
inundated by water from any source.
Floodplain Diagram
Flood Plain Management Definitions: Certain
terms used in this Resolution are defined as set forth
in regulations governing the National Flood Insurance
Program (44 CFR Section 59.1), and in Flood Plain
Management Definitions (Hamilton County Regional
Planning Commission, June, 1982).
Floodway: The channel of a river or other watercourse
and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in
order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
Floodway Fringe: The area of the base flood plain
outside the floodway.
Floor Area, Gross: Shall mean the sum of the gross
horizontal areas of all floors measured in square feet,
not including the basement floor, measured from
the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the
centerline of walls separating two buildings. Gross
Floor Area shall include all areas used for storage,
elevator shafts, and mechanical equipment.
Floor Area, Net: For the purpose of calculating
parking spaces, shall mean the sum of the gross
horizontal areas of all floors measured in square feet,
not including the basement floor or areas that are used
primarily for storage, elevator shafts, and mechanical
equipment, measured from the exterior faces of
the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls
separating two buildings.
Freestanding Sign: Any permanent sign supported by
a permanent structure such as a pole, wall or fence, or
mounted directly to the ground, but not including any
sign attached to a building.
Frontage: All the property on one side of a street
between two intersecting streets (crossing or
terminating) measured along the line of the street,
or if the street is dead ended, then all of the property
abutting on one side between an intersecting street
and the dead end of the street.
G
Garage, Private: An accessory building housing no
more than four (4) motor vehicles owned or normally
operated by a resident of the premises.
General Definitions | 6.1
Article 6: Definitions
148 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
Garage, Commercial: A facility that without
discrimination performs all customary repair services
for automobiles, or other motorized or nonmotorized
equipment owned by the general public.
Garage, Storage: Any building or premises used
for housing only, of motor-driven vehicles pursuant
to previous arrangements and not to transients, and
at which automobile fuels and oils are not sold, and
motor-driven vehicles are not equipped, repaired, hired
or sold.
Government Facility: Any building or structure used
by government for administrative or service purposes,
but not including buildings devoted solely to the
storage and maintenance of equipment and materials.
Includes but not limited to police and fire stations,
government buildings, libraries, and similar uses and
facilities.
Grade:
1. For buildings having walls adjoining one
street only, the elevation of the sidewalk at
the center of the wall adjoining the street.
2. For buildings having walls adjoining more
than one street, the average of the elevation
of the sidewalks at the centers of all walls
adjoining the streets.
3. For buildings having no wall adjoining the
street, the average level of the finished
surface of the ground adjacent to the
exterior walls of the building. Any wall
approximately parallel to and not more
than five (5) feet from a street line is to be
considered as adjoining the street.
Granny Cottage: Temporary detached living on a
single-family lot subordinate in size, location, and
appearance to the primary residence and providing
complete housekeeping facilities for the exclusive use
of the occupants. The owner of the principal residence
and lot must live in one of the dwelling units on the lot
and at least one occupant of the principal residence
and one of the unit must be related by blood, marriage,
adoption or other legal relationship.
Greenhouse: A glassed or translucent enclosure used
for the cultivation or protection of plants.
Group Home: A residence or facility that provides
accommodations for six (6) to sixteen (16) unrelated
adults and provides supervision and personal care
services to at least three of these unrelated adults.
This definition shall include paid professional support
staff provided by a sponsoring agency either living
with the residents on a 24-hour basis or present on
shifts, who live together as a single housekeeping unit
in a long-term, family-like environment in which staff
persons provide care, education, and participation
in community activities for the residents in order to
enable them to live as independently as possible in
a residential environment. The definition shall not
include an alcoholism or drug treatment center, a
work release facility for convicts or ex-convicts, or
other housing facilities serving as an alternative to
incarceration.
H
Highway, Major or Secondary: An officially
designated state or federal numbered highway or
other road designated as a major street on the official
Motorway Plan of Hamilton County.
Historical Motor Vehicle: Any motor vehicle that
is over twenty-five years old and is owned solely as a
collector’s item and for participation in club activities,
exhibitions, tours, parades, and similar uses, but that in
no event is used for general transportation.
Home Occupation: Any occupation or profession
carried on by a member of the immediate family,
residing on the premises, in connection with which
there is used no sign or no display that will indicate
from the exterior that the building is being utilized
in whole or in part for any purpose other than that
of a dwelling; there is no commodity sold upon the
premises; no person is employed other than a member
of the immediate family residing on the premises; and
no mechanical equipment is used except such as is
customary for purely domestic or household purposes.
Home occupation shall not include barber shops,
beauty shops, shoe or hat repair, or tailoring shops or
6.1 | General Definitions
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 149
any type of pickup station or any similar commercial
activities.
Hospital: An institution providing health services
and medical or surgical care to persons, primarily
temporary in-patients, with illness, disease, injury,
deformity, or other physical or mental condition, and
including as an integral part of the institution related
facilities such as laboratories, out-patient facilities
or training facilities. “Hospital” does not include
institutions for the permanent care of, or occupation
by, the poor, infirm, incurable or insane.
Hotel or Motel: A building in which lodging is
provided and offered to the public for compensation
and which is open to transient guests, in
contradistinction to a boarding house or lodging house.
Household Furnishings: An item found and utilized
within the interior of a dwelling, including, but not
limited to, beds, appliances, upholstered furniture, and
other utilitarian household goods.
Housing for the Elderly: Two or more dwelling units
specifically designed for the needs of elderly persons
and conforming to the requirements of State or Federal
programs providing for housing for the elderly.
I
Institution: A public or quasi-public establishment
serving a nonprofit purpose, as for a religious,
educational or charitable use.
Intersection, 4 Way: The place where two or
more roads, highways, private drives, or alleys or
any combination of these join one another at, or
approximately at, right angles, or any other angle
designated with a signal head in all four directions.
Impervious Surface: Any hard-surfaced, man-made
area that does not readily absorb or retain water,
including but not limited to building roofs, parking and
driveway areas, sidewalks and praved recreational
facilities. For the purposes of calculating the
impervious surface ratio for determining the intensity
of a use, pervious pavement or pavers, gravel and
other similarly paved areas shall be counted as 100%
impervious.
J
Junk Automobile: A motor vehicle which is wrecked,
dismantled, or inoperative; without limiting the term a
motor vehicle is a junk automobile if:
1. It has remained at or near the same location
for a period of thirty consecutive days or
more; or
2. Its state registration has been expired for
more than thirty days.
L
Limited Access Highways: Public roadways, as
defined by the Hamilton County Engineer or Ohio
Department of Transportation. In Anderson Township,
these routes include Interstate 275 and U.S. Route
52 in their entirety, and Five Mile Road north of
Beechmont Avenue and south of Clough Pike.
Loading Area/Dock: An off-street space or berth for
the loading or unloading of freight carriers on the same
lot as the structure they serve.
Lodging House: A building where lodging only is
provided for compensation to three (3) or more but not
more than twenty (20) persons.
General Definitions
Lot Corner Diagram
| 6.1
Article 6: Definitions
150 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
Lot: A parcel of land occupied or intended for
occupancy by a use permitted in this Resolution and
the open spaces required by this Resolution and
having its principal frontage upon a street or place.
Lot, Corner: A lot abutting upon two (2) or more
streets at their intersection or upon two (2) parts of
the same street, and in either case forming an interior
angle or less than one hundred and thirty-five (135)
degrees.
Lot, Depth of: The mean horizontal distance between
the front and rear lot lines.
Lot, Double Frontage: A lot having a frontage on two
(2) non-intersecting streets, as distinguished from a
corner lot. (ss).
Lot of Record: A lot which is part of a subdivision,
the map of which has been recorded in the office of
the Recorder of Hamilton County; or a parcel of land,
the deed to which was of record on or prior to the
effective date of this Resolution. For the purpose
of these regulations, any preliminary plan of a
subdivision which has been approved by official action
of the Regional Planning Commission of Hamilton
County or a Planning Commission of a municipality
thereof, on or after January 1, 1945, shall have the
same status as if the subdivision plan was officially
recorded in the office of the Recorder of Hamilton
County.
Lot, Panhandle: A lot, also known as a “rear lot”
or “flag lot”, which utilizes a narrow strip of land or
stem, which is not a building site, to provide access
to, or legal frontage on, a public street or a private
street. Panhandle lots shall include but not be limited
to all lots that do not meet the minimum lot width
requirement within 200% of the front yard setback of
the respective zoning district.
M
Maintenance: The cleaning, painting, repair, or
replacement of defective parts of a sign in a manner
that does not alter the basic copy, design or structure,
type, size, location, motion, or illumination of the sign.
Manufactured Home: Any nonself-propelled vehicle
transportable in one or more sections, which in the
traveling mode is eight (8) body feet or more in width
or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or, when
erected on site, is 320 or more square feet, and which
is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be
used as a dwelling with or without a permanent
foundation when connected to the required utilities,
and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning
and electrical systems contained therein. Calculations
used to determine the number of square feet in
a structure are based on the structure’s exterior
dimensions measured at the largest horizontal
projections when erected on site. These dimensions
include all expandable rooms, cabinets, and other
projections containing interior space, but not to
include bay windows. A manufactured home shall
b o An establishment that is primarily used for
the production of beer and ale and must include
restaurant/bar space, tasting or retail space. The
brewing operation processes the ingredients to make
beer and ale by mashing, cooking and fermenting. The
brewing operation does not include the production of
any alcoholic beverage other than beer or ale. The
brewery shall not produce more than 10,000 barrels
of beer or ale per year. ear a label certifying that it is
General Definitions
Lot Panhandle Diagram
Lot Width
Measured Here
Front Yard
Rear Yard
Side Yard
Side Yard
Street
Panhandle
* Min Width 20’
* Panhandle Lots shall be 200%
of the required lot area.
6.1 |
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 151
built in compliance with Federal Manufactured Housing
Construction and Safety Standards.
Massage Parlor: A place where, for any form of
consideration or gratuity, massage, alcohol rub,
administration of fomentations, electric or magnetic
treatments, or any other treatment or manipulation of
the human body which occurs as part of or in connection
with specified sexual activities, or where any person
providing such treatment, manipulation, or service
related thereto, exposes his or her specified anatomical
areas. The definition of sexually oriented businesses
shall not include the practice of massage in any licensed
hospital, nor by a licensed chiropractor or osteopath,
nor by any nurse or technician working under the
supervision of a licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor
or osteopath, nor by trainers for any amateur,
semiprofessional or professional athlete or athletic team
or school athletic program.
Maximum Extent Feasible: No feasible and prudent
alternative exists, and all possible efforts to comply with
the regulation or minimize the potential harm or adverse
impacts have been undertaken. Economic considerations
may be taken into consideration.
Micro Antenna: Defined as antennas and transmission
facilities only with no supporting structures other than
brackets. Micro antennas shall be equal to or less than
5 feet in height and with an area of not more than 580
square inches.
Micro Brewery: An establishment that is primarily
used for the production of beer and ale and must include
restaurant/bar space, tasting or retail space. The
brewing operation processes the ingredients to make
beer and ale by mashing, cooking and fermenting. The
brewing operation does not include the production of any
alcoholic beverage other than beer or ale. The brewery
shall not produce more than 10,000 barrels of beer or ale
per year.
Micro Distillery: An establishment that is primarily
used for the production of spirits in small quantities of a
maximum of 52,000 cases or a maximum of 50,000 proof
gallons annually and must include restaurant/bar space,
tasting or retail space.
Mobile Home: A transportable, factory-built dwelling,
designed to be used as a year-round residential dwelling
and built prior to enactment of the Federal Manufactured
General Definitions
Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of
1974, which became effective June 15, 1976.
Modular Home: Factory-built certified as meeting the
(local or) State Building Code as applicable to modular
housing. Once certified by the state, modular homes
shall be to the same standards as site-built homes and
shall be installed on a permanent foundation.
N
Navigable Stream: The Ohio River; the Little Miami
River, from its mouth at the Ohio River north and east
to mile 7.1.
Neighborhood Retail Areas: Areas zoned for retail
use within a radius of 1500 feet of the intersections
of Salem and Sutton, Salem and Beacon, Salem and
Burney, Clough and Royal Green, Clough and Hunley,
Clough and Eight Mile, Roundbottom and YMCA and
Five Mile and Kellogg Roads.
Nonconforming Use: Any building or land lawfully
occupied by a use on the effective date of this
Resolution or any amendment or supplement thereto,
which does not conform with the Use Regulations of
the District in which it is situated.
Nonconforming Sign: A permanent sign existing on
any premises which was legal on the effective date of
the applicable section or sections of this Resolution
and which does not conform with the provisions of this
Resolution.
Non-Profit Organizations: An organization exempt
from taxation under Sec. 501 (c) (3), (4), (7), (8), (10)
or (19) of the Internal Revenue Code, Title 26, United
States Code, as in effect on the effective date of
this Article, and/or incorporated under Chapter 1702
of the Ohio Revised Code pertaining to non-profit
corporations.
Nude Model Studio: Any place where a person,
who regularly appears in a state of nudity or displays
specified anatomical areas, is provided for money or
any form of consideration to be observed, sketched,
drawn, painted, sculpted, photographed, or similarly
| 6.1
Article 6: Definitions
152 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
depicted by other persons.
Nudity or State of Nudity: The showing of either of
the following:
1. The human male or female genitals, pubic
area, or buttocks with less than a fully
opaque covering;
2. The female breast with less than a fully
opaque covering on any part of the nipple.
O
Off-Premise Business Sign: A permanent sign
which directs attention to a business, commodity,
or commercial or non-commercial service or
entertainment which is not conducted, sold or offered
upon the premises where such sign is located or
affixed.
Operator (Sexually Oriented Business): Means and
includes the owner, permit holder, custodian, manager,
operator or person in charge of any sexually oriented
business.
P
Parking Aisle: The driveway or access drive by which
a car enters and departs a parking space.
Parking Space: A graded and surfaced area of not
less than 180 square feet in an area either enclosed
or open for the parking of a motor vehicle, having
adequate ingress and egress to a public street, alley or
parking aisle.
Parking Lot: A parcel of land devoted to unenclosed
parking spaces.
Permanent Sign: A sign which is either permanently
anchored to the ground or permanently affixed to a
structure and not constructed of materials of temporary
durability.
Person: An individual, proprietorship, partnership,
corporation, association, or other legal entity..
Place: An open unoccupied space at least thirty (30) feet
wide, other than a street, permanently reserved as the
principal means of access to abutting property.
Portable Storage Containers – A portable structure,
crate or other container which is used for packing, moving
and/or temporary storage, and which: (1) is owned,
rented, borrowed or leased by the user and/or (2) is part of
a moving and storage service whereby a service provider
typically delivers and leaves a storage container, leaves it
for packing by a customer, and subsequently picks up the
container, after which it is typically moved to a company
warehouse or the customer’s destination.
Premise: Any tract or tracts of land which comprise a
single, integrated development or use of such land.
Primary System: That portion of the state highway
system as designated, or as may hereafter be designated
by the state as part of the federal-aid primary system of
highways, which designation has been approved by the
Secretary of Transportation of the United States, pursuant
to 70 Stat. 374 (1956), 23 U.S.C. 103.
Private Traffic Control Signs: Permanent signs placed
on private property, which relates to such property and
which is used to direct on site pedestrian or vehicular
traffic. Private Traffic Control Signs may include but
are not limited to messages such as private drive, no
trespassing, tenant parking only, reserved, and the like.
Public Park: Public land which has been designated for
park or recreational activities including a park, playground,
nature trail, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field,
basketball or tennis court, pedestrian/bicycle path, open
space, wilderness area, or similar public land within
the Township which is under the control, operation, or
management of the Board of Township Trustees, the Board
of County Commissioners, the Anderson Township Park
District, the Hamilton County Park District, the State of
Ohio, the U.S. Government, or a nonprofit corporation
R
Recreation, Commercial: A public or private indoor or
6.1 | General Definitions
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 153
a reflective surface that is solid, open mesh, or bar
configured and is in the shape of a shallow dish, cone,
horn or cornucopia. Such device shall be used to
transmit and/or receive radio or electromagnetic waves
between terrestrially and/or orbitally based uses. This
definition is meant to include but not limited to what
are commonly referred to as satellite earth stations,
TVROs, and satellite microwave antennas.
School: A privately-owned or publicly-owned preschool,
elementary school, middle school, junior high
school, high school, or vocational or professional
school, with no rooms regularly used for housekeeping
or sleeping rooms.
Sexual Encounter Establishment: A business
or commercial establishment that, as one of its
primary business purposes, offers for any form of
consideration, a place where two or more persons may
congregate, associate, or consort for the purpose of
specified sexual activities or the exposure of specified
anatomical areas or activities when one or more of
the persons is in a state of nudity or semi- nude. The
definition of sexually oriented businesses shall not
include an establishment where a medical practitioner,
psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional
person licensed by the state engages in medically
approved and recognized sexual therapy.
1. Establishment means and includes any of the
following:
a. The opening or commencement of any
such business as a new business;
b. The conversion of an existing business,
whether or not a sexually oriented
business, to any of the sexually oriented
businesses defined in this Article;
c. The addition of any of the sexually
oriented businesses defined in this
chapter to any other existing sexually
oriented business; or
d. The relocation of any such sexually
oriented business.
Shopping Center: A group of stores or shops for
retail sales and services designed and developed as
a unit, where the uses of such stores or shops are not
outdoor recreation facility operated as a commercial
activity, including but not limited to batting cages,
bowling alleys, drag strips, raceways, golf driving
ranges, gun-firing ranges, mechanical rides, miniature
golf courses, racquet clubs, arenas, amphitheaters,
stadiums, health and fitness facilities, and swimming
pools.
Recreation, Private Community Facility: A
building or facility operated by a private or non-profit
group for a social or recreational purpose, but not as
a commercial activity. Includes but is not limited to
country clubs, athletic fields, golf courses, swim/tennis
facilities, and YMCAs.
Recreation, Public Community Facility: A building
or facility operated by a governmental agency for a
social or recreational purpose, but not as a commercial
activity. Includes but is not limited to athletic
fields, golf courses, swim/tennis facilities, parks,
playgrounds, wildlife reservations, forests, senior
centers, and recreation centers.
Recreational, Cultural and Entertainment: A
public or private facility, of a non-commercial nature,
designed and equipped to be used for sport, leisure,
cultural, or entertainment activities including internal
recreation centers, private and public community
recreation facilities, and cultural facilities, but
excluding commercial recreation facilities.
Religious Institution: Any church, synagogue,
mosque, temple or building which is used primarily for
religious worship and related religious activities.
Roof Sign: A permanent sign erected or constructed
wholly upon or over the roof of any building and
supported on the roof structure. Signs which are an
integral part of the roof design and whose structural
members are not visible shall be considered wall signs
and not roof signs.
S
Satellite Dish Antenna: A device incorporating
General Definitions | 6.1
Article 6: Defifinitions
154 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
otherwise specifically designated.
Shrub: A woody plant consisting of several small
stems from the ground or small branches near the
ground, which may be deciduous or evergreen.
Specified Anatomical Areas: Means and includes
any of the following:
1. The human male or female genitals, pubic
area, or buttocks with less than a fully
opaque covering;
2. The female breast with less than a fully
opaque covering on any part of the nipple.
3. Specified Sexual Activities means and
includes any of the following:
4. The fondling or other intentional touching
of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks,
anus, or female breast;
5. Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or
simulated, including intercourse, oral
copulation, or sodomy;
6. Masturbation, actual or simulated;
7. Human genitals in a state of sexual
stimulation, arousal or tumescence;
8. Excretory functions as part of or in
connection with any of the activities set
forth in subdivisions (1) through (4) of this
definition.
Special Flood Hazard Area: All that area within
Zones A1-A30 and the unnumbered A Zones on
the Flood Insurance Rate Map for Unincorporated
Anderson Township, Hamilton County, Ohio, and
all that area within the unincorporated territory of
Hamilton County, Ohio, designated as being within
the flood plain of various streams in Appendix A of
the Storm Drainage and Open Space Master Plan for
Hamilton County, Ohio.
Sign: Any device and its supporting structure,
including any writing, word, number, pictorial,
illustration, decoration, emblem, symbol, trademark,
flag, banner, pennant, insignia, or similar feature
which is placed in a manner that the communication,
announcement, message, attraction, advertisement,
or promotion inherent to the device is visible or appears
to be intended to be visible to persons on adjoining
property or nearby public rights-of-way, and is used for
purposes of advertisement, announcement, declaration,
demonstration, identification or expression.
Sign Inspector: The individual appointed as such by the
Board of Township Trustees of Anderson Township, Ohio,
or his or her designee, whose responsibilities include, but
are not limited to, the issuance of zoning certificates for
signage and removal of illegal signs.
Sign Support Structure: Any part of the supporting
structure, including decorative cover of a freestanding
sign, that is greater than twelve (12) inches in width or
diameter, shall be calculated as part of the total surface
area of the sign, except when using Bonus Formula #3
under Article 5.5.
Surface Area: The entire area within a single continuous
perimeter enclosing the extreme limits of writing,
representation, emblem, logo, or any figure or similar
character together with any frame or other material or
color forming an integral part of a display. The area of
such sign shall be determined by computing the minimum
area of a polygon which completely encloses the sign face
and in which polygon no interior angle is greater than 180
degrees. Canopy, awnings or other translucent material,
which are back lighted, shall be considered part of the
surface area. Surface areas that intersect at an interior
angle greater than 90 degrees shall be considered one
surface area.
Story: That portion of a building, other than a cellar as
defined herein, included between the surface of any floor
and the surface of the floor next above it or, if there be no
floor above it, then the space between the floor and the
ceiling next above it. (See Illustration).
Story, Half: A space under a sloping roof which has the
line of intersection of roof decking and wall face not more
than three feet above the top floor level, and in which
space not more than two-thirds (2/3) of the floor area is
finished off for use.
Street: All property dedicated or intended or used,
whether public or private, for vehicular and pedestrian
movement, including street, highway, freeway or other
motorway right-of-way, and, except where limited or
controlled access, affording the principal means of access
to abutting property.
6.1 | General Definitions
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 155
a. Street right-of-way: Includes pavement, and
sidewalks and all of the land between opposite
property lines.
b. The dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel
of land and the contiguous right-of-way.
Structure: Anything constructed or erected, the
use of which requires location on the ground or
attached to something having a location on the
ground including, but without limiting the generality
of the foregoing, signs, areas improved for parking,
backstops for tennis courts, fences, swimming pools
and pergolas.
Structural Alterations: Any change in the
supporting members of a building, such as bearing
walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or
any increase in the area of cubical contents of the
building.
T
Telecommunications Tower: Any free-standing
structure, or any structure to be attached to a building
or other structure, that meets all of the criteria
contained in Ohio Revised Code Section 519.211 (B).
Telecommunications tower may be constructed as: a
“monopole”, meaning one cylindrical column in the
air; a “lattice tower”, meaning three or more vertical
legs trussed together; or a “guyed tower”, meaning
a structure that is secured to the ground by wires,
cables or similar material.
Temporary Sign: A sign for use for six (6) months or
less, not for permanent use, including transportable
signs which are not incidental to identifying a
delivery or service vehicle. The material of which
the sign may be made (cloth, canvas, light metal,
plastic, cardboard) or the manner in which the sign is
affixed to the ground or structure are of a nature not
suitable for permanent display because exposure to
the elements may unreasonably deface the message,
discolor or tear the material or loosen the method by
which a sign is anchored.
Tenant Space: A securable area separated from
other areas by walls and doors that is available for
lease or rent within a multi- tenant building, such
as tenant spaces typically found within an office
building, shopping mall, or strip center.
Trade Stimulators: A device, other than a sign,
which seeks to attract attention through the use of
a balloon or other display. This may or may not be
related to the primary use of the property.
Transportable Sign: A temporary sign that is
movable when mounted on a chassis, truck bed, or
trailer, which may be illuminated, that may display a
changeable message face on one or more sides.
Trailer: The word “trailer” shall include trailer
coach, automobile trailer, camp car or any towed or
self-propelled vehicle constructed, reconstructed, or
added to by means of accessories in such a manner
as will permit the use and occupancy thereof for:
a. Temporary human habitation for travel,
recreation, vacation, or other primarily transient
purposes, as opposed to a mobile home as
defined in in this Articleor manufactured home
as defined in this Article of this Resolution; or
b. Office use, or storage or conveyance of
machinery, tools, or equipment, including those
vehicles that are attached to an automobile or
truck for the sole purpose of transporting goods
or farm animals.
Trustees: Board of Anderson Township Trustees.
V
Variable Message Signs: A permanent sign
or graphic object which is displayed in a series
of electric lights, movable parts, or other image
producing devices, and whose message or graphic
changes in form, color, intensity or any other manner
more than once in a 24 hour period.
Variance: A means by which relief the Board of
Zoning Appeals may, because of special conditions,
authorize an exception to a strict rule or literal
enforcement of the Anderson Township Zoning
Resolution, and grant relief from particular
General Definitions | 6.1
Article 6: Definitions
156 | Anderson Township Ohio Zoning Resolution
unforeseen applications of the Resolution which
create practical difficulties or unnecessary hardships
relating to specific property.
Vehicle Stacking Space: A lane or area that is
specifically designated for cars to “stack” in while
utilizing drive-up or drive-through services at uses
that may include, but are not limited to, car washes,
restaurants, and financial institutions.
Vehicular Use Area: All areas subject to vehicular
traffic including parking lots, access-ways, loading
areas and service areas.
W
Wall, Dividing: A wall which is common to two or
more units of a building, such as a wall separating
adjoining townhouses or group houses in a building
group.
Wall Sign: A permanent sign attached to the face
of, or erected and confined within the limits of, the
outside wall of any building and supported by such
wall or building.
Window Sign: A sign placed inside or upon a
window facing the outside and which is intended to
be seen from the exterior.
Warehousing: The indoor storage and wholesale of
goods, materials or merchandise for shipment to or
processing on other property, and for sale to retailers
and jobbers rather than consumers.
Y
Yard: An open space on the same lot with a building,
unoccupied and unobstructed by any portion of
a structure from the ground upward, except as
otherwise provided herein. In measuring a yard for
the purpose of determining the width of a side yard,
the depth of a front yard or the depth of a rear yard,
the minimum horizontal distance between the lot line
and the nearest portion of the main building shall be
used.
a. Yard, Front: A yard extending across the front
of a lot between the side lot lines and being
the minimum horizontal distance between
the street line and the main building or any
projection thereof, other than the projection of
the usual steps or entrance-way.
b. Yard, Rear: A yard extending across the rear of
a lot between the side lot lines and being the
minimum horizontal distance between the rear
lot line and the main building or any projection
thereof, other than steps, unenclosed balconies
or unenclosed porches. On corner lots, the
rear yard is generally considered to be parallel
to the street upon which the lot has its least
dimension. However, the rear yard may be
approved parallel to the street upon which the
lot has its greatest dimension, if the minimum
distance from the structure to the rear property
line complies with the minimum rear yard
setback required in the zoning district.
c. Yard, Side: A yard between the main building
and the sideline of the lot extending from the
front yard to the rear yard.
Z
Zoning Compliance Plan - A site plan for the
specific development and specific use of a parcel
or tract of real estate is required to obtain a Zoning
Certificate, as further described in Article 2.1. The
Zoning Compliance Plan shall show the specific use
or uses, illustrated by a plat, drawn to scale, showing
the boundaries of such parcel or tract, the location,
size, height and use of all existing structures, and
the exact location and pertinent details of proposed
buildings, structures, signage, lighting, pedestrian
ways, vehicular access, circulation patterns, parking
areas and buffering accompanied by a detailed
description the plat identifying the impervious surface
ratio, density and requirements for yards, parking,
landscaping and buffers, the existing and intended
use of each building or part of a building, the number
of families or housekeeping units the building is
designed to accommodate, such other information
with regard to the lot and neighboring lots as may
be necessary for the enforcement of this Resolution
and any other requirements as identified on the
application form or forms provided by the Director of
Planning and Zoning. All dimensions shown on these
6.1 | General Definitions
As Amended: 4/16/2015 | Effective: 11/3/1987 | 157
General Definitions | 6.1
Article 6: Definitions plats relating to the location and size of the lot to be
built upon shall be based on an actual survey
Zoning Inspector: For the purposes of this
Resolution, this refers to the Township officials
directed by the Board of Township Trustees to
administer and enforce the Zoning Resolution.
Architecture
Preservation
Interior Design
Landscape Architecture
Urban Design + Planning
Graphic Design
Indianapolis, Indiana
Champaign, Illinois
Raleigh, North Carolina

ADOPTED – SEPTEMBER 20, 2007
ANDERSON TOWNSHIP
HAMILTON COUNTY, OHIO
Anderson Center
7850 Five Mile Road
Anderson Township, Ohio 45255
(513) 688-8400
www.andersontownship.org
THE BOARD OF TOWNSHIP TRUSTEES
RUSSELL L. JACKSON, JR. ALBERT F. PETER PEGGY D. REIS
TOWNSHIP ADMINISTRATOR
HENRY C. DOLIVE
DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DIRECTOR
STEVE E. SIEVERS
DEVELOPMENT SERVICES ASST. DIRECTOR
PAUL J. DRURY, JR.
THE ANDERSON TOWNSHIP PROPERTY MAINTAINANCE CODE OFFICIAL
See Section 103.1
Anderson Township
Property Maintenance
Code
Anderson Township Property Maintenance Code (September 2007) Page 1 of 14
Chapter 1 - Administration Chapter 3 - General Requirements
101 - General
102 - Applicability
103 - Property Maintenance Inspection
104 - Duties and Powers of the Code Officials
105 - Notice of Violation
106 - Civil Citations
107 - Permissible Answers to Civil Citation
108 - Admission of Violations Charged in Civil Citation
109 - Express Denial of Violations Charged in Civil Citation
110 - Implicit Denial of Violations Charged in Civil Citation
111 - Municipal Court Proceedings
112 - Appeal Process
113 - Penalties and Fines
114 - Abatement and Other Lawful Remedies
301 - General
302 - Exterior Property Areas
303 - Exterior Structure
304 - Rubbish and Garbage
305 - Extermination
Chapter 2 - Definitions Chapter 4 - Referenced Standards
201 - General
202 - General Definitions
Table of Contents
Anderson Township Property Maintenance Code (September 2007) Page 2 of 14
CHAPTER 1 - ADMINISTRATION
SECTION 101 - GENERAL
101.1 Title. These regulations shall be known as the Property Maintenance Code of Anderson
Township, hereinafter referred to as "this code."
101.2 Scope. The provisions of this code shall apply to all existing residential and nonresidential
structures and all existing premises and constitute minimum requirements and standards for
premises, structures, equipment and facilities; the responsibility of owners, operators and
occupants; and for administration, enforcement and penalties.
101.3 Intent. This code shall be construed to secure its expressed intent, which is to ensure public
health, safety and welfare insofar as they are affected by the continued occupancy and
maintenance of structures and premises. Existing structures and premises that do not comply
with these provisions shall be altered or repaired to provide a minimum level of health and
safety as required herein. Repairs, alterations, additions to and changes of occupancy in
existing buildings shall comply with all applicable Codes and Standards.
101.4 Severability. If a section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this code is, for any reason,
held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions
of this code.
SECTION 102 - APPLICABILITY
102.1 General. The provisions of this code shall apply to all matters affecting or relating to structures
and premises, as set forth in Section 101. Where, in a specific case, different sections of this
code specify different requirements, the most restrictive shall govern.
102.2 Maintenance. Equipment, systems, devices and safeguards required by this code or a previous
regulation or code under which the structure or premises was constructed, altered or repaired
shall be maintained in good working order. No owner, operator or occupant shall cause any
service, facility, equipment or utility which is required under this section to be removed from
or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling, except for such temporary
interruption as necessary while repairs or alterations are in progress. The requirements of this
code are not intended to provide the basis for removal or abrogation of fire protection or safety
systems and devices in existing structures. Except as otherwise specified herein, the owner or
the owner's designated agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of buildings, structures
and premises.
102.3 Application of other codes. Repairs, additions or alterations to a structure, or changes of
occupancy, shall be done in accordance with the procedures and provisions of all applicable
Codes and Standards. Nothing in this code shall be construed to cancel, modify or set aside
any provision of any existing Codes.
102.4 Existing remedies. The provisions in this code shall not be construed to abolish or impair
existing remedies of Anderson Township or its officers or agencies relating to the removal or
demolition of any structure which is dangerous, insecure, unsafe, or unsanitary.
Anderson Township Property Maintenance Code (September 2007) Page 3 of 14
102.5 Workmanship. Repairs, maintenance work, alterations or installations which are caused
directly or indirectly by the enforcement of this code shall be executed and installed in a
workmanlike manner and installed substantially in accordance with the manufacturer's
installation instructions.
102.6 Historic buildings. The provisions of this code shall not be mandatory for existing buildings
or structures designated as historic buildings when such buildings or structures are judged by
the code official to be safe and in the public interest of health, safety and welfare.
102.7 Referenced codes and standards. The codes and standards referenced in this code shall be
considered part of the requirements of this code to the prescribed extent of each such reference.
Where differences occur between provisions of this code and the referenced standards, the
provisions of this code, to the extent permitted by law, shall apply.
SECTION 103 - PROPERTY MAINTENANCE INSPECTION
103.1 General. The Development Services Department shall be responsible for the enforcement and
application of this code. The Development Services Director shall be the official in charge.
103.2 Inspectors. Anderson Township shall employ inspectors in such numbers as it deems
necessary to perform the duties required by this code. These inspectors shall report to the
Development Services Director.
SECTION 104 - DUTIES AND POWERS OF THE CODE OFFICIAL
104.1 General. The Development Services Director and the inspectors assigned to the Development
Services Department shall enforce the provisions of this code.
104.2 Interpretation authority. The Development Services Director shall have authority to interpret
and implement the provisions of this code; to secure the intent thereof; and to designate
requirements applicable because of local climatic or other conditions.
104.3 Inspections. The Development Services Director and/or inspectors assigned to the
Development Services Department shall make all of the required inspections, or shall accept
reports of inspection by approved agencies or individuals. All reports of such inspections by
agencies outside of the Anderson Township Development Services Department shall be in
writing and be certified by an officer of such approved agency or by the responsible individual.
The Development Services Director is authorized to engage experts opinion as deemed
necessary to report upon unusual technical issues that arise, subject to the approval of the
Anderson Township Administrator.
104.4 Identification. The Development Services Director and inspectors assigned to the
Development Services Department shall carry proper identification when inspecting structures
or premises in the performance of duties under this code.
104.5 Notices and orders. The Development Services Director and inspectors assigned shal1 issue
all necessary notices or orders to ensure compliance with this code.
Anderson Township Property Maintenance Code (September 2007) Page 4 of 14
104.6 Department records. The Development Services Director shall keep official records of all
business and activities of the Development Services Department which relate to this code. Such
records shall be retained in the official records in such manner and for so long as is required by
Anderson Township's retention policy.
SECTION 105 - NOTICE OF VIOLATION
105.1 Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to be in conflict with or in
violation of any of the provisions of this code.
105.2 Notice of Violation. The Development Services Director shall serve a Notice of Violation
(hereinafter referred to as "Notice" or "Notice of Violation") on all persons, firms, or
corporations found to be in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this code.
105.3 Form of Notice of Violation. Whenever the Development Services Director determines that
there has been a violation of this code or has grounds to believe that a violation has occurred,
notice shall be given in accordance with all of the following:
1. The Notice must be in writing;
2. The Notice shall be sent to the person, firm, or corporation listed by the Hamilton County
Auditor's Office as owner of the property at issue;
3. The Notice must include a description of the property at issue which description is
sufficient for identification purposes;
4. The Notice must include a statement of the violation or violations determined to exist on
the property with specific references to the section or sections of this code alleged to have
been violated;
5. The Notice must include a description of the corrective action which must be taken to
bring the property into compliance with the provisions of this code; and
6. The Notice must include a deadline by which time the person receiving the Notice shall be
required to take the necessary corrective action required to bring the property into
compliance with the provisions of this code.
105.4 Method of service. The Notice of Violation shal1 be deemed to be properly served if a copy
thereof is:
1. Delivered personally; or
2. Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the owner of the property at issue at the
address of the property; or
3. Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the owner of the property at issue at the
address listed as the owner's tax mailing address by the Hamilton County Auditor; or
4. Sent by certified or first-class mail addressed to the owner of the property at issue at the
owner's last known address; or
5. Posted in a conspicuous place on or about the property at issue if another method of
delivery of the Notice is returned showing that the Notice was not delivered.
Anderson Township Property Maintenance Code (September 2007) Page 5 of 14
105.5 Extension of Compliance Deadline. For good cause shown, the Development Services
Director may, at his/her sole discretion, extend the deadline previously stated in the Notice of
Violation for corrective action to bring a property into compliance. In the event such an
extension is granted, the Development Services Director shall notify the owner of the property
at issue of the extension in the same form and pursuant to the same method of service required
by Sections 105.3 and 105.4 of this code. Any such notice of extension shall specifically state
the revised deadline by which time the person receiving the extension shall be required to take
the necessary corrective action required to bring the property into compliance with the
provisions of this code.
105.6 Local Appeals Process. Persons, firms, or corporations wishing to appeal an adverse
determination by the Development Services Director, Code Official or Official Designee may
file an appeal with the Anderson Township Board of Maintenance Appeals within thirty (30)
days after the notice of violation. The Development Services Department will schedule a
hearing on the matter, and its decision will determine further progression of the violation
process.
SECTION 106 - CIVIL CITATIONS
106.1 Civil Citation Issued. If a person, firm, or corporation to whom a Notice of Violation has been
served does not bring the property at issue into compliance with the provisions of this code by
the deadline established in the Notice of Violation or by the granted deadline extension, if any,
such person shall be issued a Civil Citation (hereinafter referred to as "Citation" or "Civil
Citation").
106.2 Form of Civil Citation. Civil Citations issued for a failure to comply with the Notice of
Violation by the deadline established therein, or by the granted deadline extension, if any, must
be given in accordance with all of the following:
1. The Citation must be in writing on a form specifically designated as a Civil Citation form;
2. The Citation must include a statement advising the person charged that he/she must
answer the citation within fourteen (14) days after the date on which the Citation is served
upon him/her;
3. The Citation must include a statement indicating the allowable answers that may be made
and that the person will be afforded a court hearing if he/she denies committing the
violation;
4. The Citation must include a statement specifying that the answer must be made in person,
or by mail, to the Anderson Township Fiscal Officer;
5. The Citation must include a statement indicating the amount of the fine arising from the
violation;
6. The Citation must include a statement advising the person of the violation charged, and
the date, time and place of the violation charged; and
7. The Citation must include the signature and affirmation of the Hamilton County Sheriff
deputy if any, who delivers the Citation.
Anderson Township Property Maintenance Code (September 2007) Page 6 of 14
106.3 Method of Service. The Civil Citation shal1 be deemed to be properly served if it is:
1. Delivered personally by a Hamilton County Sheriff’s deputy; or
2. Sent by certified or express mail, return receipt requested with instructions to the
delivering postal employee to show to whom it was delivered, the date of delivery, and the
address where it was delivered, addressed to the owner of the property at issue at the
address listed as the owner's tax mailing address maintained by the Hamilton County
Auditor; or
3. Sent by certified or express mail, return receipt requested with instructions to the
delivering postal employee to show to whom it was delivered, the date of delivery, and the
address where it was delivered, to the owner of the property at issue at the owner's last
known address; or
4. Delivered personally to the usual place of residence of the owner of the property at issue
to the owner or some person of suitable age and discretion then residing at that residence;
or
5. Any other method of service permitted by the Ohio Rules of Civil Procedure.
SECTION 107 - PERMISSIBLE ANSWERS TO CIVIL CITATION
107.1 Permissible Answers. Any person, firm, or corporation to whom a Civil Citation has been
served may answer said Citation in one of the following ways:
1. Admission that the person, firm, or corporation committed the violation charged filed in
the manner and within the time permitted by Section 108 of this code;
2. Express denial of the violations charged by the person, firm, or corporation charged filed
in the manner and within the time permitted by Section 109 of this code; or
3. Implicit denial of the violations charged by the failure of the person, firm, or corporation
charged to file an answer or pay the fine set forth in the Civil Citation within the time
permitted by Sections 108 and 109 of this code.
SECTION 108 - ADMISSION OF VIOLATIONS CHARGED IN CIVIL CITATION
108.1 Admission of Guilt. Persons, firm, or corporations served with Civil Citations may admit
commission of the violations charged by paying the fine set forth in the Civil Citation as
required by Sections 108.2 and 108.3 of this code.
108.2 Admission of Guilt of Violations Charged in Civil Citations & Payment of Fine by Hand
Delivery. Persons, firms or corporations served with Civil Citations may admit the violations
charged in the Civil Citation by paying the fine or fines set forth in the Civil Citation in person
to the Township Fiscal Officer. Such payments must be hand-delivered within fourteen (14)
days of the date that the Civil Citation was served upon such person, firm, or corporation.
108.3 Admission of Guilt of Violations Charged in Civil Citations & Payment of Fine by Mail.
Persons, firms or corporations served with Civil Citations may admit the violations charged in
the Civil Citation by paying the fine or fines set forth in the Civil Citation by mailing the
payment, postage prepaid, to the Anderson Township Fiscal Officer, 7850 Five Mile Road
Anderson Township, Ohio 45230. Such admissions/payments must be received by the Fiscal
Officer no later than fourteen (14) days after the date that the Civil Citation was served upon
such person, firm, or corporation.
Anderson Township Property Maintenance Code (September 2007) Page 7 of 14
108.4 Effect of Admission and Payment of Fine. Persons, firms, or corporations who admit guilt as
to the violation charged in a Civil Citation issued against them and who pay the fine set forth in
the Citation are in no way absolved from resolving, removing, repairing, or otherwise abating
the condition which resulted in the issuance of the Civil Citation. If such persons, firms, or
corporations fail to resolve, remove, repair, or otherwise abate that condition, Anderson
Township may continue to issue Civil Citations each day it determines that the condition
continues to violate the provisions of this code. Civil Citations issued for such continuing,
unresolved violations of this code need not be preceded by additional Notices of Violation as
the initial Notice of Violation shall suffice to notify the person, firm, or corporation involved as
to the nature of the violation charged. Further, the admission of guilt and payment of the fines
set forth in the Civil Citation shall in no way preclude the Anderson Township Board of
Township Trustees from instituting, by and through its Law Director or otherwise, appropriate
action to enjoin, restrain, correct or abate a violation, or to prevent illegal occupancy of a
building, structure or premises, or to stop an illegal act, conduct, business or utilization of the
building, structure or premises.
SECTION 109 - EXPRESS DENIAL OF VIOLATION CHARGED IN CIVIL CITATION
109.1 Express Denial of Violation Charged in Civil Citations & Hand Delivery of Denial.
Persons, firms or corporations served with Civil Citations may deny the violation charged in
the Civil Citation by expressly denying the violation in writing and presenting the denial in
person to the Anderson Township Fiscal Officer. Such denials must be hand-delivered within
fourteen (14) days of the date that the Civil Citation was served upon such person, firm, or
corporation.
109.2 Express Denial of Violation Charged in Civil Citations & Mailing of Denial. Persons,
firms or corporations served with Civil Citations may deny the violations charged in the Civil
Citation by expressly denying the violations in writing and by delivering or mailing the denial,
postage prepaid, to the Anderson Township Fiscal Officer, 7850 Five Mile Road Anderson
Township, Ohio 45230. Such denials must be received by the Fiscal Officer no later than
fourteen (14) days after the date that the Civil Citation was served upon such person, firm, or
corporation.
SECTION 110 - IMPLICIT DENIAL OF VIOLATIONS CHARGED IN CIVIL CITATION
110.1 Implicit Denial of Violations. Persons, firms, or corporations who fail to either expressly
deny the violation charged in the Civil Citation issued against them in the manner and within
the time permitted by Section 109 of this code or who fail to admit the violations charged in the
Civil Citation issued against them by paying the fine or fines set forth in the Civil Citation in
the manner and within the time permitted by Section 108 of this code shall be deemed to have
denied the violation charged.
SECTION 111 - MUNICIPAL COURT PROCEEDINGS
111.1 Referral to Municipal Court. If the person, firm, or corporation issued a Civil Citation either
expressly or implicitly denies the violation charged in the Citation within fourteen (14) days
after service of the Civil Citation, the Anderson Township Fiscal Officer or Development
Services Director shall notify the Hamilton County Municipal Court of the denial so that a
hearing can be set.
Anderson Township Property Maintenance Code (September 2007) Page 8 of 14
111.2 Municipal Court Hearings. Municipal Court hearings are conducted according to the Rules
of Civil Procedure and the court determines whether the violation is proven by the Township
by a preponderance of the evidence. If the court determines that the violation has been proven,
it will order the violator to pay the fine.
111.3 Payment of Fine After Determination of Guilt. Persons, firms, or corporations found to
have violated the provisions of this code charged in the Civil Citation must pay the fines
assessed by the court within ten (10) days after the judgment. Failure to pay the fine within
this time period will result in the placement of a lien on the property at issue and/or the
collection of the amount due in any manner authorized by law.
SECTION 112 - APPEAL PROCESS
112.1 Appeal. Persons, firms, or corporations wishing to appeal an adverse determination by the
Hamilton County Municipal Court may file an appeal with the First District Court of Appeals
within thirty (30) days after the judgment.
SECTION 113 - PENALTIES AND FINES
113.1 Violation Penalties. Any person, firm, or corporation who violates a provision of this code
shall be issued a Civil Citation in the following amounts:
1. In the amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for the first offense;
2. In the amount of two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00) for the second offense;
3. In the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for the third offense;
4. In the amount of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) for the fourth offense; and
5. In the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each subsequent offense.
113.2 Continuing Violations. Each day that a violation continues after due notice has been served
shall be deemed a separate offense.
SECTION 114 - ABATEMENT AND OTHER LAWFUL REMEDIES
114.1 Emergency Measures. Nothing in the provisions of this code shall prohibit the Development
Services Director from taking any action authorized by law, without regard to the provisions of
this code and regardless of whether the legal procedures herein described have been instituted,
when, in his/her opinion, there is imminent danger of failure or collapse of a building or
structure which endangers life, or when any structure or part of a structure has failed and life is
endangered by the occupation of the structure, or when there is actual or potential danger to the
building occupants or those in the proximity of any structure because of explosives, explosive
fumes or vapors or the presence of toxic fumes, gases or materials, or operation of defective or
dangerous equipment.
Anderson Township Property Maintenance Code (September 2007) Page 9 of 14
CHAPTER 2 DEFINITIONS
SECTION 201 - GENERAL
201.1 Scope. Unless otherwise expressly stated, the following terms shall, for the purposes of this
code, have the meanings shown in this chapter.
201.2 Interchangeability. Words stated in the present tense include the future; words stated in the
masculine gender include the feminine and neuter; the single number includes the plural, and the
plural, the singular.
201.3 Terms not defined. Where terms are not defined in this code the usual and customary
definition shall apply.
201.4 Parts. Whenever the words "dwelling unit", "dwelling", "premises", "building", or "story" are
stated in this code, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any
part thereof".
SECTION 202 - GENERAL DEFINITIONS
202.1 APPROVED. Approved by the code official.
202.2 BASEMENT. That portion of a building which is partly or completely below grade.
202.3 CIVIL CITATION. Citation issued pursuant to section 106 of this code.
202.4 DEVELOPMENT SERVICES DIRECTOR. The official who is charged with the
administration and enforcement of this code, or any duly authorized representative.
202.5 DWELLING UNIT. A single unit providing complete, independent living facilities for one or
more persons, including permanent provisions for living, sleeping, eating, cooking, and
sanitation.
202.6 EASEMENT. An interest in land or property reserved for present or future use by a person
or agency other than legal fee owner(s) of the property. The easement shall be permitted to be
for use under, on or above a property.
202.7 EXTERIOR PROPERTY. The open space on the premises and on adjoining property under
the control of owners or operators of such premises. Exterior Property shall include such open
areas as carports and other storage areas open and visible to passersby.
202.8 EXTERMINATION. The control and elimination of insects, rats or other pests by eliminating
their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that serves as their food;
by spraying, fumigating, and trapping or by any other approved pest elimination method.
202.9 GARBAGE. The animal or vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking
and consumption of food.
202.10 IMMINENT DANGER. A condition which could cause serious or life-threatening injury or
death at any time.
202.11 INFESTATION. The presence, within or contiguous to, a structure or premises of insects, rats,
vermin or other pests.
202.12 INSPECTORS. Persons assigned to the Development Services Department who are duly
authorized representatives of the Development Services Director. Inspectors are charged with
initial administration and enforcement of this code, under the direction and supervision of the
Development Services Director.
Anderson Township Property Maintenance Code (September 2007) Page 10 of 14
202.13 NOTICE OF VIOLATION. A written notice which complies with Section 105 of this code.
202.14 OCCUPANCY. The purpose for which a building or portion thereof is utilized or occupied.
202.15 OCCUPANT. Any individual living or sleeping in a building, or having possession of a space
within a building.
202.16 OPENABLE AREA. That part of a window, skylight or which is available for unobstructed
ventilation and which opens directly to the outdoors.
202.17 OPERATOR. Any person who has charge, care or control of a structure or premises which is
let or offered for occupancy.
202.18 OWNER. Any person, agent, operator, firm or corporation having a legal or equitable interest
in the property; or recorded in the official records of the state or county as holding title to the
property; or otherwise having control of the property, including the guardian of the estate of
any such person, and the executor or administrator of the estate of such person if ordered to
take possession of real property by a court.
202.19 PERSON. An individual, corporation, partnership or any group acting as a unit.
202.20 PREMISES. A lot, plot or parcel of land, easement or public way, including any structures
thereon.
202.21 PUBLIC WAY. Any street, alley or similar parcel of land essentially unobstructed from the
ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or otherwise permanently available to the public
for public use.
202.22 RUBBISH. Combustible and noncombustible waste materials except garbage; the term shall
include the residue from burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible materials, paper,
rags, cartons, boxes, wood, excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans,
metals, mineral matter glass, crockery and dust and other similar materials. The term shall also
include inoperable and broken appliances, electronic, and household equipment.
202.23 STRUCTURE. That which is built or constructed on premises or a portion thereof.
202.24 TENANT. A person, corporation, partnership or group: whether or not the legal owner of
record, occupying a building or portion thereof as a unit.
202.25 VENTILATION. The natural or mechanical process of supplying conditioned or
unconditioned air to, or removing air from, any space.
202.26 WORKMANLIKE. Executed in a skilled manner; e.g., generally plumb, level, square, in line,
undamaged and without marring adjacent work.
202.27 YARD. An open space on the same lot with a structure.
Anderson Township Property Maintenance Code (September 2007) Page 11 of 14
CHAPTER 3 - GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
SECTION 301 – GENERAL
301.1 Scope. The provisions of this code shall govern the minimum conditions and the responsibilities
of persons for maintenance of structures, equipment and exterior property.
301.2 Responsibility. The owner of the premises shall maintain the structures and exterior property in
compliance with these requirements, except as otherwise provided for in this code. A person
shall not occupy as owner-occupant or permit another person to occupy premises which are not
in a sanitary and safe condition and which do not comply with the requirements of this code.
Occupants of a dwelling unit are responsible for keeping in a clean, sanitary and safe condition
that part of the premises which they occupy and control.
301.3 Vacant structures and land. All vacant structures and premises thereof or vacant land shall be
maintained in a clean, safe, secure and sanitary condition as provided herein so as not to cause a
blighting problem or adversely affect the public health or safety.
SECTION 302 – EXTERIOR PROPERTY AREAS
302.1 Sanitation. All exterior property and premises shall be maintained in a clean, safe and sanitary
condition. The occupant shall keep that part of the exterior property which such occupant
occupies or controls in a clean and sanitary condition.
302.3 Rodent harborage. All structures and exterior property shall be kept free from rodent
harborage and infestation. Where rodents are found, they shall be promptly exterminated by
approved processes which will not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper
precautions shall be taken to eliminate rodent harborage and prevent re-infestation
302.3 Accessory structures. All accessory structures, including detached garages, fences and walls,
shall be maintained structural1y sound and in good repair.
302.4 Defacement of property. No person shall willfully or wantonly damage, mutilate or deface any
exterior surface of any structure or building on any private or public property by placing
thereon any marking, carving or graffiti. It shall be the responsibility of the owner to restore
said surface to an approved state of maintenance and repair.
SECTION 303 – EXTERIOR STRUCTURE
303.1 General. The exterior of a structure shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound and
sanitary so as not to pose a threat to the public health, safety or welfare.
303.2 Protective treatment. All exterior surfaces, including but not limited to, doors, door and
window frames, cornices, porches, trim, balconies, decks and fences shall be maintained in
good condition. Exterior wood surfaces, other than decay-resistant woods, shall be protected
from the elements and decay by painting or other protective covering or treatment. Peeling,
flaking and chipped paint shall be eliminated and surfaces re-painted. All siding and masonry
joints as well as those between the building envelope and the perimeter of windows, doors, and
skylights shall be maintained weather resistant and water tight. All metal surfaces subject to rust
or corrosion shall be coated to inhibit such rust and corrosion and all surfaces with rust or
corrosion shall be stabilized and coated to inhibit future rust and corrosion. Oxidation stains
shall be removed from exterior surfaces. Surfaces designed for stabilization by oxidation are
exempt from this requirement.
Anderson Township Property Maintenance Code (September 2007) Page 12 of 14
303.3 Structural members. All structural members shall be maintained free from deterioration, and
shall be capable of safely supporting the imposed dead and live loads.
303.4 Foundation walls. All foundation walls shall be maintained plumb and free from open cracks
and breaks and shall be kept in such condition so as to prevent the entry of rodents and other
pests.
303.5 Exterior walls. All exterior walls shall be free from holes, breaks, and loose or rotting
materials; and maintained weatherproof and properly surface coated where required to prevent
deterioration.
303.6 Roofs and drainage. The roof and flashing shall be sound, tight and not have defects that admit
rain. Roof drainage shall be adequate to prevent dampness or deterioration in the walls or
interior portion of the structure. Roof drains, gutters and downspouts shall be maintained in
good repair and free from obstructions.
303.7 Decorative features. All cornices, belt courses, corbels, terra cotta trim, wall facings and
similar decorative features shall be maintained in good repair with proper anchorage and in a
safe condition.
303.8 Overhang extensions. All overhang extensions including but not limited to canopies,
marquees, signs, awnings, fire escapes, standpipes and exhaust ducts shall be maintained in
good repair and be properly anchored so as to be kept in a sound condition. When required, all
exposed surfaces of metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or
rust by periodic application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface
treatment.
303.9 Stairways, decks, porches and balconies. Every exterior stairway, deck, porch and balcony,
and all appurtenances attached thereto, shall be maintained structurally sound, in good repair,
with proper anchorage and capable of supporting the imposed loads.
303.10 Chimneys and towers. All chimneys, cooling towers, smoke stacks, and similar appurtenances
shall be maintained structurally safe and sound, and in good repair. All exposed surfaces of
metal or wood shall be protected from the elements and against decay or rust by periodic
application of weather-coating materials, such as paint or similar surface treatment.
303.11 Handrails and guards. Every handrail and guard shall be firmly fastened and capable of
supporting normally imposed loads and shall be maintained in good condition.
303.12 Window, skylight, doors and frames. Every window, skylight, door and their frames shall be
kept in sound condition, good repair and weather tight.
303.13 Doors. All exterior doors, door assemblies and hardware shall be maintained in good condition.
Locks at all entrances to dwelling units, rooming units and guestrooms shall tightly secure the
door.
303.14 Basement hatchways. Every basement hatchway shall be maintained to prevent the entrance of
rodents, rain and surface drainage water.
303.15 Building security. Doors, windows or hatchways for dwelling units shall be provided with
devices designed to provide security for the occupants and property within.
Anderson Township Property Maintenance Code (September 2007) Page 13 of 14
SECTION 304 - RUBBISH AND GARBAGE
304.1 Accumulation of rubbish or garbage. All exterior property and premises, of every structure,
carport, deck, and patio shall be free from any accumulation of rubbish or garbage.
304.2 Disposal of rubbish. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of all rubbish in a clean and
sanitary manner by placing such rubbish in approved containers.
304.2.1 Rubbish storage containers. The owner of occupied premises shall supply
approved covered containers for rubbish, and the owner of the premises shall
be responsible for the removal of rubbish.
304.2.2 Refrigerators. Refrigerators, air conditioners and similar equipment not in
operation shall not be discarded, or abandoned on premises.
304.3 Disposal of garbage. Every occupant of a structure shall dispose of garbage in a clean and
sanitary manner by placing such garbage in an approved garbage disposal facility or approved
garbage container.
304.3.1 Containers. The operator of all establishments producing garbage shall
provide, and at all times cause to be utilized, approved leak proof containers
provided with close-fitting covers for the storage of such materials until removed
from the premises for disposal.
SECTION 305 - EXTERMINATION
305.1 Infestation. All structures shall be kept free from insect and rodent infestation. Insects or
rodents found in any structure shall be promptly exterminated by approved processes that will
not be injurious to human health. After extermination, proper precautions shall be taken to
prevent re-infestation.
Anderson Township Property Maintenance Code (September 2007) Page 14 of 14
CHAPTER 4 - REFERENCED STANDARDS
This chapter lists the codes and standards that are referenced in various sections of this document, and
the language found in this Code was adapted from the 2000 International Property Maintenance Code.
The standards are listed herein are those of the promulgating agency of the standard and the section or
sections of this document that reference the standard. The application of the referenced standards shall
be as specified in Section 102.7.
Title
Referenced in code
section number
Anderson Township Zoning Resolution where applicable (such as 101.3, 102.3)
Hamilton County Building Code where applicable (such as 101.3, 102.3)
Ohio Revised Code(s)
Hamilton County General Health District
where applicable (such as 101.3, 102.3)
where applicable (such as 101.3, 102.3)
Chicago, Illinois
RATIOdesign.com
In partnership with smdp, LLC