BROADVIEW HEIGHTS, OHIO
CODE OF ORDINANCES
2020 S-2 Supplement contains:
Local legislation current through 7-6-2020
State legislation current through 7-30-2019
Published by:
American Legal Publishing Corporation
525 Vine Street, Suite 310
Cincinnati, Ohio  45202
Tel: (800) 445-5588
Fax: (513) 763-3562
Internet:  http://www.amlegal.com
CHARTER OF THE CITY OF
BROADVIEW HEIGHTS, OHIO
Editor's note:
   The Charter of the City of Broadview Heights was approved by the voters on
November 7, 1961.
TABLE OF CONTENTS
   PREAMBLE
   
Art. I.   Name and Boundaries
   
Art. II.   Form of Government and Powers
   
Art. III.   The Council
   
Art. IV.   The Mayor
   
Art. V.   Administrative Departments, Boards, Commissions and Offices
   
Art. VI.   General Provisions
   
Art. VII.   Nominations and Elections
   
Art. VIII.   Initiative, Referendum and Recall
   
Art. IX.   Ordinances and Resolutions and Effective Dates
   
Art. X.   Franchises
   
Art. XI.   Limitation on the Rate of Taxation
   
Art. XII.   Amendments to Charter
   
Art. XIII.   Charter Review Committee
   
Art. XIV.   Miscellaneous Provisions
   
Art. XV.   Community Bill of Rights.
CHARTER OF THE CITY OF BROADVIEW HEIGHTS, OHIO:
PREAMBLE
   We, the citizens of the City of Broadview Heights, County of Cuyahoga, State
of Ohio, believing in our ability to govern ourselves in local self-government
under the Constitution and the laws of the State of Ohio, do hereby adopt this
Charter.
ARTICLE I
NAME AND BOUNDARIES
   The City of Broadview Heights, as its limits now exist, shall continue to be
a city in the County of Cuyahoga, State of Ohio.
ARTICLE II
FORM OF GOVERNMENT AND POWERS
Sec. 1.  Form.
   The Municipal Government provided by this Charter shall be known as the
“Mayor-Council Form of Government.”
Sec. 2.  Powers.
   The City shall have all powers of local self-government and home rule, and
all powers possible for a city to have or hereafter to be granted to cities,
under the Constitution or laws of the State of Ohio. All such powers shall be
exercised in the manner prescribed in this Charter, or if not prescribed
herein, in such manner as shall be provided by Council, and there is reserved
to the people the right to petition for redress of grievances.
ARTICLE III
THE COUNCIL
Sec. 1.  Composition and Term.
   (a)   The legislative powers of the City of Broadview Heights shall be
vested in and exercised by a Council comprised of seven (7) members:
   Four (4) of whom shall be elected by wards, one (1) from each of the four
wards; and
   Three (3) of whom shall be elected by electors of the City-at-Large.
   Effective January 1, 2007 one (1) existing ward council position shall be
deleted from Council and one (1) existing Council-at-Large position shall be
deleted from Council. The legislative powers of the City of Broadview Heights
shall then be vested therein and exercised by a council composed of seven (7)
members.
   (b)   Commencing with the regular Municipal election of 2015, each
Councilperson shall be elected for a term of four (4) years and until his or
her successor shall be elected and qualified by law.
   (c)   Commencing with the regular Municipal election of 1991 and each
Municipal election thereafter, all Councils shall take office at 12:01 p.m. on
the first Monday of December following said regular Municipal election. 
(Approved Nov. 5, 1996; Nov. 5, 2002; Nov. 7, 2006; Nov. 4, 2014)
Sec. 2.  Wards.
   For the term commencing January 1, 1962, the division of the City into wards
existing at the time of the adoption of this charter shall continue as they
existed on that date and thereafter shall be as amended up to and including the
first Monday in December, 2007. No later than January 1, 2007 based on the
federal census of 2000 and all other relevant City data regarding population
and thereafter commencing January 1, 2010 and every ten years thereafter,
within sixty days after the proclamation by the Secretary of State announcing
the population of cities of Ohio as determined by the Federal census
decennially taken, the Council shall redivide the City into wards, which shall
be as nearly equal in population as is possible each composed of contiguous and
compact territory bounded by natural boundaries or street lines. Upon failure
of the Council to redivide the City within the period provided, the Director of
Law shall redivide it as herein provided and he shall file such plan with the
Clerk of Council. This plan shall thereupon become the new division by wards of
the City, provided that the redistricting of wards in 2007 shall be effective
for ballot purposes upon its adoption but shall not be otherwise effective
until the first Monday in December 2007.
(Approved Nov. 5, 2002; Nov. 7, 2006)
Sec. 3.  Qualifications.
   Members of the Council shall be electors of the City, shall have resided in
the City, and Ward Councilmen shall have resided in their respective wards, for
at least two (2) years immediately preceding their election and shall maintain
their residency and electoral status during their term of office, provided
that, for purposes of the election of 2007, such prior ward residency shall not
be required of any candidate who has resided in a ward for at least two (2)
years immediately preceding said election contiguous to the ward for which he
or she is a candidate in 2007.
   Except as otherwise provided in this Charter no member of Council shall hold
any other Municipal office or Municipal employment in this City.
   No member of Council shall be directly or indirectly interested in any
profit or emolument from or on account of any contract work or service with or
for the Municipality.
   No two members of a family shall serve in an elected position concurrently.
Family is consanguinity or affinity of the second degree which includes spouse,
parents, children, siblings, grandparents, grandchildren.
   Council shall be the judge of the qualifications of its own members.
(Approved Nov. 5, 1968; Nov. 5, 2002; Nov. 2, 2004; Nov. 7, 2006)
Sec. 4.  Salaries and Bonds.
   The Council shall fix the compensation of each officer and employee and each
member of any board or commission of the City. Any such person may be required
by the Council from time to time to furnish a bond or bonds for the faithful
performance of his duties and the Council may provide that the premium for any
such bond shall be paid by the City. The compensation of the Mayor and each
member of the Council shall be fixed at least forty-five (45) days before the
time for the filing of the nominating petitions for the term beginning on the
next succeeding first day of their term of office and shall not thereafter be
diminished or increased in any respect during such terms or any part thereof. 
The Council may authorize the payment of or reimbursement of expenses incurred
by any officer or employee of the City, or by a board or commission of the
City, for trips taken or otherwise incurred in the interest of the City.
(Approved Nov. 2, 1971)
Sec. 5.  Meetings and Quorum.
   In each calendar month, excepting July and August, where only one meeting
per month shall be required, the Council shall hold at least two (2) regular
meetings, the time and place of which shall be prescribed by ordinance.  A
majority of the Council shall constitute a quorum to do business unless
otherwise specified in this Charter or by the Constitution or laws of the State
of Ohio, but a lesser number may adjourn the meeting from time to time and
compel the attendance of absent members in such manner and under such penalties
as are prescribed by ordinance.  The Mayor or any four (4) other members of
Council may call special meetings upon at least twenty-four (24) hours’ written
notice to the Mayor and each member, served personally or left at his or her
other usual place of residence.  Such notice shall state the time, date and
place thereof, and the subject or subjects to be considered at the meeting, and
no other subject shall be there considered.  Except as provided by the
Constitution or the laws of the State of Ohio, all Council meetings shall be
open to the public at all times.
(Approved Nov. 5, 1996)
Sec. 6.  Vacancies.
   Whenever any office of Councilman becomes vacant, the vacancy shall be
filled by election for the unexpired term by a majority vote of all the
remaining members of the Council. If the Council fails within thirty (30) days
to fill such a vacancy, the Mayor shall fill it by appointment.
Sec. 7.  Powers.
   The Council shall have the power:
   (a)   To determine its own rules;
   (b)   By ordinance, to create, change and abolish any office, department or
agency other than the offices, departments and agencies established by this
Charter. The Council, by ordinance, may assign additional functions or duties
to offices, departments or agencies established by this Charter, but may not
discontinue or assign to any other office, department or agency any function or
duty assigned by this Charter to a particular office, department or agency.
Council may authorize one person to serve in any capacity in two or more
departments, divisions, boards or commissions.
   (c)   To fix the number of employees in the various departments of the City
and to fix the rate of their compensation;
   (d)   To establish the form and method of enactment of its ordinances and
resolutions, except as otherwise provided in this Charter;
   (e)   To authorize all contracts and make the necessary appropriations
therefor. No contract shall be binding upon the City until it has been
authorized or approved and the necessary money has been appropriated.
   (f)   By a vote of all of its members, to expel or remove any appointee of
the Mayor from office for gross misconduct, malfeasance, nonfeasance or
misfeasance in office, or for any other matter which would disqualify him from
office or prevent him from carrying on his official duties in said office, or
for his conviction while in office of a crime involving moral turpitude, or for
absence without justifiable reason from his position, by first notifying the
said appointee in writing of the charge which has been lodged against him at
least fifteen (15) days prior to any hearing upon such charge.  He shall have
the right to be represented by counsel and shall be given an opportunity to be
heard and to present evidence in his defense, and also shall have the right to
examine under oath any witness appearing against him in support of such charge.
Sec. 8.  Validation of Actions.
   All ordinances passed and resolutions adopted by Council shall be signed by
the President of Council, attested by the Clerk, and presented to the Mayor
within five (5) days after their passage by the Council.
Sec. 9.  President of Council and President Pro-Tem.
   The President of Council shall be chosen from the entire pool of
Councilpersons by a vote of the entire Council and shall serve a term of two
(2) years as President.
   Council shall, at the meeting scheduled for the first Monday in December
elect from the entire pool of Councilpersons, the President of Council. The
individual with the highest number of Council votes shall be the President of
Council.
   It shall be the duty of the President of Council to preside at meetings of
Council, appoint various Council committees and perform such other duties as
may be imposed by Council upon its presiding officer and such other duties as
are imposed upon him by this Charter coordinating the work of the various
committees appointed by him.
   The President of Council shall have the right to vote on Ordinances,
Resolutions and motions coming before Council.
   The President of Council shall be acting Mayor when the Mayor is unable for
any cause to perform his duties. As Acting Mayor, the President of Council
shall have the same duties and powers as the Mayor.
   In case of a vacancy in the office of President of Council, the President
Pro-Tem of the Council shall become President of Council and the office of
President Pro-Tem shall be filled by the Council candidate receiving the
highest number of votes by a vote of the entire Council.
   The President Pro-Tem of Council shall be chosen from the entire pool of
Councilpersons by a separate vote of the entire Council and shall serve a term
of two (2) years as President Pro-Tem.
   Council shall, at the meeting scheduled for the first Monday in December
elect from the entire pool of Councilpersons, the Council President Pro-Tem. 
The individual with the highest number of Council votes shall be the Council
President Pro-Tem.
   It shall be the duty of the President Pro-Tem of Council to preside at
meetings of Council and perform such other duties as may be imposed by Council
upon its presiding officer in the absence of the President of Council whenever
the office of President of Council is vacant and/or in any period during which
the President of Council is serving as Acting Mayor.
(Approved Nov. 5, 1996; Nov. 5, 2002; Nov. 7, 2006; Nov. 2, 2010; Nov. 4, 2014)
Sec. 10.  Clerk of Council.
   A Clerk of Council shall be appointed by Council. The Clerk of Council shall
keep an accurate and complete journal of the proceedings of Council, have
custody of and properly index and file all ordinances and resolutions of
Council, have custody of all other documents, reports, papers and
communications received by Council and perform such other duties of Council
that are required.
(Approved Nov. 5, 1968)
ARTICLE IV
THE MAYOR
Sec. 1.  Term and Qualifications.
   Commencing with the regular Municipal election of 1991, the Mayor shall be
elected for a term of four (4) years and until his or her successor shall be
elected and qualified as provided by law. He or she shall be a qualified
elector of the City and shall have resided therein for not less than two (2)
years preceding the date of election.
   No two members of a family shall serve in an elected position concurrently.
Family is consanguinity or affinity of the second degree which includes spouse,
parents, children, siblings, grandparents or grandchildren.
(Approved Nov. 6, 1990; Nov. 2, 2004)
Sec. 2.  Judicial Powers.
   The Mayor shall have all the judicial powers granted by the general laws of
Ohio to mayors of cities, unless and until other lawful provisions shall be
made for the exercise of such powers.
Sec. 3.  Legislative and Veto Powers.
   (a)   The Mayor shall attend all Council meetings. The Mayor may introduce
ordinances and resolutions and take part in any discussions on matters coming
before Council but shall have no vote except as otherwise provided in this
Charter.
   (b)   Every ordinance passed or resolution adopted by Council shall be
signed by the President of Council or other presiding officer and presented to
the Mayor within five (5) days of such passage or adoption. If the Mayor
approves such legislation he shall sign it within ten (10) days after passage
or adoption by Council. If the Mayor does not approve he shall veto such
legislation by returning it to Council within the aforesaid ten (10) days with
a written statement of his objections. Such statement of objections shall be
entered in its entirety in the Council journal. The Mayor may approve or
disapprove the whole or any items of an ordinance appropriating money but
otherwise his approval or disapproval shall be addressed to the entire
ordinance or resolution. If the Mayor does not sign or veto an ordinance or
resolution within the aforesaid ten (10) days, it shall take effect in the same
manner as if he had signed it. When the Mayor has vetoed an ordinance or
resolution, Council may, at its next meeting thereafter, reconsider said
ordinance or resolution and if approved by two-thirds (2/3) or more Council
members after such reconsideration, said ordinance or resolution shall take
effect notwithstanding the disapproval of the Mayor.
(Approved Nov. 5, 1996; Nov.  6, 2007)
Sec. 4.  Executive Powers and Duties.
   (a)   The Mayor shall be the chief executive officer of the City. He shall
supervise the administration of the affairs of the City and supervise all the
departments and divisions thereof, except as otherwise provided in this
charter. He shall be the chief conservator of the peace within the City, and
shall see that all laws and ordinances are enforced therein.
   (b)   Except as may otherwise be provided by this Charter or the laws of the
State of Ohio, the Mayor shall have the power to appoint, promote, transfer,
reduce or remove any officer or employee of the City, except those required by
this Charter to be elected.
   (c)   The Mayor shall execute on behalf of the City all contracts,
conveyances and all other instruments to which the City is a party. He shall be
the official and ceremonial head of the City and shall receive all civil
processes in any action wherein the City is a party.
Sec. 5.  Vacancy in Office of Mayor.
   (a)   Absence.  When the Mayor is absent from the City or unable to perform
his duties, the President of Council shall act as the Mayor, with the same
powers and duties as the Mayor, and shall continue as President of Council with
all the powers and duties of a president of council.
   (b)   Vacancy.  The office of Mayor shall be considered vacant when the
Mayor shall absent himself from four (4) consecutive regular Council meetings,
except that Council, by an affirmative vote of at least two- thirds (2/3) of
its members, may extend this period, after which the President of Council shall
succeed to the office of Mayor and shall be endowed with all of the powers of
said office.
(Approved Nov. 5, 1996; Nov. 7, 2006)
Sec. 6.  Commencement of Term.
   Commencing with the regular Municipal election of 1991 and each election
thereafter, the Mayor shall take office beginning at 12:01 p.m. on the first
Monday of December following said regular Municipal election.
(Approved Nov. 6, 1990)
ARTICLE V
ADMINISTRATIVE DEPARTMENTS, BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND OFFICES
Sec. 1.  Specific Provisions.
   Initially, the City of Broadview Heights shall have a Department of Finance,
a Department of Law, a Department of Public Safety and a Department of Public
Service. There shall be a Planning Commission, a Civil Service Commission and a
Board of Zoning Appeals. There shall be a Clerk of the City.
   The Council may, by ordinance, make provision for such other departments,
commissions, boards and offices as it may determine are required, and may
combine, consolidate or abolish such other departments, commissions, boards,
offices or divisions thereof as it may deem necessary, so long as such action
is not inconsistent with any provision of this Charter.
Sec. 2.  Department of Law.
   The Director of Law shall be head of the Department of Law. He shall be the
legal advisor, attorney and prosecuting attorney for the City and shall perform
such duties as are consistent with his office and that may be required by the
Mayor or Council.
   The Director of Law shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a
majority of Council. Disapproval of an appointee by Council shall be
accompanied by a public statement of the reasons for disapproval.
   The Director of Law need not be an elector of the City; however, he shall
have been duly admitted to the practice of law in the State of Ohio and shall
have been actively engaged therein for a period of five (5) years or more
immediately prior to his appointment.
(Approved May 2, 1989)
Sec. 3.  Department of Finance.
   (a)   The Department of Finance shall be under the supervision of the
Director of Finance. The Director of Finance need not be an elector of the City
but shall be a certified public accountant and have a minimum of five (5) years
experience in public or private accounting.
   The Director of Finance shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of
a majority of Council. Disapproval of an appointee by Council shall be
accompanied by a public statement of the reasons for disapproval.
   The Director of Finance shall attend all Council meetings and serve the
Mayor and Council as financial adviser in Municipal affairs of the City. His
duties shall include the preparation of data for the annual budget, supervision
of all accounts, the certification for collection of special assessments and
fiscal matters as Council may direct.
(Approved Nov. 3, 1998)
   (b)   The Director of Finance shall establish and maintain accounting
procedures necessary for keeping complete financial transactions of all
departments and offices of the Municipality. Such accounting procedures and
financial records shall be adequate in form and in such detail as necessary for
the making of all financial reports and furnishing such other financial data
and statements as may be required under this Charter.
   (c)   The Director of Finance shall approve all valid purchase requisitions
after determining that the requisition is drawn on the proper account and that
the account will not be overdrawn as a result of the requisition in question.
(Approved Nov. 5, 1968)
   (d)   The Director of Finance shall assist the Mayor in the preparation of
an annual budget of revenue and expenditures of this City for the next
succeeding fiscal year.  This budget shall be prepared not less than forty-five
(45) days before the end of each fiscal year and shall be compiled from
information furnished by the head of each department, commission, board or
division in such form and detail as the Mayor may require.  The Mayor, with the
assistance of the Director of Finance, shall furnish to Council the budget
mentioned above as well as an ordinance making initial appropriations for the
expenditures of this City during the year covered by such budget in such form
as may be determined by the Mayor with the assistance of the Director of
Finance.  Thereafter, the Council shall review and approve the budget subject
to such amendments thereto as the Council deems advisable.  In conducting said
review, the Council may request such additional information as may be necessary
to appropriately consider the budget.
   (e)   The Director of Finance shall prepare financial statements, as deemed
appropriate by the Director of Finance and as required by State law, at least
quarterly and submit the same to the Council not later than fifteen (15) days
after the end of each accounting period detailed as to appropriations and funds
in such manner as to show the true financial condition of the Municipality and
each department and division thereof as of the last day of the accounting
period.  He shall furnish such other financial reports, data and statements as
shall be required by the Mayor, Council or laws of the State of Ohio.
(Approved Nov. 3, 1998)
Sec. 4.  Clerk of the City.
   There shall be a Clerk of the City who shall be appointed by the Mayor.  The
Clerk of the City shall serve as purchasing agent for the City.  The purchasing
agent may, on the basis of requisitions submitted by department, commission or
board heads and approved by the Director of Finance, or as directed by Council
and within the amounts and items appropriated by Council, make purchases not in
excess of ten thousand dollars ($10,000), provided sufficient funds have
otherwise been appropriated by Council.  No expenditure of more than ten
thousand dollars ($10,000) shall be made except upon specific order and
approval of Council.  All records pertaining to requisitions and purchases
shall be kept at City Hall.
(Approved Nov. 3, 1998; Nov. 4, 2014)
Sec. 5.  Department of Public Safety.
   (a)   The Department of Public Safety shall be under the supervision of the
Director of Public Safety who must be a qualified elector of the City. The
Mayor shall serve as Director of Public Safety until such a time as Council may
decide it to be in the best interest of the City for this office to be filled
by some other qualified elector. At such time the Council shall direct the
Mayor to appoint an elector to the office of Director of Public Safety with the
appointment subject to the approval of Council.
   The Director of Public Safety shall be the executive head of the Fire
Department and the Police Department and shall be responsible for enforcing all
police, health, safety and sanitary regulations that may be prescribed by the
ordinances of the City or the general laws of the State of Ohio.
   The Fire Department shall consist of the Fire Chief and such other officers,
firemen and personnel as the Council shall provide, all of whom shall be
appointed by the Mayor and in accordance with the rules and regulations of the
Civil Service Commission and the provisions of this Charter.
   The Police Department shall consist of the Chief of Police and such other
officers, patrolmen and personnel as the Council shall provide, all of whom
shall be appointed by the Mayor and in accordance with the rules and
regulations of the Civil Service Commission and the provisions of this Charter.
(Approved Nov. 5, 2002)
   (b)   The Director of Public Safety shall make and publish, with the
approval of the Council, written rules for the government of the Police, Fire
and Building Departments and the conduct and discipline of members and
personnel thereof.
(Approved Nov. 5, 1968)
Sec. 6.  Department of Public Service.
   (a)   The Department of Public Service shall be under the supervision of the
Director of Public Service who must be a qualified elector of the City. The
Mayor shall serve as Director of Public Service until such time as the Council
may decide it to be in the best interest of the City for this office to be
filled by some other qualified elector. At such time the Council shall direct
the Mayor to appoint an elector to the office of Director of Public Service
with the appointment subject to the approval of Council.
   (b)   The Department of Public Service shall consist of a Division of
Streets and a Division of Public Properties, operating under the direct
supervision of the Director of Public Service. The Director of Public Service
shall appoint the heads of these divisions subject to approval of the Council.
Disapproval of an appointee by Council shall be accompanied by a public
statement of the reasons for disapproval. The duties of each division shall be
determined by ordinance of Council.
   (c)   The Director of Public Service shall have charge of all public works
and construction thereof. He shall be responsible for the construction,
improvement, repair and maintenance of streets, sidewalks, lanes and bridges;
of sewers, sewage systems, drains, ditches and culvert streams; and of all
public places belonging to the City or dedicated to public use.
   He shall manage all public utilities of the City supported wholly or in part
by taxation, and shall enforce all obligations of privately owned or operated
public utilities enforceable by the City.
   He shall have charge of the cleaning, resurfacing, repairing, sprinkling and
lighting of streets and public places; the collection and disposal of waste;
and the preservation of all property belonging to the City and pertaining to
the functions thereof.
   He shall perform such other duties consistent with his office as may be
required by this Charter, by ordinance of the Council or, in the case of an
appointee, as directed by the Mayor.
(Approved Nov. 5, 1968; Nov. 4, 2003)
Sec. 7.  Planning Commission.
   (a)   Organization.
      (1)   The Planning Commission shall consist of five (5) regular members
and two (2) alternate members who shall be electors of the Municipality and who
shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of Council.
Disapproval of an appointee by Council shall be accompanied by a public
statement of the reasons for disapproval.
         No Commission member shall hold any other Municipal office or
appointment in this Municipality.
         Alternate members of the Planning Commission shall be in addition to
the regular members and may substitute for regular members who are unable to
attend a meeting or hearing of the Commission. Alternate members shall only be
entitled to vote when they substitute for regular members who are unable to
attend a meeting or hearing of the Commission. Alternate members shall be the
two (2) most recently appointed of the members. 
         Council shall appoint one of its members as an ex officio member to
attend all meetings. He shall have no vote in the deliberations of the Planning
Commission, but shall apprise Council of the activities of the Commission.
      (2)   The Commission shall elect its Chairman from among its appointed
members.
      (3)   The term of each member of the Commission shall be four (4) years
except that of three (3) members first appointed who shall be appointed for two
(2) years; the remaining two (2) members shall be appointed for four (4) years.
Thereafter all succeeding appointments shall be for four (4) years.
      (4)   Any vacancy occurring during the unexpired term of any member shall
be filled as originally provided for the remainder of the term.
      (5)   No Commission member may participate in any deliberation or vote
upon any matter involving property or issues which directly affect the personal
or business interest of the member, or for which the member will be in a
position to realize personal aggrandizement or financial gain. Each member
shall sign a non-conflict of interest affidavit prepared by the Director of Law
in accordance with the laws of the State of Ohio. This affidavit shall be
executed at the time the member takes office.
(Approved Nov. 8, 1978)
      (6)   The Mayor may at any time remove any Commission member for
inefficiency, neglect of duty, malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in
office, incapacity or incompetency, provided however, that such removal shall
not become final without the concurrence of at least two-thirds (2/3) of the
members of Council.
(Approved Nov. 3, 1998; Nov. 7, 2006)
   (b)   Qualifications.
      (1)   Members of the Planning Commission shall be electors whose
education or experience provides the level of personal competence necessary for
the development of a Master Plan for the physical development of the
Municipality and zoning plans to control land use, and for such other duties as
this Charter may provide.
      (2)   No member of the Planning Commission shall hold a real estate
license or a real estate broker’s license or be a land developer or the agent
of a land developer.
   (c)   Duties and Requirements.  Subject to the approval of Council, the
Planning Commission shall:
      (1)   Make, amend, extend and add to the Master Plan for the physical
development of the Municipality;
      (2)   Exercise control over platting or subdividing land within the
Municipality and recommend acceptance or rejection of all projects properly
presented to it pursuant to procedures established by Council;
      (3)   Draft for the Council an official map of the Municipality and
recommend or disapprove proposed changes in such map;
      (4)   Make or adopt a zoning plan and recommend or disapprove proposed
changes to such plan. However, the Council may from time to time amend, repeal
or adopt any or all the provisions of the zoning ordinance, but no amendment,
repeal or adoption shall be passed until the Council shall have held a public
hearing thereon and shall have given at least fourteen (14) days notice of the
time and place thereof in a newspaper of general circulation in the
Municipality. During said fourteen-day period, the text or a copy of the text
of such amendment, repeal or adoption, together with the maps or plans or
copies thereof, forming part of, or referred to in, said ordinance, measure or
regulation, shall be on file with the Clerk of Council for public examination,
and a copy of the text of such amendment, repeal or adoption shall be placed or
posted in a conspicuous place in the Municipal Building.
      (5)   Submit annually to the Mayor and Council, not less than ninety (90)
days prior to the beginning of the budget year, a list of recommended changes
or capital improvements which, in the opinion of the Commission, are necessary
or desirable to be constructed during the forthcoming two-year period. Such a
list shall be arranged in order of preference, with recommendations as to which
projects shall be constructed in which year.
      (6)   Make and adopt plans for the clearing and rebuilding of blighted
areas within the Municipality;
      (7)   Promote public interest in and understanding of the Master Plan and
of planning and zoning;
      (8)   Hold regular meetings open to the public at least once each month
in the Council Chamber of the Municipality. Special meetings shall be held at
the call of the Chairman when deemed necessary, subject to such provisions as
provided by the rules of the Commission.
      (9)   Keep a public record of its resolutions, findings and
determinations.
(Approved Nov. 8, 1994)
   (d)   Powers.  The powers of the Commission are as follows:
      (1)   Request information and require the same to be furnished within a
reasonable length of time from the other departments of the Municipal
government in relation to its work;
      (2)   Within its budget appropriation and with the approval of Council,
contract with appropriate consultants for such services as it may require;
      (3)   Request assistance from the Mayor, who may, at his discretion,
assign to the Commission members of the staff of any administrative department
or direct such department to make special studies requested by the Commission;
      (4)   In the performance of its functions, enter any land and make
examinations and surveys and place and maintain necessary monuments and marks
thereon;
      (5)   Make and adopt a plan for the replanning, reconstruction or
redevelopment of any area or district within the Municipality which may have
been destroyed, in whole or part, or seriously damaged by fire, earthquake,
flood or any other disaster; and
      (6)   Have all other powers granted by the Constitution of Ohio and the
laws of the State of Ohio, provided the same are not inconsistent with the
Charter or ordinances of the City of Broadview Heights, Ohio.
(Approved Nov. 8, 1994)
   (e)   Referral to Planning Commission.
      (1)   Any ordinance referring to zoning or platting or other regulations
controlling the use or development of lands shall not be passed, or become
effective or binding upon the Municipality, unless and until Council shall have
first submitted the same to the Planning Commission for report and
recommendation.  Any matter so referred shall be acted upon by the Commission
within sixty (60) days from the date of referral unless a longer time is
allowed by Council; however, in no event shall the time allotted exceed sixty
(60) additional days.
      (2)   If the Planning Commission shall fail to act within the time
allotted, Council may act thereon as if it had received a recommendation of
approval in such matter.  In such a case, Council shall hold a public hearing
prior to enacting the proposed ordinance.
      (3)   Any provision of any ordinance, resolution or order disapproved by
formal action of the Planning Commission shall require a concurrence of at
least two-thirds (2/3) members of Council for adoption or authorization.
      (4)   When the Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to the
Council for a change in or addition to any zoning ordinance or building code,
Council shall study each recommendation and, unless otherwise agreed to by the
applicant, take final action within ninety (90) days.
(Approved Nov. 3, 1998)
   (f)   Funds.  A sufficient sum shall be appropriated by the Council each
year to carry out the planning and zoning provisions of this Charter.
(Approved Nov. 7, 1972; Nov.  6, 2007)
Sec. 8.  Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (a)   Organization.
      (1)   There shall be a Board of Zoning Appeals consisting of at least
five (5) regular members and two (2) alternate members.
         At least one regular member of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be
appointed from each ward.  All other members, whether regular or alternate,
shall be appointed from the City-at-Large. In the event that the number of ward
members plus one regular member at-large is at any time such as to result in an
even number of regular voting members, the Mayor shall appoint an additional
regular member at-large, and no more, so as to result in an odd number of
regular votes. Total membership shall be as otherwise provided herein except
that at no time shall the regular membership of the Board of Zoning Appeals
exceed the sum of all ward members plus two at-large members.
         Alternate members of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be in addition
to the regular members and may substitute for regular members who are unable to
attend a meeting or hearing of the Board. Alternate members of the Board of
Zoning Appeals shall be the two (2) most recently appointed of the members at-
large.
         The Mayor shall appoint the members of the Board of Zoning Appeals and
said appointees shall be approved by a majority of Council. Disapproval of an
appointee by Council shall be accompanied by a public statement of the reasons
for disapproval.
         Council shall appoint one of its members as an ex officio member to
attend all meetings. He shall have no vote in the deliberations of the Board of
Zoning Appeals but shall apprise the Council of the activities of the Board of
Zoning Appeals.
(Approved Nov. 5, 2002)
      (2)   The Board shall elect its Chairman from among its members.
      (3)   The term of each member of the Board shall be for four (4) years.
(Approved Nov. 8, 1966)
      (4)   Any vacancy occurring during the unexpired term of any member shall
be filled as originally provided for the remainder of the term.
      (5)   On every vote taken by the Board of Zoning Appeals each member
shall sign a non-conflict of interest affidavit prepared by the Director of Law
in accordance with the laws of the State of Ohio. Said affidavit shall provide
that the signer thereof shall realize no personal aggrandizement or financial
gain as the result of his vote in said meeting. This affidavit shall be
incorporated in the minutes of the Board of Zoning Appeals of that particular
date.
(Approved Nov. 8, 1978)
      (6)   The Mayor may at any time remove any member for inefficiency,
neglect of duty, malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office, incapacity
or incompetency, provided however, that such removal shall not become final
without the concurrence of at least two-thirds (2/3) of the members of Council.
(Approved Nov. 3, 1998; Nov. 7, 2006)
   (b)   Qualifications.  No member of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall hold a
real estate license or a real estate broker’s license or be a land developer or
the agent of a land developer.
   (c)   Duties and Requirements.
      (1)   Meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairman when deemed
necessary, subject to such provisions as provided by the rules of the Board, or
at such times as Council may require.
(Approved Nov. 8, 1994)
      (2)   All meetings of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be public. 
Public notice shall be given of hearings on any appeals by the posting of a
notice in the main entrance of the Municipal Building and by publishing one
notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Broadview Heights
or by publishing one notice on the City of Broadview Heights website at least
fourteen (14) days prior to the date of said hearing.  Written notice of a
variance to be considered by the Board of Zoning Appeals shall be mailed to all
the property owners within a five hundred (500) foot radius of the property for
which a variance is requested at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of
said hearing. Said notice shall be in a form reasonably calculated to give
actual notice of the date of the hearing.  The Board of Zoning Appeals shall
keep minutes of its proceedings.
(Approved Nov. 3, 1998; Nov. 5, 2002; Nov. 4, 2003; Nov. 7, 2006; Nov. 6, 2018)
   (d)   Determinations; Variances.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided herein, the Board of Zoning Appeals
shall determine all matters properly presented to it in writing.  Where
practical difficulties shall result from the enforcement of any zoning
ordinance,  the Board of Zoning Appeals shall have the power to grant a
variance in harmony with the general intent of the ordinance and to secure the
general welfare and substantial justice in the promotion of the public health,
comfort, convenience, morals, safety and general welfare of the Municipality.
      (2)   Variances granted pursuant to Section 8(d)(1), unless acted upon,
shall expire one year from the date in which the variance was granted. The
jurisdiction of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall not extend to the granting of
a variance from any zoning ordinance which limits the location of trades,
industries,
condominiums, apartment houses, two-family houses, single-family houses and/or
any other comparable structures and/or primary uses to a specific zoning
district.
      (3)   The action of the Board of Zoning Appeals on any non-residential
matter shall be forwarded to Council. Council may, by affirmative vote of two-
thirds (2/3) of its members override the action of the Board of Zoning Appeals
on any non-residential matter, provided however, that the vote to do so must be
made within thirty (30) days of the action of the Board of Zoning Appeals. The
action of the Board of Zoning Appeals on all residential matters shall be
final.
(Approved Nov. 8, 1994; Nov. 4, 2008)
   (e)   Funds. A sufficient sum shall be appropriated by the Council each year
to carry out the Board of Zoning Appeals provisions of this Charter.
Sec. 9.  The Civil Service Commission.
   (a)   Organization.
      (1)   The Civil Service Commission shall consist of three (3) electors of
the Municipality not holding other Municipal office or appointment, to be
appointed by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of the members of
Council. Commissioners shall serve for a term of four (4) years.
      (2)   A vacancy occurring during the term of any member of the Commission
shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Mayor with the approval of a
majority of the members of Council.
      (3)   The Commission shall designate one of its members as Chairman and
may appoint a Secretary who need not be a member of the Commission and may hold
other Municipal office or appointment.
   (b)   Compensation and Funds.  Members of the Civil Service Commission shall
serve without compensation unless otherwise provided by ordinance. A sufficient
sum shall be appropriated by the Council to carry out the civil service
provisions of this Charter.
   (c)   Powers and Duties.
      (1)   The Commission shall provide for ascertainment of merit and fitness
as the basis for appointment and promotion in the classified service of the
Municipality, as required by the Constitution of the State of Ohio, the Revised
Code of the State of Ohio, and for appeals from the action of the Director of
Public Safety of the Director of Public Service in case of transfer, reduction
or removal except as otherwise provided in this Charter.
      (2)   The Commission shall keep a record of its proceedings and
examinations, which shall be open to public inspection, and in all matters not
in conflict with this Charter shall conduct its affairs in accordance with the
provisions of general law and consistent with the Rules and Regulations of the
Civil Service Commission of Broadview Heights. 
   (d)   Classification of Service.
      (1)   Officers, appointees and employees of the Municipality are hereby
divided into the classified and unclassified service.
      (2)   The classified service shall comprise all persons employed full-
time within the Police and Fire Departments for which it is practicable to
determine the merit and fitness of applicants by competitive examination or who
have been appointed pursuant to Article V, Section 9(e), of the Charter except
for the Secretary to the Police Chief, the Secretary to the Fire Chief and all
employees engaged in the activities that are principally clerical in nature.
      (3)   The unclassified service shall include all positions not
specifically included in the classified service.
(Approved Nov. 8, 1994;  Nov. 4, 2003)
   (e)   Appointment of Full-Time Firemen. 
Editor’s note:
   Division (e) was repealed by the voters on November 5, 2002.
   (f)   Removal.  The Mayor may at any time remove any commissioner for
inefficiency, neglect of duty, malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in
office, incapacity or incompetency, provided however, that such removal shall
not become final without the concurrence of at least two thirds (2/3) of the
members of Council.
(Approved Nov. 3, 1998; Nov. 7, 2006)
Sec. 10.  Department of Parks and Recreation.
   (a)   Organization.
      (1)   There shall be a Department of Parks and Recreation which shall be
under the direction of a Director of Parks and Recreation.
      (2)   The Director of Parks and Recreation shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of a majority of Council.  Disapproval of an appointee
by Council shall be accompanied by a public statement of the reasons for
disapproval.
      (3)   Subject to the other provisions of the Charter and the ordinances
promulgated thereunder, the Director of Parks and Recreation shall have the
control and management of parks, park entrances, parkways, children’s
playgrounds, public recreation facilities, gymnasiums, swimming pools,
playfields, or indoor recreational centers, and any lands or buildings set
aside for park or recreational use by the public, and the acquisition,
construction, repair, and maintenance thereof.  Subject to the Charter, the
Director of Parks and Recreation shall have the responsibility for expenditures
of all monies appropriated by the legislative authority of the City or received
from any other source for the purchase, acquisition, improvement, maintenance,
equipment, or enjoyment of all property under his control, but no liability
shall be incurred or expenditure made unless the money required therefor is
duly appropriated.
         The Director of Parks and Recreation may recommend and the Mayor may
employ recreational supervisors, engineers, clerks, and other necessary
employees for carrying into effect the purposes of the Department, and the
Council shall fix the compensation and term of service of such employees within
its appropriation.
      (4)   The Director shall be required and shall have the power to schedule
and regulate the use of the facilities in the City in all areas of recreation. 
The Director shall give first preference to the citizens and organizations of
Broadview Heights in the scheduling of the use of any recreational facilities.
      (5)   The Director, with the approval of the Mayor, shall prepare a set
of rules governing the use of recreational facilities and the supervision of
personnel used in conjunction therewith, and shall make the same as a public
record.
      (6)   The Director shall create and administer all recreational programs
for the City of Broadview Heights.
   (b)   Parks and Recreation Advisory Board.
      (1)   Effective with this Charter Amendment, the term of each member of
the current Board of Recreation and Activities shall terminate.
      (2)   The Mayor shall appoint a Parks and Recreation Advisory Board of
five (5) members with the approval of a majority of Council and the Mayor shall
consult with the Director as to the Director’s recommendations prior to
appointing said Board.
      (3)   All members of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall serve
without compensation and no member shall hold any other Municipal office or
appointment in the City of Broadview Heights.
      (4)   Within thirty (30) days of the effective date of this provision,
three (3) members of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall be appointed
for a term of four (4) years and two (2) members shall be appointed for a term
of two (2) years.  Thereafter, all persons appointed to the Parks and
Recreation Advisory Board shall serve for a term of four (4) years.
      (5)   Any vacancy occurring during the unexpired term of any of the
members shall be filled by the Mayor with the approval of a majority of Council
and said appointee shall conclude the term of the member whom he has succeeded.
      (6)   The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall hold meetings at
least once per calendar quarter or from time to time as the Director may
require.
      (7)   The Mayor may at any time remove any member of inefficiency,
neglect of duty, malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office, incapacity
or incompetency, provided however, that such removal shall not become final
without the concurrence of at least two thirds (2/3) of the members of Council.
      (8)   The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board shall review and make
recommendations on pertinent parks and recreation issues, on behalf of all of
the City’s residents, in order to improve the quality of life and benefit all
City residents.
(Approve Nov. 3, 1998; Nov. 7, 2006)
Sec. 11.  Department of Human Services.
   (a)   Establishment.  The Department of Human Services is hereby
established.
   (b)   Director of Human Services.  The Department of Human Services shall be
under the supervision of the Director of Human Services, which position shall
be appointed by the Mayor with the concurrence of a majority of Council.
Disapproval of an appointee by Council shall be accompanied by a public
statement of the reasons for disapproval. The Director of Human Services shall
serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and shall be directly responsible for
carrying out the purposes of the Department of Human Services.
   (c)   Powers and Duties.  The Human Services Department shall provide a
central resource wherein individuals with social concerns can obtain general or
specific assistance or information. The Department shall:
      (1)   Develop, cultivate and bring together human resources in the
community in assisting persons in the area of social concerns;
      (2)   Encourage and work with public and private agencies in establishing
facilities and programs within the City that deal with needs, such as needs of
the elderly, problems of mentally or physically handicapped persons and family
counseling problems; and
      (3)   Direct or bring together individuals willing to donate their time
or services in helping others.
   (d)   Human Services Advisory Board.
      (1)   Establishment.  There is hereby established an advisory board to be
known as the Human Services Advisory Board, which board shall consist of three
(3) regular members and two (2) alternate members that are electors of the
Municipality, not holding other municipal office or appointment, who shall
be appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by a majority of Council for terms of
three (3) years. Any vacancy shall be filled in the same manner for the
unexpired term.
         Council shall appoint one of its members as an ex official member to
attend all meetings. He shall have no vote in the deliberation of the Human
Services Advisory Board but shall apprise Council of the activities of the
commission.
      (2)   Powers and Duties.  The Board shall meet and organize and
thereafter shall meet at least once per calendar quarter or from time to time
as the Director may require for the purpose of advising and assisting the
Director of the Human Services Department in the establishment of policies and
procedures with respect to prospective programs or activities deemed necessary
to carry out the purposes of the Office. The Board shall also confer with the
Mayor and Council relative to the establishment of programs designed to meet
the human needs of the residents of the City.
      (3)   Rules and Regulations.  The Board shall adopt rules and regulations
with respect to conducting meetings, which rules and regulations shall be
consistent with the purpose and intent of the powers and duties set forth in
this section.
      (4)   Reports. The Board shall file a written annual report with the
administration and Council not later than the first regular meeting of Council
in February of each year, setting forth such details of its activities for the
previous year as Council and the Mayor may require.
(Approved Nov. 5, 2002; Nov. 7, 2006; Nov. 6, 2018)
Sec. 12.  Building and Zoning Department.
   (a)   Establishment.  The Building and Zoning Department is hereby
established.
   (b)   Authority of Building Department.  The Building and Zoning Department
shall have the authority to administer the provisions of the Building and
Zoning Codes of the City.
   (c)   Building Commissioner.  The Building and Zoning Department shall be
under the supervision of the Building Commissioner, which position shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the concurrence of a majority of Council.
Disapproval of an appointee by Council shall be accompanied by a public
statement of the reasons for disapproval. The Building Commissioner shall serve
at the pleasure of the Mayor and shall be directly responsible for carrying out
the purposes of the Building and Zoning Department.
   (d)   Powers and Duties.  The Building Commissioner shall be responsible for
the performance and oversight of the duties of the Building and Zoning
Department, which shall include directing and organizing the Department,
program administration, planning, zoning, building inspections, building and
housing Code enforcement, and planning and zoning Code enforcement.
   The Building and Zoning Department shall be staffed as otherwise provided by
Charter and ordinances so as to provide adequate personnel to discharge the
responsibilities of the Building and Zoning Department.
   All other duties and powers of the Building and Zoning Department shall be
as otherwise provided in the Charter and Ordinances of the City of Broadview
Heights, Ohio.
(Approved Nov. 5, 2002; Nov. 7, 2006; Nov. 4, 2014)
Sec. 13.  Department of Engineering.
   (a)   Establishment. The Department of Engineering is hereby established.
   (b)   Director of Engineering. The Department of Engineering shall be under
the supervision of the Director of Engineering, which position shall be
appointed by the Mayor with the concurrence of a majority of Council, provided
that the appointee now serving as Broadview Heights Engineer shall continue in
said position until his successor is appointed and qualified as otherwise
provided by law. Disapproval of an appointee by Council shall be accompanied by
a public statement of the reasons for disapproval. The Director of Engineering
shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor and shall be directly responsible for
carrying out the purposes of the Department of Engineering.
   (c)   Powers and Duties.  The Director of Engineering shall have charge of
all engineering and inspection in connection with public works and inspections
as well as all engineering and inspection as otherwise required by the
ordinances of the City of Broadview Heights, Ohio. He shall have charge of
making and preserving all surveys, maps, plans, drawings and estimates for
public works and shall attend all meetings and perform all other duties
consistent with his office and as may be required by this Charter, by ordinance
of the Council, and/or as directed by the Mayor.
   The Director of Engineering shall file a written annual report with the
administration and Council not later than the first regular meeting of Council
in February of each year, setting forth such details of its activities for the
previous year as Council and the Mayor may require.
(Approved Nov. 4, 2003)
ARTICLE VI
GENERAL PROVISIONS
   The Council may, by ordinance, establish additional departments and
commissions, or divisions thereof, and provide for such boards, officers and
employees as it may deem necessary.
ARTICLE VII
NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS
Sec. 1.  Municipal Elections.
   Regular Municipal elections shall be held on the first Tuesday after the
first Monday of November in the odd-numbered years.
Sec. 2.  Nominations and Qualifications.
   Nominations for elective offices of the Municipality shall be made by
petition only, on the standard forms for the nomination of nonpartisan
candidates for such offices. Each candidate for Mayor shall file a petition
signed by not less than one hundred (100) registered electors of the
Municipality. Each candidate for Councilman-at-Large shall file a petition
signed by not less than fifty (50) registered electors of the Municipality.
Each candidate for Ward Councilman shall file a petition signed by not less
than twenty-five (25) registered electors of the ward in which he seeks
election.  Each candidate shall file a separate petition. Such nominating
petitions shall not be circulated prior to one hundred fifty (150) days before
said election. Group petitions shall not be used. Such petition or petitions
when filed must be accompanied by the written acceptance of the nominee. Each
signer of a petition shall sign his or her name and after his or her name shall
designate his or her address and the date of signing.  The petition may be in a
number of parts, but each part shall be verified under oath by the circulator
as required by law.  Nominating petitions shall be filed with the Board of
Elections of Cuyahoga County not less than ninety (90) days prior to the date
of election.
(Approved Nov. 5, 1996)
Sec. 3.  Election Procedures.
   The ballots used in elections for offices of the Municipality shall be
without party mark or designation. The names of all candidates shall be placed
upon the same ballot and shall be rotated in the manner provided by the general
laws of the State of Ohio. Any person may vote in any Municipal election if
such person is registered as a voter with election authorities as prescribed by
the laws of the State of Ohio.
   Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the general laws of the State
of Ohio shall govern the nomination and election of the elective officers of
the Municipality.
(Approved Nov. 8, 1978)
Sec. 4.  Run-off Election.
Editor’s note:
   Section 4 was repealed by the voters on November 8, 1978.
Sec. 5.  Primary Election.
   There shall be a primary election on the second Tuesday in September in the
event that more than six (6) persons are nominated for the elective Municipal
office of Council-at-Large, or more than two (2) persons are nominated for
Mayor or any ward Council position as provided for in this Charter. The purpose
of the primary election is to select six (6) candidates for Council-at-Large
and two (2) candidates for Mayor and each ward Council position for the
November election ballot. The six (6) candidates for Council-at-Large and two
(2) candidates for Mayor and each ward Council position shall be those six (6)
in the case of candidates for Council-at-Large and those two (2) candidates for
Mayor and/or Ward Councilman receiving the highest number of votes cast in the
primary election. The name of each person who is elected in compliance herewith
shall be printed on the official ballot for the regular Municipal election in
November following, and names of no other candidates shall be printed thereon.
(Approved Nov. 3, 1998; Nov. 5, 2002; Nov. 7, 2006)
ARTICLE VIII
INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL
Sec. 1.  Initiative.
   The electors shall have the power to propose any ordinance or resolution
except an ordinance appropriating money or authorizing the levy of taxes and to
adopt or reject the same at the polls. A petition to initiate an ordinance or
resolution shall be signed by a number of qualified electors equal to at least
ten (10) percent of the total votes cast in the last regular Municipal
election. Otherwise the exercise of the power of initiative shall be in
accordance with the provisions of the Constitution and the laws of Ohio now or
hereafter in effect.
(Approved Nov. 5, 1968)
Sec. 2.  Referendum.
   The electors shall have the power to approve or reject any ordinance or
resolution passed by Council except as otherwise provided by the laws of Ohio.
The referendum petition shall be signed by a number of qualified electors equal
to at least twenty (20) percent of the total votes cast in the last regular
Municipal election. Otherwise the exercise of the power of referendum shall be
in accordance with the provisions of the Constitution and the laws of Ohio now
or hereafter in effect.
(Approved Nov. 5, 1968)
Sec. 3.  Petition Procedure.
   All petition papers circulated for the purposes of an initiative, referendum
or recall shall be uniform in size and style. All circulators of said petition
papers shall be qualified electors and residents of the City. The initiative
petition papers shall contain the full text of the proposed ordinance. The
signatures to the initiative or referendum petitions need not all be appended
to one paper, but to each separate petition there shall be attached a statement
of the circulator thereof, as provided by general law. Each signer of any such
petition paper shall sign his name in ink or indelible pencil and shall
indicate after his name, his place of residence by street and number. There
shall appear on each petition the names and addresses of the same five (5)
electors, who, as a committee of petitioners, shall be regarded as responsible
for the circulation and filing of the petition. All petition papers comprising
an initiative or referendum petition shall be assembled and filed with the
Clerk of Council as one instrument.
(Approved Nov. 4, 2014)
Sec. 4.  Recall.
   Electors shall have the power to remove from office, by recall election, any
elected officer of the Municipality. After an elected officer has served six
(6) months of his term, a petition demanding his recall and removal may be
filed with the Clerk of Council. Such petition shall state the position of the
elected officer, his or her name and the reasons for removal. In the case of a
Ward Councilman, such petition shall be signed by qualified electors of the
ward equal in number to at least twenty-five (25) percent of the total votes
cast in the ward from which the Councilman was elected at the last preceding
regular election, and only qualified electors of said ward shall be eligible to
vote at said recall election. In the case of the Mayor and Councilmen-at-Large,
such recall petition shall be signed by qualified electors equal in number to
at least twenty-five (25) percent of the total votes cast at the last preceding
regular Municipal election. All registered voters of the Municipality shall be
eligible to cast their vote in said recall election. If the Clerk of Council
shall find the petition sufficient, he shall promptly so certify to the
Council, shall deliver a copy of such certificate to the officer whose removal
is sought, and make a record of such delivery. If such officer shall not resign
within five (5) days after the day on which such delivery shall have been made,
the Council shall fix a day for holding a recall election, not less than thirty
(30) days, nor more than forty-five (45) days from the date of delivery. The
form of the ballot used shall be:    
   “Shall _______________ be retained in his office as                ?”
   If a majority of the ballots cast shall be voted affirmatively, such officer
shall remain in office. If a majority of the ballots cast shall be voted
negatively, such officer shall be considered as removed, his office shall be
deemed vacant and such vacancy shall be filled as provided in this Charter. The
officer removed by such recall election shall not be eligible for appointment
to the vacancy created thereby.
(Approved Nov. 2, 1971)
ARTICLE IX
ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS AND EFFECTIVE DATES
Sec. 1.  Action by the Council.
   The action of the Council shall be by ordinance or resolution, and on the
passage of each ordinance or resolution the vote shall be taken by “yes” and
“no” and entered upon the journal. An affirmative vote of at least a majority
of the Council shall be required for the passage of every ordinance or
resolution. No bylaw, ordinance or resolution of a general and permanent
nature, or granting a franchise, or creating a right, or involving the
expenditure of money, or the levying of a tax, or for the purchase, lease, sale
or transfer of property, shall be passed, unless it is written or printed and
has been fully and distinctly read on three
different days, and with respect to any such bylaw, ordinance or resolution,
there shall be no authority to dispense with this rule, except by an
affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the members elected to the Council, and
eligible to vote, taken by “yes” or “no,” on each bylaw, resolution or
ordinance, and entered on the journal.
   A written or printed copy of any ordinance or resolution shall be furnished
to all members of Council and the Mayor at least twenty-four (24) hours prior
to introduction thereof, unless expressly or impliedly waived by the person or
persons not receiving a copy as provided for herein.
   All ordinances, resolutions, statements, orders, proclamations and reports
required by law or by this Charter or by ordinance to be published or posted
shall be posted for a period of fifteen (15) days after passage in the
Municipal Building, recreation hall and each of the other wards in a prominent
public location in the City as determined by Council.
(Approved Nov. 5, 1996; Nov. 7, 2006)
Sec. 2.  Effective Date of Ordinances and Resolutions.
   Each ordinance or resolution providing for (a) the appropriation of money,
(b) an annual real or personal property tax levy, and (c) improvements
petitioned for by the owners of a majority of the foot frontage of the property
benefited and to be specially assessed therefor, and (d) any emergency
ordinance or resolution necessary for the immediate preservation of the public
peace, health or safety, shall take effect, unless a later time is specified
therein, upon its signature by the Mayor, or upon the expiration of the time
within which it may be disapproved by the Mayor, or upon its passage after
disapproval by the Mayor, as the case may be. No other ordinance or resolution
shall go into effect until thirty (30) days after its passage or adoption by
the Council. Each emergency measure shall contain a statement of the necessity
for such emergency action and shall require the affirmative vote of two-thirds
(2/3) of the members of the Council for its enactment. No action of the Council
(a) relating to any change in the boundaries or the zoning ordinances of the
Municipality, (b) providing for the surrender or joint exercise of any of its
powers, (c) any franchise, (d) contracting for the supply to the Municipality
or its inhabitants of the product or service of any utility, whether
Municipally owned or not, or (e) levying an income or excise tax, shall be
taken as an emergency measure.
(Approved Nov. 5, 1996; Nov. 2, 2010)
Sec. 3.  Mandatory Referral.
   Any legislation passed by Council which refers to the reclassification of
the existing zoning of a parcel and/or parcels of land or that refers to
changes in any regulations limiting the location of trades, industries,
condominiums, apartment houses, two-family houses, single-family houses, and/or
any other comparable structures and/or primary uses to a specific zoning
district, shall not become effective or binding upon the Municipality unless
and until the same is submitted to the electors of the Municipality and
approved by a majority vote of all votes cast on this issue by the qualified
electors of the City of Broadview Heights.  Said issue shall be submitted to
the electors of the City at the next primary or general election which shall
occur not less than sixty (60) days after its passage by Council.
   If this section is violated and a building is under construction or
completely constructed, appropriate legal action shall be taken under law to
abate said violation.
   The City shall have on display at all times in the Council Chambers,
available to the public, a Zone Map, showing a legend and summary of zoning
regulations by district, including major uses and minimum and maximum lot
widths. In addition, each district, City park, playground and City lands shall
be accurately located and identified with the date of adoption and the date of
revisions to date. Any and all revisions shall be promptly posted to the Zone
Map.  Maps shall be available to each land owner of the City for a cost as
otherwise determined by the Council.
(Approved Nov. 3, 1998)
ARTICLE X
FRANCHISES
   The Council may, by ordinance, grant a nonexclusive franchise to any person
or corporation to construct or operate a public utility on, across, under, over
or above any public street or real estate within the Municipality for a period
not in excess of twenty-five (25) years; and it may prescribe in the ordinance
the kind or quality of service or product to be furnished, the rate to be
charged therefor and such other terms as Council shall deem conducive to the
public interest. Such franchise may be amended or renewed in the manner and
subject to the provisions established by this Charter for original grants. No
consent of the owner of property abutting on any public street or real estate
shall be necessary to the effectiveness of any such grant, amendment or
renewal. All such grants, amendments and renewals shall be made subject to the
continuing right of the Council to provide reasonable regulations for the
operation of such utilities with reference to such street and public real
estate, including the right to require such reconstruction, relocation,
alteration or removal of structures and equipment used in such streets or
public realty as shall, in the opinion of Council, be necessary in the public
interest.
ARTICLE XI
LIMITATION ON THE RATE OF TAXATION
Sec. 1.  General Limitation.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, the taxing authority of this
Municipality shall be, in all respects, subject to the limitations thereon
provided by the Constitution and laws of the State of Ohio and nothing
contained in this Charter shall be construed to authorize the levying of any
tax by this Municipality in excess of said limitations without a vote of the
people.
Sec. 2.  Exception; Levy to Fund Full-Time Fire and Emergency Medical Service.
   Notwithstanding Article XI, Section 1, of this Charter, a tax for the
purpose of providing necessary facilities and equipment for, and paying costs
of the operation of, a full-time fire and emergency medical service may be
levied without a vote of the people at a rate not exceeding 4.2 mills for each
one dollar of valuation on all property in the city listed and assessed for
taxation, commencing with a levy on the 2012 tax list and duplicate.
(Approved Nov. 6, 2012)
Sec. 3.  Limitation on Levying an Income or Receipts Tax.
   No ordinance or other measure levying a tax on income earned by residents of
this Municipality or earned or received within this Municipality shall be
enacted, and no such tax shall be levied or collected unless approved by a
majority of those voting upon such question, at a Municipal election. Such
question shall be certified to the Board of Elections and placed upon the
ballot in the same manner as now or may hereafter be provided by general law
for the submission of a tax levy for operating purposes in excess of the
limitation imposed by Article XII, Section 2, of the Constitution of the State
of Ohio.
(Approved Nov. 8, 1994)
ARTICLE XII
AMENDMENTS TO CHARTER
Sec. 1.  Indexing.
   (a)   System Used.  The indexing system of this Charter shall be as follows:
Articles numbered I, II, III, IV, etc.; sections numbered 1, 2, 3, etc.;
subsections lettered (a), (b), (c), etc.
   (b)   Severability.  Any word, phrase, clause, sentence, subsection, section
or article of this Charter may be amended as, or in, the manner hereinafter
provided.
Sec. 2.  Amendments.
   Council may, by affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of its members, submit
to the electors any proposed amendment to this Charter; or, upon petition
signed by not less than ten (10) percent of the electors of the Municipality
setting forth any proposed amendment to this Charter, Council shall submit such
proposed amendment to the electors in accordance, in each instance, with the
provisions of the Constitution of Ohio. If any such amendment is approved by a
majority of the electors voting thereon, it shall become a part of this
Charter, except that if two or more inconsistent proposed amendments on the
same subject are submitted at the same election, only the one of such
amendments receiving the largest affirmative vote, not less than a majority,
shall become a part of this Charter.
(Approved Nov. 6, 2007)
ARTICLE XIII
CHARTER REVIEW COMMITTEE
   At least once every four (4) years during the first quarter of the year
there shall be appointed a committee of nine (9) qualified electors of the
Municipality to be known as a Charter Review Committee. The members of such
Committee shall be appointed a committee of nine (9) qualified electors of the
Municipality to be known as a Charter Review Committee. The members of such
Committee shall be appointed as follows: One appointed by the Mayor; one
appointed by Council from among its members; one appointed by the Planning
Commission from its members; one appointed by the Board of Zoning Appeals from
its members; one appointed by the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board from its
members; and one from each of the wards, appointed by the Mayor with the
approval of Council, none of which persons appointed from the wards shall hold
any other Municipal office or appointment in this appointment in the City
contained in Article V, Sections 7, 8, and 10 of this Charter Review Committee.
Such Committee shall review and recommend to Council not less than one hundred
twenty (120) days prior to the next November election any alterations,
revisions and amendments to this Charter as in its judgment seem advisable. The
Council shall submit to the electors without change any such proposed
alteration, revision or amendment to the Charter at the next regular November
election. Each such Charter Review Committee shall cease to function the day of
the next November election following its appointment. The members shall serve
without compensation unless otherwise provided by ordinance.
(Approved Nov. 8, 1978; Nov. 3, 1998; Nov. 5, 2002; Nov. 7, 2006; Nov. 4, 2014)
ARTICLE XIV
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Sec. 1.  Effective Date of Charter.
   For the purpose of nominating and electing officers of the Municipality, the
establishing of wards and fixing the compensation of those officers elected in
1961, this Charter shall be in effect from and after the date of its approval
by the electors. For all other purposes, this Charter shall be in effect on and
after the first day of January, 1962.
Sec. 2.   Effect of Charter Upon Existing Laws and Rights.
   The adoption of this Charter shall not affect any pre-existing rights of the
Municipality, nor any right or liability or pending suit or prosecution either
on behalf of or against the Municipality, nor any franchise granted by the
Municipality, nor pending proceedings for the authorization of public
improvements or the levy of assessments therefor. Except as a contrary intent
appears herein, all acts of the Council of this Municipality shall continue in
effect until lawfully amended or repealed.
Sec. 3.  Saving Clause.
   The determination that any part of this Charter is invalid shall not
invalidate or impair the force or effect of any other part hereof, except to
the extent that such other part is wholly dependent for its operation upon the
part declared invalid.
Sec. 4.  Interpretation of Charter.
   The article and section headings herein have been inserted for convenient
reference and are not intended to define or limit the scope of, or otherwise
affect, any provision of this Charter.
Sec. 5.  Continuance of Present Officers.
   (a)   Continuance of Officers.  All persons who are appointees, employees or
nonelected officials of the Municipality at the time this Charter takes effect
shall continue in office and in the performance of their duties until
provisions shall have been made otherwise in accordance with the provisions of
this Charter. When such provisions shall have been made, the term of any such
appointee, employee or nonelected official shall expire.
   (b)   Abolishment of Duties.  The powers which are conferred and the duties
which are imposed upon any appointee, employee or nonelected official,
commission, board, department or division of the Municipality under the laws of
the State of Ohio, shall, if such office, department or division is abolished
by this Charter, be thereafter exercised and discharged by the officer, board,
department or division upon whom are imposed corresponding functions, powers
and duties hereunder.
Sec. 6.  Oath of Office.
   Every elected official or officer of the Municipality shall, before entering
upon the duties of his office, take an oath or affirm that he will in all
respects faithfully discharge the duties of his office, that he will profess
loyalty to the Constitution of the United States of America and to the
Constitution of the State of Ohio and that he will uphold this Charter and all
of the laws of this Municipality.
Sec. 7.  Gender Neutrality.
   Masculine pronouns and the male gender used in this Charter shall be
construed to include the female pronoun and the female gender.
(Approved Nov. 4, 2014)
ARTICLE XV
COMMUNITY BILL OF RIGHTS
   a.   Right to Pure Water.  All residents, natural communities and ecosystems
the City of Broadview Heights possess a fundamental and inalienable right to
sustainably access, use, consume, and preserve water drawn from natural water
cycles that provide water necessary to sustain life within the City.
   b.   Right to Clean Air.  All residents, natural communities and ecosystems
in The City of Broadview Heights possess a fundamental and inalienable right to
breathe air untainted by toxins, carcinogens, particulates and other substances
known to cause harm to health.
   c.   Right to Peaceful Enjoyment of Home.  Residents of The City of
Broadview Heights possess fundamental and inalienable right to the peaceful
enjoyment of their homes, free from interference, intrusion, nuisances or
impediments to access and occupation.
   d.   Rights of Natural Communities.  Natural communities and ecosystems,
including, but not limited to, wetlands, streams, rivers, aquifers, and other
water systems possess inalienable and fundamental rights to exist and flourish
within The City of Broadview Heights. Residents of the City shall possess legal
standing to enforce those rights on behalf of those natural communities and
ecosystems.
   e.   Right to a Sustainable Energy Future.  All residents in The City of
Broadview Heights possess a right to a sustainable energy future, which
includes, but is not limited to, the development, production, and use of energy
from renewable and sustainable fuel sources.
   f.   Right to Self-Government.  All residents of The City of Broadview
Heights possess the fundamental and inalienable right to a form of governance
where they live which recognizes that all power is inherent in the people, that
all free governments are founded on the people’s authority and consent, and
that corporate entities and their directors and managers shall not enjoy
special privileges or powers under the law which make community majorities
subordinate to them.
   g.   People as Sovereign.  The City of Broadview Heights shall be the
governing authority responsible to, and governed by, the residents of the City.
Use of the “City of Broadview Heights” municipal corporation by the sovereign
people of the City to make law shall not be construed to limit or surrender the
sovereign authority or immunities of the people to a municipal corporation that
is subordinate to them in all respects at all times. The people at all times
enjoy and retain an inalienable and indefeasible right to self-governance in
the community where they reside.
   h.   Right as Self-Executing.  All rights delineated and secured by this
Charter shall be self-executing and these rights shall be enforceable against
private and public entities.
   i.   Securing and Protecting Rights.  To further secure and protect the
rights enumerated by the Bill of Rights.
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation to engage in the
extraction of gas or oil within the City of Broadview Heights, with the
exception of gas and oil wells installed and operating at the time of enactment
of this Charter provision, provided that the extraction of gas or oil from
those existing wells does not involve a practice or process not previously used
for the extraction of gas or oil from those wells and providing those wells are
capped securely when production ceases.
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation, or any director,
officer, owner, or manager of a corporation to use a corporation, to deposit,
store or transport waste water, “produced” water, “frack” water, brine, or
other materials, chemicals or by-products used in the extraction of gas or oil,
within, upon or through the land, air or waters of the City of Broadview
Heights.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any person or corporation, or any director,
officer, owner, or manger of a corporation to use a corporation to engage in
the creation of fossil fuel, nuclear or other non-sustainable energy production
and delivery infrastructures, such as pipelines, processing facilities,
compressors, or storage and transportation facilities of any sort that would
violate the right to a sustainable energy future for the City of Broadview
Heights.
      4.   Corporations and persons using corporations to engage in gas or oil
extraction in a neighboring municipality, county or state shall be strictly
liable for all harms caused to natural water sources, ecosystems, human and
natural communities within the City of Broadview Heights.
      5.   Corporations in violation of the prohibition against gas and oil
extraction, or seeking to engage in gas or oil extraction shall not have the
right of “persons” afforded by the United States and Ohio Constitutions, nor
shall those corporations be afforded the protections of the commerce or
contracts clauses with the United States Constitution or corresponding sections
of the Ohio Constitution.
      6.   Corporations engaged in the extraction of gas or oil shall not
possess the authority or power to enforce State of federal preemptive law
against the people of the City of Broadview Heights, or to challenge or
overturn municipal ordinances or Charter provisions adopted by the City of
Broadview Heights Council.
      7.   No permit, license, privilege or charter issued by any State or
federal agency, Commission or Board to any person or any corporation operating
under a State charter, or any director, officer, owner, or manager of a
corporation operating under a State charter, which would violate the
prohibitions of this Charter provision or deprive any City resident(s), natural
community, or ecosystem of any rights, privileges, or immunities secured by
this Charter, the Ohio Constitution, the United States Constitution, or other
laws, shall be deemed valid within the City of Broadview Heights.
      8.   Any person, corporation, or other entity that violates any
prohibition of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a summary offense and, upon
conviction shall be sentenced to pay the maximum fine allowable under State law
for that violation, and shall be imprisoned to the extent allowed by law. A
separate offense shall arise for each day or portion thereof in which a
violation occurs and for each section of this Ordinance found to be violated.
Enforcement of this article may be initiated by the Broadview Heights Police
Department, the Director of Public Safety, or other designee of City Council.
Broadview Heights may also enforce this Ordinance through an action in equity.
In such an action, Broadview Heights shall be entitled to recover damages and
all costs of litigation, including limitation, expert and attorney’s fees.
      9.   Any City resident shall have the authority to enforce this Ordinance
through an action in equity. In such an action, the resident shall be entitled
to recover damages and all costs of litigation, including, without limitation,
expert and attorney’s fees. Any person who brings an action to secure or
protect the rights of natural communities or ecosystems within Broadview
Heights shall bring that action in the name of the natural community or
ecosystem in a court of competent jurisdiction. Damages shall be measured by
the cost of restoring the natural community or ecosystem to its pre-damaged
state, and shall be paid to Broadview Heights or other applicable governmental
entity, to be used exclusively for the full land complete restoration of the
natural community or ecosystem.
      10.   The provision of this section are severable. If any court of
competent jurisdiction decides that any subsection, clause, sentence, part, of
provision of this section if illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional, such
decision shall not affect, impair or invalidate any of the remaining
subsections, clauses, sentences, parts, or provisions of this Bill of Rights
and its prohibitions. The people of the City of Broadview Heights hereby
declare that in the event of such a decision, and the determination that the
court’s ruling is legitimate, they would have enacted this amendment even
without the subsection, clause, sentence, part, or provision that the court
decides is illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional. All inconsistent provisions
of prior Ordinances and zoning Ordinances adopted at any time by the City of
Broadview Heights are hereby held in abeyance, but shall take immediate effect
in the event this Bill of Rights and its protective prohibitions are
overturned.
(Approved Nov. 6, 2012)
Editor’s note:
   This article has been invalidated by the Ohio Supreme Court’s decision in:
State ex rel. Morrison v. Beck Energy Corp., 143 Ohio St. 3d 271, 2015-Ohio-
485.
PART II: ADMINISTRATION CODE
TITLE TWO - GENERAL PROVISIONS
   
CHAP. 202.   CODIFIED ORDINANCES
   
CHAP. 204.   OFFICIAL STANDARDS
   
CHAP. 206.   WARDS AND BOUNDARIES
   
CHAP. 208.   PUBLIC MEETINGS
   
CHAP. 212.   INCIDENT MANAGEMENT
   
CHAP. 214.   DONATIONS TO NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS
TITLE FOUR - LEGISLATION
   
CHAP. 220 .  COUNCIL
   
CHAP. 222 .  ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND DOCUMENTS
TITLE SIX - ADMINISTRATION
   
CHAP. 230.  ADMINISTRATION GENERALLY
   
CHAP. 232.  MAYOR
   
CHAP. 234.  DEPARTMENT OF LAW
   
CHAP. 236.  DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE
   
CHAP. 240.  DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY
   
CHAP. 242.  FIRE DEPARTMENT
   
CHAP. 244.  POLICE DEPARTMENT
   
CHAP. 248.  DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SERVICE
   
CHAP. 250.  DIVISION OF ENGINEERING
   
CHAP. 256.  RECREATION DEPARTMENT
   
CHAP. 258.  HUMAN SERVICES DEPARTMENT
   
CHAP. 260.  COMMUNITY IMPROVEMENT CORPORATION
TITLE EIGHT - EMPLOYMENT PROVISIONS
   
CHAP. 264   EMPLOYEES GENERALLY
   
CHAP. 266   WAGE ENFORCEMENT REGULATIONS
TITLE TEN - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
   
CHAP. 270.    PLANNING COMMISSION
   
CHAP. 272.    BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
   
CHAP. 274.    CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
   
CHAP. 275.    STORM WATER MANAGEMENT BOARD
   
CHAP. 276.    PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD
   
CHAP. 278.    SUNDRY CLAIMS BOARD
   
CHAP. 283.    STRATEGIC PLAN ADVISORY COMMITTEE
   
CHAP. 288.    SHADE TREE COMMISSION
   
CHAP. 289.    RECORDS COMMISSION
TITLE TWELVE - JUDICIAL
   
CHAP. 290.   MAYOR’S COURT
TITLE TWO:  GENERAL PROVISIONS
   
CHAP. 202.   CODIFIED ORDINANCES
   
CHAP. 204.   OFFICIAL STANDARDS
   
CHAP. 206.   WARDS AND BOUNDARIES
   
CHAP. 208.   PUBLIC MEETINGS
   
CHAP. 212.   INCIDENT MANAGEMENT
   
CHAP. 214.   DONATIONS TO NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS
CHAPTER 202: CODIFIED ORDINANCES
Section
202.01   Designation; citation; headings
202.02   General definitions
202.03   Rules of construction
202.04   Revivor; effect of re-enactment, amendment or repeal
202.05   Construction of section references
202.06   Separability
202.99   General Code penalty
Cross-reference:
   Copies of published codes and codified ordinances, see §§
222.03,
222.04
   General Offenses Code penalties and sentencing, see §
606.99
   Ordinances and resolutions, see
Chapter 222
   Statute of limitations on prosecutions, see §
606.06
   Traffic Code penalties, see §
404.99
Statutory reference:
   Codification in book form, see Ohio R.C. 731.23
   Imprisonment until fine paid, see Ohio R.C. 1905.30, 2947.14
§ 202.01  DESIGNATION; CITATION; HEADINGS.
   This document, consisting of general and permanent legislation relating to
Ohio cities in general, together with such general and permanent legislation of
the municipality that Council may wish to include herein, as revised, arranged,
compiled, numbered, codified and printed herewith, consolidated into component
codes, titles, chapters and sections, shall be known, designated and cited as
the Code of Ordinances of Broadview Heights, Ohio, 2018, for which designation
the term “Code of Ordinances” or “Code of Ordinances of the city” may be
substituted. Code, title, chapter, and section headings do not constitute any
part of the law as contained in the Code of Ordinances.
(ORC 1.01)
§ 202.02  GENERAL DEFINITIONS.
   As used in the Code of Ordinances, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   “And” may be read “or”, and “or” may be read “and”, if the sense requires
it.
   “Another.” When used to designate the owner of property which is the subject
of an offense, includes not only natural persons but also every other owner of
property.
   “Bond.” Includes an undertaking.
   “Child.” Includes child by adoption.
   “Council.” Means the legislative authority of the municipality.
   “County.” Means Cuyahoga County, Ohio.
   “Fire Chief.” Shall include the Chief of the Fire Department if such Fire
Department has been established in the municipality, and shall include the Fire
Prevention Officer if no Fire Department has been established in the
municipality.
   “Imprisoned.” Shall have the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 1.05.
   “Internet.” Means the international computer network of both federal and
non-federal interoperable packet switched data networks, including the
graphical subnetwork known as the world wide web.
   “Keeper” or “proprietor.” Includes all persons, whether acting by themselves
or as a servant, agent, or employee.
   “Land” or “real estate.” Includes rights and easements of incorporeal
nature.
   “Legislative authority.” Means the legislative authority of the
municipality.
   “May.” Is permissive.
   “Municipality” or “city.” When used in this Code of Ordinances, shall denote
the City of Broadview Heights, Ohio, irrespective of its population or legal
classification.
   “O.A.C.” Refers to the Ohio Administrative Code.
   “Oath.” Includes affirmation; and “swear” includes affirm.
   “Ohio R.C.,” “ORC” or “revised code.” Refers to the Ohio Revised Code.
   “Owner.” When applied to property, includes any part owner, joint owner, or
tenant in common of the whole or part of such property.
   “Person.” Includes an individual, corporation, business trust, estate,
trust, partnership, and association.
   “Personal property.” Includes all property except real property.
   “Plan of sewerage”, “system of sewerage”, “sewer”, and “sewers”. Includes
sewers, sewage disposal works and treatment plants, and sewage pumping
stations, together with facilities and appurtenances necessary and proper
therefor.
   “Premises.” As applied to property, includes land and buildings.
   “Property.” Includes real, personal, mixed estates, and interests.
   “Public authority.” Includes boards of education; the municipal, county,
state, or federal government, its officers, or an agency thereof; or any duly
authorized public official.
   “Public place.” Includes any street, sidewalk, park, cemetery, school yard,
body of water or watercourse, public conveyance, or any other place for the
sale of merchandise, public accommodation, or amusement.
   “Real property.” Includes lands, tenements, and hereditaments.
   “Registered mail.” Includes certified mail; and “certified mail” includes
registered mail.
   “Shall.” Is mandatory.
   “Sidewalk.” Means that portion of the street between the curb line and the
adjacent property line intended for the use of pedestrians.
   “State.” Means the State of Ohio.
   “Street.” Includes alleys, avenues, boulevards, lanes, roads, highways,
viaducts, and all other public thoroughfares within the municipality.
   “Tenant” or “occupant.” As applied to premises, includes any person holding
a written or oral lease, or who actually occupies the whole or any part of such
premises, alone or with others.
   “Undertaking.” Includes a bond.
   “Week.” Means seven consecutive days.
   “Whoever.” Includes all persons, natural and artificial; partners;
principals, agents, and employees; and all officials, public or private.
   “Writing.” Includes printing.
   “Written” or “in writing.” Include any representation of words, letters,
symbols, or figures; this provision does not affect any law relating to
signatures.
   “Year.” Means 12 consecutive months.
(ORC 1.02, 1.05, 1.44, 1.59, 701.01)
§ 202.03  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Common and Technical Use. Words and phrases shall be read in context
and construed according to the rules of grammar and common usage. Words and
phrases that have acquired a technical or particular meaning, whether by
legislative definition or otherwise, shall be construed accordingly.
(ORC 1.42)
   (B)   Singular and Plural; Gender; Tense. As used in the Code of Ordinances,
unless the context otherwise requires:
      (1)   The singular includes the plural, and the plural includes the
singular;
      (2)   Words of one gender include the other genders; and
      (3)   Words in the present tense include the future tense.
(ORC 1.43)
   (C)   Computation of Time.
      (1)   The time within which an act is required by law to be done shall be
computed by excluding the first and including the last day; except that when
the last day falls on Sunday or a legal holiday, then the act may be done on
the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a legal holiday.
      (2)   When a public office, in which an act required by law is to be
performed, is closed to the public for the entire day that constitutes the last
day for doing the act or before its usual closing time on that day, the act may
be performed on the next succeeding day that is not a Sunday or a legal
holiday.
      (3)   “Legal holiday,” as used in divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2) of this
section, means the following days:
         (a)   The first day of January, known as New Year’s Day;
         (b)   The third Monday in January, known as Martin Luther King Day;
         (c)   The third Monday in February, known as Washington-Lincoln Day;
         (d)   The day designated in the “Act of June 28, 1968”, 82 Stat. 250,
5 U.S.C. § 6103, as amended, for the commemoration of Memorial Day;
         (e)   The fourth day of July, known as Independence Day;
         (f)   The first Monday in September, known as Labor Day;
         (g)   The second Monday in October, known as Columbus Day;
         (h)   The eleventh day of November, known as Veteran’s Day;
         (i)   The fourth Thursday in November, known as Thanksgiving Day;
         (j)   The twenty-fifth day of December, known as Christmas Day; and
         (k)   Any day appointed and recommended by the Governor of this state
or the President of the United States as a holiday.
      (4)   If any day designated in this section as a legal holiday falls on a
Sunday, the next succeeding day is a legal holiday.
(ORC 1.14)
      (5)   When an act is to take effect or become operative from and after a
day named, no part of that day shall be included. If priority of legal rights
depends upon the order of events on the same day, such priority shall be
determined by the times in the day at which they respectively occurred.
(ORC 1.15)
      (6)   If a number of months is to be computed by counting the months from
a particular day, the period ends on the same numerical day in the concluding
month as the day of the month from which the computation is begun, unless there
are not that many days in the concluding month, in which case the period ends
on the last day of that month.
(ORC 1.45)
§ 202.04  REVIVOR; EFFECT OF RE-ENACTMENT, AMENDMENT OR REPEAL.
   (A)   The repeal of a repealing provision of the Code of Ordinances does not
revive the provision originally repealed nor impair the effect of any saving
clause therein.
(ORC 1.57)
   (B)   The re-enactment, amendment, or repeal of the Code of Ordinances does
not, except as provided in division (C) of this section:
      (1)   Affect the prior operation of the provision or any prior action
taken thereunder;
      (2)   Affect any validation, cure, right, privilege, obligation, or
liability previously acquired, accrued, accorded, or incurred thereunder;
      (3)   Affect any violation thereof or penalty, forfeiture, or punishment
incurred in respect thereto, prior to the amendment or repeal; or
      (4)   Affect any investigation, proceeding, or remedy in respect of any
privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture, or punishment; and the
investigation, proceeding, or remedy may be instituted, continued, or enforced,
and the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment imposed, as if the provision had not
been repealed or amended.
   (C)   If the penalty, forfeiture, or punishment for any offense is reduced
by a re-enactment or amendment of the Code of Ordinances, the penalty,
forfeiture, or punishment, if not already imposed, shall be imposed according
to the Code of Ordinances as amended.
(ORC 1.58)
§ 202.05  CONSTRUCTION OF SECTION REFERENCES.
   (A)   Wherever in a penalty section reference is made to a violation of a
section or an inclusive group of sections, or of divisions or subdivisions of a
section, such reference shall be construed to mean a violation of any provision
of the section, sections, divisions, or subdivisions included in the reference.
   (B)   References in the Code of Ordinances to action taken or authorized
under designated sections of the Code of Ordinances include, in every case,
action taken or authorized under the applicable legislative provision which is
superseded by the Code of Ordinances.
(ORC 1.23)
   (C)   Whenever in one section reference is made to another section hereof,
the reference shall extend and apply to the section referred to as subsequently
amended, revised, recodified, or renumbered, unless the subject matter be
changed or materially altered by the amendment or revision.
(ORC 1.55)
§ 202.06  SEPARABILITY.
   If any provisions of a section of the Code of Ordinances or the application
thereof to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the invalidity does not
affect other provisions or applications of the section or related sections
which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to
this end the provisions are severable.
(ORC 1.50)
§ 202.99  GENERAL CODE PENALTY.
   (A)   Considerations in Misdemeanor Sentencing.
      (1)   A court that sentences an offender for a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor violation of any provision of the Ohio Revised Code, or of any
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to a misdemeanor or minor
misdemeanor violation of a provision of the Ohio Revised Code, shall be guided
by the overriding purposes of misdemeanor sentencing. The overriding purposes
of misdemeanor sentencing are to protect the public from future crime by the
offender and others and to punish the offender. To achieve those purposes, the
sentencing court shall consider the impact of the offense upon the victim and
the need for changing the offender’s behavior, rehabilitating the defender, and
making restitution to the victim of the offense, the public, or the victim and
the public.
      (2)   A sentence imposed for a misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor violation
of an Ohio Revised Code provision or for a violation of a municipal ordinance
that is subject to division (B)(1) of this section shall be reasonably
calculated to achieve the two overriding purposes of misdemeanor sentencing set
forth in division (A)(1) of this section, commensurate with and not demeaning
to the seriousness of the offender’s conduct and its impact upon the victim,
and consistent with sentences imposed for similar offenses committed by similar
offenders.
      (3)   A court that imposes a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor
or minor misdemeanor violation of an Ohio Revised Code provision or for a
violation of a municipal ordinance that is subject to division (B)(1) of this
section shall not base the sentence upon the race, ethnic background, gender,
or religion of the offender.
      (4)   Divisions (B)(1) and (B)(2) of this section shall not apply to any
offense that is disposed of by a traffic violations bureau of any court
pursuant to Traffic Rule 13 and shall not apply to any violation of any
provision of the Ohio Revised Code that is a minor misdemeanor and that is
disposed of without a court appearance. Divisions (B)(1) to (B)(3) of this
section do not affect any penalties established by the municipality for a
violation of its ordinances that are not substantially equivalent to a
misdemeanor or minor misdemeanor violation of a provision of the Ohio Revised
Code.
(ORC 2929.21)
   (B)   Misdemeanor Jail Terms.
      (1)   Except as provided in §
666.98 of this Code or Ohio R.C. 2929.22 or 2929.23 or division (B)(5) or (B)
(6) of this section and unless another term is required or authorized pursuant
to law, if the sentencing court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a
misdemeanor elects or is required to impose a jail term on the offender
pursuant to this chapter, the court shall impose a definite jail term that
shall be one of the following:
         (a)   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than 180 days;
         (b)   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than 90 days;
         (c)   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than 60 days;
and
         (d)   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than 30 days.
      (2)   (a)   A court that sentences an offender to a jail term under
division (B) of this section may permit the offender to serve the sentence in
intermittent confinement or may authorize a limited release of the offender as
provided in division (D)(2) of this section. The court retains jurisdiction
over every offender sentenced to jail to modify the jail sentence imposed at
any time, but the court shall not reduce any mandatory jail term.
         (b)   1.   If a prosecutor, as defined in Ohio R.C. § 2935.01, has
filed a notice with the court that the prosecutor wants to be notified about a
particular case and if the court is considering modifying the jail sentence of
the offender in that case, the court shall notify the prosecutor that the court
is considering modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case. The
prosecutor may request a hearing regarding the court’s consideration of
modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, and, if the
prosecutor requests a hearing, the court shall notify the eligible offender of
the hearing.
            2.   If the prosecutor requests a hearing regarding the court’s
consideration of modifying the jail sentence of the offender in that case, the
court shall hold the hearing before considering whether or not to release the
offender from the offender’s jail sentence.
      (3)   If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under division (B)
of this section and the court assigns the offender to a County Jail that has
established a County Jail Industry Program pursuant to Ohio R.C. 5147.30, the
court shall specify, as part of the sentence, whether the offender may be
considered for participation in the program. During the offender’s term in the
County Jail, the court retains jurisdiction to modify its specification
regarding the offender’s participation in the County Jail Industry Program.
      (4)   If a person sentenced to a jail term pursuant to division (B) of
this section, the court may impose as part of the sentence pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 2929.28 a reimbursement sanction, and, if the local detention facility in
which the term is to be served is covered by a policy adopted pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 307.93, 341.14, 341.19, 341.21, 341.23, 753.02, 753.04, 753.16, 2301.56,
or 2947.19 and Ohio R.C. 2929.37, both of the following apply:
         (a)   The court shall specify both of the following as part of the
sentence.
            1.   If the person is presented with an itemized bill pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 2929.37 for payment of the costs of confinement, the person is
required to pay the bill in accordance with that section.
            2.   If the person does not dispute the bill described in division
(B)(4)(a)1. of this section and does not pay the bill by the times specified in
Ohio R.C. 2929.37, the Clerk of the Court may issue a certificate of judgment
against the person as described in that section.
         (b)   The sentence automatically includes any certificate of judgment
issued as described in division (B)(4)(a)2. of this section.
      (5)   If an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation
of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(B), or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
also is convicted of or also pleads guilty to a specification of the type
described in Ohio R.C. 2941.1414 and if the court imposes a jail term on the
offender for the underlying offense, the court shall impose upon the offender
an additional definite jail term of not more than six months. The additional
jail term shall not be reduced pursuant to any provision of the Ohio Revised
Code. The offender shall serve the additional jail term consecutively to and
prior to the jail term imposed for the underlying offense and consecutively to
any other mandatory term imposed in relation to the offense.
      (6)   (a)   If an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
misdemeanor violation of Ohio R.C. 2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241, or 2907.25, or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and to a specification of the
type described in Ohio R.C. 2941.1421 and if the court imposes a jail term on
the offender for the misdemeanor violation, the court may impose upon the
offender an additional definite jail term as follows:
            1.   Subject to division (B)(6)(a)2. of this section, an additional
definite jail term of not more than 60 days; or
            2.   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one or more misdemeanor or felony violations of Ohio R.C. 2907.22,
2907.23, 2907.24, 2907.241, or 2907.25, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and also was convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
specification of the type described in Ohio R.C. 2941.1421 regarding one or
more of those violations, an additional definite jail term of not more than 120
days.
         (b)   In lieu of imposing an additional definite jail term under
division (B)(6)(a) of this section, the court may directly impose on the
offender a sanction that requires the offender to wear a real-time processing,
continual tracking electronic monitoring device during the period of time
specified by the court. The period of time specified by the court shall equal
the duration of an additional jail term that the court could have imposed upon
the offender under division (B)(6)(a) of this section. A sanction imposed under
this division shall commence on the date specified by the court, provided that
the sanction shall not commence until after the offender has served the jail
term imposed for the misdemeanor violation of Ohio R.C. 2907.23, 2907.24,
2907.241, or 2907.25, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and
any residential sanction imposed for the violation under division (D) of this
section or Ohio R.C. 2929.26. A sanction imposed under this division shall be
considered to be a community control sanction for purposes of division (C) or
this section or Ohio R.C. 2929.25, and all provisions of this Code and the Ohio
Revised Code that pertain to community control sanctions shall apply to a
sanction imposed under this division, except to the extent that they would by
their nature be clearly inapplicable. The offender shall pay all costs
associated with a sanction imposed under this division, including the cost of
the use of the monitoring device.
      (7)   If an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor
violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.13 and also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
specification of the type described in Ohio R.C. 2941.1423 that charges that
the victim of the violation was a woman whom the offender knew was pregnant at
the time of the violation, the court shall impose on the offender a mandatory
jail term that is a definite term of at least 30 days.
      (8)   If a court sentences an offender to a jail term under this division
(B), the sentencing court retains jurisdiction over the offender and the jail
term. Upon motion of either party or upon the court’s own motion, the court, in
the court’s sole discretion and as the circumstances warrant, may substitute
one or more community control sanctions under division (D) or (E) of this
section for any jail days that are not mandatory jail days.
(ORC 2929.24)
   (C)   Misdemeanor Community Control Sanctions.
      (1)   (a)   Except as provided in §
666.98 of this Code or Ohio R.C. 2929.22 and 2929.23 or when a jail term is
required by law, in sentencing an offender for a misdemeanor, other than a
minor misdemeanor, the sentencing court may do either of the following.
            1.   Directly impose a sentence that consists of one or more
community control sanctions authorized by divisions (D), (E), or (F) of this
section. The court may impose any other conditions of release under a community
control sanction that the court considers appropriate. If the court imposes a
jail term upon the offender, the court may impose any community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions in addition to the jail
term.
            2.   Impose a jail term under division (B) of this section from the
range of jail terms authorized under that division for the offense, suspend all
or a portion of the jail term imposed, and place the offender under a community
control sanction or combination of community control sanctions authorized under
divisions (D), (E), or (F) of this section.
         (b)   The duration of all community control sanctions imposed upon an
offender and in effect for an offender at any time shall not exceed five years.
         (c)   At sentencing, if a court directly imposes a community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions pursuant to division (C)
(1)(a)1. of this section, the court shall state the duration of the community
control sanctions imposed and shall notify the offender that if any of the
conditions of the community control sanctions are violated the court may do any
of the following:
            1.   Impose a longer time under the same community control sanction
if the total time under all of the offender’s community control sanctions does
not exceed the five-year limit specified in division (C)(1)(b) of this section;
            2.   Impose a more restrictive community control sanction under
division (D), (E), or (F) of this section, but the court is not required to
impose any particular sanction or sanctions; or
            3.   Impose a definite jail term from the range of jail terms
authorized for the offense under division (B) of this section.
      (2)   If a court sentences an offender to any community control sanction
or combination of community control sanctions pursuant to division (C)(1)(a)1.
of this section, the sentencing court retains jurisdiction over the offender
and the period of community control for the duration of the period of community
control. Upon the motion of either party or on the court’s own motion, the
court, in the court’s sole discretion and as the circumstances warrant, may
modify the community control sanctions or conditions of release previously
imposed, substitute a community control sanction or condition of release for
another community control sanction or condition of release previously imposed,
or impose an additional community control sanction or condition of release.
      (3)   (a)   If a court sentences an offender to any community control
sanction or combination of community control sanctions authorized under
division (D), (E), or (F) of this section, the court shall place the offender
under the general control and supervision of the court or of a department of
probation in the jurisdiction that serves the court for purposes of reporting
to the court a violation of any of the conditions of the sanctions imposed. If
the offender resides in another jurisdiction and a department of probation has
been established to serve the Municipal Court or County Court in that
jurisdiction, the sentencing court may request the Municipal Court or the
County Court to receive the offender into the general control and supervision
of that department of probation for purposes of reporting to the sentencing
court a violation of any of the conditions of the sanctions imposed. The
sentencing court retains jurisdiction over any offender whom it sentences for
the duration of the sanction or sanctions imposed.
         (b)   The sentencing court shall require as a condition of any
community control sanction that the offender abide by the law and not leave the
state without the permission of the court or the offender’s probation officer.
In the interests of doing justice, rehabilitating the offender, and ensuring
the offender’s good behavior, the court may impose additional requirements on
the offender. The offender’s compliance with the additional requirements also
shall be a condition of the community control sanction imposed upon the
offender.
      (4)   (a)   If the court imposing sentence upon an offender sentences the
offender to any community control sanction or combination of community control
sanctions authorized under division (D), (E), or (F) of this section, and the
offender violates any of the conditions of the sanctions, the public or private
person or entity that supervises or administers the program or activity that
comprises the sanction shall report the violation directly to the sentencing
court or to the department of probation or probation officer with general
control and supervision over the offender. If the public or private person or
entity reports the violation to the department of probation or probation
officer, the department or officer shall report the violation to the sentencing
court.
         (b)   If an offender violates any condition of a community control
sanction, the sentencing court may impose upon the violator one or more of the
following penalties:
            1.   A longer time under the same community control sanction if the
total time under all of the community control sanctions imposed on the violator
does not exceed the five-year limit specified in division (C)(1)(b) of this
section;
            2.   A more restrictive community control sanction; and/or
            3.   A combination of community control sanctions, including a jail
term.
         (c)   If the court imposes a jail term upon a violator pursuant to
division (C)(4)(b) of this section, the total time spent in jail for the
misdemeanor offense and the violation of a condition of the community control
sanction shall not exceed the maximum jail term available for the offense for
which the sanction that was violated was imposed. The court may reduce the
longer period of time that the violator is required to spend under the longer
sanction or the more restrictive sanction imposed under division (C)(4)(b) of
this section by all or part of the time the violator successfully spent under
the sanction that was initially imposed.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if an offender, for
a significant period of time, fulfills the conditions of a community control
sanction imposed pursuant to division (D), (E), or (F) of this section in an
exemplary manner, the court may reduce the period of time under the community
control sanction or impose a less restrictive community control sanction.
Fulfilling the conditions of a community control sanction does not relieve the
offender of a duty to make restitution under division (F) of this section.
(ORC 2929.25)
   (D)   Community Residential Sanction.
      (1)   Except when a mandatory jail term is required by law, the court
imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a minor misdemeanor, may
impose upon the offender any community residential sanction or combination of
community residential sanctions under this division (D). Community residential
sanctions include, but are not limited to, the following:
         (a)   A term of up to 180 days in a halfway house or a term in a
halfway house not to exceed the longest jail term available for the offense,
whichever is shorter, if the political subdivision that would have
responsibility for paying the costs of confining the offender in a jail has
entered into a contract with the halfway house for use of the facility for
misdemeanor offenders; or
         (b)   If the offender is an eligible offender, as defined in R.C. §
307.932, a term in a community alternative sentencing center or district
community alternative sentencing center established and operated in accordance
with that section, in the circumstances specified in that section, with one of
the conditions of the sanction being that the offender successfully complete
the portion of the sentence to be served in the center.
      (2)   A sentence to a community residential sanction under division (D)
(1)(b) of this section shall be in accordance with R.C. § 307.932. In all other
cases, the court that sentences an offender to a community residential sanction
under this division (D) may do either or both of the following:
         (a)   Permit the offender to serve the offender’s sentence in
intermittent confinement, overnight, on weekends or at any other time or times
that will allow the offender to continue at the offender’s occupation or care
for the offender’s family; and/or
         (b)   Authorize the offender to be released so that the offender may
seek or maintain employment, receive education or training, receive treatment,
perform community service, or otherwise fulfill an obligation imposed by law or
by the court. A release pursuant to this division shall be only for the
duration of time that is needed to fulfill the purpose of the release and for
travel that reasonably is necessary to fulfill the purposes of release.
      (3)   The court may order that a reasonable portion of the income earned
by the offender upon a release pursuant to division (D)(2) of this section be
applied to any financial sanction imposed under division (F) of this section.
      (4)   No court shall sentence any person to a prison term for a
misdemeanor or to a jail term for a minor misdemeanor.
      (5)   If a court sentences a person who has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a misdemeanor to a community residential sanction as described in
division (D)(1) of this section, at the time of reception and at other times
the person in charge of the operation of the halfway house, community
alternative sentencing center, district community alternative sentencing
center, or other place at which the offender will serve the residential
sanction determines to be appropriate, the person in charge of the operation of
the halfway house, community alternative sentencing center, district community
alternative sentencing center, or other place may cause the convicted offender
to be examined and tested for tuberculosis, HIV infection, hepatitis,
including, but not limited to, hepatitis A, B, and C, and other contagious
diseases. The person in charge of the operation of the halfway house, community
alternative sentencing center, district community alternative sentencing
center, or other place at which the offender will serve the residential
sanction may cause a convicted offender in the halfway house, community
alternative sentencing center, district community alternative sentencing
center, or other place who refuses to be tested or treated for tuberculosis,
HIV infection, hepatitis, including, but not limited to, hepatitis A, B, and C,
or another contagious disease to be tested and treated involuntarily.
      (6)   The municipality may enter into a contract with a halfway house for
use of the halfway house to house misdemeanor offenders under a sanction
imposed under division (D)(1)(a) of this section.
(ORC 2929.26)
   (E)   Nonresidential Sanction Where Jail Term is not Mandatory.
      (1)   Except when a mandatory jail term is required by law, the court
imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a minor misdemeanor, may
impose upon the offender any nonresidential sanction or combination of
nonresidential sanctions authorized under this division. Nonresidential
sanctions include, but are not limited to, the following:
         (a)   A term of day reporting;
         (b)   A term of house arrest with electronic monitoring or continuous
alcohol monitoring or both electronic monitoring and continuous alcohol
monitoring, a term of electronic monitoring or continuous alcohol monitoring
without house arrest, or a term of house arrest without electronic monitoring
or continuous alcohol monitoring;
         (c)   A term of community service of up to 500 hours for misdemeanor
of the first degree or 200 hours for a misdemeanor of the second, third, or
fourth degree;
         (d)   A term in a drug treatment program with a level of security for
the offender as determined necessary by the court;
         (e)   A term of intensive probation supervision;
         (f)   A term of basic probation supervision;
         (g)   A term of monitored time;
         (h)   A term of drug and alcohol use monitoring, including random drug
testing;
         (i)   A curfew term;
         (j)   A requirement that the offender obtain employment;
         (k)   A requirement that the offender obtain education or training;
         (l)   Provided the court obtains the prior approval of the victim, a
requirement that the offender participate in victim-offender mediation;
         (m)   If authorized by law, suspension of the offender’s privilege to
operate a motor vehicle, immobilization or forfeiture of the offender’s motor
vehicle, a requirement that the offender obtain a valid motor vehicle
operator’s license, or any other related sanction;
         (n)   A requirement that the offender obtain counseling if the offense
is a violation of Ohio R.C. 2919.25 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance or a violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.13 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance involving a person who was a family or household member at
the time of the violation, if the offender committed the offense in the
vicinity of one or more children who are not victims of the offense, and if the
offender or the victim of the offense is a parent, guardian, custodian, or
person in loco parentis of one or more of those children. This division does
not limit the court in requiring that the offender obtain counseling for any
offense or in any circumstance not specified in this division.
      (2)   If the court imposes a term of community service pursuant to
division (E)(1)(c) of this section, the offender may request that the court
modify the sentence to authorize the offender to make a reasonable
contribution, as determined by the court, to the general fund of the county,
municipality, or other local entity that provides funding to the court. The
court may grant the request if the offender demonstrates a change in
circumstances from the date the court imposes the sentence or that the
modification would otherwise be in the interests of justice. If the court
grants the request, the offender shall make a reasonable contribution to the
court, and the Clerk of the Court shall deposit that contribution into the
general fund of the county, municipality, or other local entity that provides
funding to the court. If more than one entity provides funding to the court,
the Clerk shall deposit a percentage of the reasonable contribution equal to
the percentage of funding the entity provides to the court in that entity’s
general fund.
      (3)   In addition to the sanctions authorized under division (E)(1) of
this section, the court imposing a sentence for a misdemeanor, other than a
minor misdemeanor, upon an offender who is not required to serve a mandatory
jail term may impose any other sanction that is intended to discourage the
offender or other persons from committing a similar offense if the sanction is
reasonably related to the overriding purposes and principles of misdemeanor
sentencing.
      (4)   The court imposing a sentence for a minor misdemeanor may impose a
term of community service in lieu of all or part of a fine. The term of
community service imposed for a minor misdemeanor shall not exceed 30 hours.
After imposing a term of community service, the court may modify the sentence
to authorize a reasonable contribution, as determined by the court, to the
appropriate general fund as provided in division (E)(2) of this section.
(ORC 2929.27)
   (F)   Financial Sanctions.
      (1)   In addition to imposing court costs pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2947.23,
the court imposing a sentence upon an offender for a misdemeanor, including a
minor misdemeanor, may sentence the offender to any financial sanction or
combination of financial sanctions authorized under this division (F). If the
court in its discretion imposes one or more financial sanctions, the financial
sanctions that may be imposed pursuant to this section include, but are not
limited to, the following:
         (a)   Restitution.
            1.   Unless the misdemeanor offense is a minor misdemeanor or could
be disposed of by the Traffic Violations Bureau serving the court under Traffic
Rule 13, restitution by the offender to the victim of the offender’s crime or
any survivor of the victim, in an amount based upon the victim’s economic loss.
The court may not impose restitution as a sanction pursuant to this division if
the offense is a minor misdemeanor or could be disposed of by the Traffic
Violations Bureau serving the court under Traffic Rule 13. If the court
requires restitution, the court shall order that the restitution be made to the
victim in open court or to the adult probation department that serves the
jurisdiction or the Clerk of the Court on behalf of the victim.
            2.   If the court imposes restitution, the court shall determine
the amount of restitution to be paid by the offender. The court may base the
amount of restitution it orders on an amount recommended by the victim, the
offender, a presentence investigation report, estimates or receipts indicating
the cost of repairing or replacing property, and other information, provided
that the amount the court orders as restitution shall not exceed the amount of
economic loss suffered by the victim as a direct and proximate result of the
commission of the offense. If the court decides to impose restitution, the
court shall hold an evidentiary hearing on restitution if the offender, victim,
or survivor disputes the amount of restitution. If the court holds an
evidentiary hearing, at the hearing the victim or survivor has the burden to
prove by a preponderance of the evidence the amount of restitution sought from
the offender.
            3.   All restitution payments shall be credited against any
recovery of economic loss in a civil action brought by the victim or any
survivor of the victim against the offender. No person may introduce evidence
of an award of restitution under this section in a civil action for purposes of
imposing liability against an insurer under R.C. 3937.18.
            4.   If the court imposes restitution, the court may order that the
offender pay a surcharge, of not more than 5% of the amount of the restitution
otherwise ordered, to the entity responsible for collecting and processing
restitution payments.
            5.   The victim or survivor of the victim may request that the
prosecutor in the case file a motion, or the offender may file a motion, for
modification of the payment terms of any restitution ordered. If the court
grants the motion, it may modify the payment terms as it determines
appropriate.
         (b)   Fines. A fine of the type described in divisions (F)(1)(b)1. and
2. of this section payable to the appropriate entity as required by law:
            1.   A fine in the following amount:
               a.   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than
$1,000;
               b.   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than $750;
               c.   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than $500;
               d.   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than $250;
or
               e.   For a minor misdemeanor, not more than $150.
            2.   A state fine or cost as defined in Ohio R.C. 2949.111.
         (c)   Reimbursement.
            1.   Reimbursement by the offender of any or all of the costs of
sanctions incurred by the government, including, but not limited to, the
following:
               a.   All or part of the costs of implementing any community
control sanction, including a supervision fee under Ohio R.C. 2951.021;
               b.   All or part of the costs of confinement in a jail or other
residential facility, including, but not limited to, a per diem fee for room
and board, the costs of medical and dental treatment, and the costs of
repairing property damaged by the offender while confined; or
               c.   All or part of the cost of purchasing and using an
immobilizing or disabling device, including a certified ignition interlock
device, or a remote alcohol monitoring device that a court orders an offender
to use under Ohio R.C. 4510.13.
            2.   The amount of reimbursement under division (F)(1)(c)1. of this
section shall not exceed the total amount of reimbursement the offender is able
to pay and shall not exceed the actual cost of the sanctions. The court may
collect any amount of reimbursement the offender is required to pay under that
division. If the court does not order reimbursement under that division,
confinement costs may be assessed pursuant to a repayment policy adopted under
Ohio R.C. 2929.37. In addition, the offender may be required to pay the fees
specified in Ohio R.C. 2929.38 in accordance with that section.
      (2)   (a)   If the court determines a hearing is necessary, the court may
hold a hearing to determine whether the offender is able to pay the financial
sanction imposed pursuant to this division (F) or court costs or is likely in
the future to be able to pay the sanction or costs.
         (b)   If the court determines that the offender is indigent and unable
to pay the financial sanction or court costs, the court shall consider imposing
and may impose a term of community service under division (E)(1) of this
section in lieu of imposing a financial sanction or court costs. If the court
does not determine that the offender is indigent, the court may impose a term
of community service under division (E)(1) of this section in lieu of or in
addition to imposing a financial sanction under this division (F) and in
addition to imposing court costs. The court may order community service for a
minor misdemeanor pursuant to division (E)(4) of this section in lieu of or in
addition to imposing a financial sanction under this section and in addition to
imposing court costs. If a person fails to pay a financial sanction or court
costs, the court may order community service in lieu of the financial sanction
or court costs.
      (3)   (a)   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed upon the
offender pursuant to division (F)(1)(c) of this section to pay the costs
incurred by a county pursuant to any sanction imposed under division (D), (E),
or (F) of this section or in operating a facility used to confine offenders
pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (D) of this section to the County
Treasurer. The County Treasurer shall deposit the reimbursements in the
county’s General Fund. The county shall use the amounts deposited in the fund
to pay the costs incurred by the county pursuant to any sanction imposed under
division (D), (E), or (F) of this section or in operating a facility used to
confine offenders pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (D) of this
section.
         (b)   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed upon the offender
pursuant to division (F)(1)(c) of this section to pay the costs incurred by a
municipal corporation pursuant to any sanction imposed under division (D), (E),
or (F) of this section or in operating a facility used to confine offenders
pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (D) of this section to the
Treasurer of the municipal corporation. The Treasurer shall deposit the
reimbursements in the municipal corporation’s General Fund in accordance with
division (F)(8) of this section. The municipal corporation shall use the
amounts deposited in the Fund to pay the costs incurred by the municipal
corporation pursuant to any sanction imposed under division (D), (E), or (F) of
this section or in operating a facility used to confine offenders pursuant to a
sanction imposed under division (D) of this section.
         (c)   The offender shall pay reimbursements imposed pursuant to
division (F)(1)(c) of this section for the costs incurred by a private provider
pursuant to a sanction imposed under division (D), (E), or (F) of this section
to the provider.
      (4)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (F)(4), a
financial sanction imposed under division (F)(1) of this section is a judgment
in favor of the state or the political subdivision that operates the court that
imposed the financial sanction, and the offender subject to the financial
sanction is the judgment debtor. A financial sanction of reimbursement imposed
pursuant to division (F)(1)(c)1.a. of this section upon an offender is a
judgment in favor of the entity administering the community control sanction. A
financial sanction of reimbursement imposed pursuant to division (F)(1)(c)1.b.
of this section upon an offender confined in a jail or other residential
facility is a judgment in favor of the entity operating the jail or other
residential facility. A financial sanction of restitution, an order in favor of
the victim of the offender’s criminal act that can be collected through a
certificate of judgment as described in division (F)(4)(b)1. of this section,
through execution as described in division (F)(4)(b)2. of this section or
through an order as described in division (F)(4)(b)3. of this section, and the
offender shall be considered for purposes of the collection as a judgment
debtor.
         (b)   Once a financial sanction is imposed as a judgment or order
under this division, the victim, private provider, state, or political
subdivision may do any of the following:
            1.   Obtain from the Clerk of the court in which the judgment was
entered a certificate of judgment that shall be in the same manner and form as
a certificate of judgment issued in a civil action;
            2.   Obtain execution of the judgment or order through any
available procedure, including any of the procedures identified in Ohio R.C.
2929.18(D)(1) and (D)(2) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance; or
            3.   Obtain an order for the assignment of wages of the judgment
debtor under Ohio R.C. 1321.33 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
      (5)   The civil remedies authorized under division (F)(4) of this section
for the collection of the financial sanction supplement, but do not preclude
enforcement of the criminal sentence.
      (6)   Each court imposing a financial sanction upon an offender under
this division (F) may designate the Clerk of the Court or another person to
collect the financial sanction. The Clerk, or another person authorized by law
or the court to collect the financial sanction may do the following:
         (a)   Enter into contracts with one or more public agencies or private
vendors for the collection of amounts due under the sanction. Before entering
into a contract for the collection of amounts due from an offender pursuant to
any financial sanction imposed pursuant to this division (F), a court shall
comply with Ohio R.C. 307.86 to 307.92;
         (b)   Permit payment of all or any portion of the sanction in
installments, by financial transaction device if the court is a County Court or
a Municipal Court operated by a county, or by any other reasonable method, in
any time, and on any terms that the court considers just, except that the
maximum time permitted for payment shall not exceed five years. If the court is
a County Court or a Municipal Court operated by a county, the acceptance of
payments by any financial transaction device shall be governed by the policy
adopted by the Board of County Commissioners of the county pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 301.28. If the court is a Municipal Court not operated by a county, the
Clerk may pay any fee associated with processing an electronic transfer out of
public money or may charge the fee to the offender; and
         (c)   To defray administrative costs, charge a reasonable fee to an
offender who elects a payment plan rather than a lump sum payment of any
financial sanction.
      (7)   No financial sanction imposed under this division (F) shall
preclude a victim from bringing a civil action against the offender.
(ORC 2929.28)
   (G)   Organizational Penalties.
      (1)   Regardless of the penalties provided in divisions (A) through (F)
of this section, an organization convicted of an offense pursuant to §
606.08 shall be fined by the court as follows:
         (a)   For a misdemeanor of the first degree, not more than $5,000;
         (b)   For a misdemeanor of the second degree, not more than $4,000;
         (c)   For a misdemeanor of the third degree, not more than $3,000;
         (d)   For a misdemeanor of the fourth degree, not more than $2,000;
         (e)   For a minor misdemeanor, not more than $1,000;
         (f)   For a misdemeanor not specifically classified, not more than
$2,000; and
         (g)   For a minor misdemeanor not specifically classified, not more
than $1,000.
      (2)   When an organization is convicted of an offense that is not
specifically classified, and the section defining the offense or penalty
plainly indicates a purpose to impose the penalty provided for violation upon
organizations, then the penalty so provided shall be imposed in lieu of the
penalty provided in this section.
      (3)   When an organization is convicted of an offense that is not
specifically classified, and the penalty provided includes a higher fine than
the fine that is provided in this section, then the penalty imposed shall be
pursuant to the penalty provided for the violation of the section defining the
offense.
      (4)   This section does not prevent the imposition of available civil
sanctions against an organization convicted of an offense pursuant to §
606.08, either in addition to or in lieu of a fine imposed pursuant to this
section.
(ORC 2929.31)
   (H)   General Code Penalty. Whenever, in this Code of Ordinances, or in any
technical or other code adopted by reference in this Code of Ordinances, or in
any rule, regulation, or order promulgated or made under authority of any
provision of this Code of Ordinances, or under authority of any technical or
other code adopted by reference in this Code of Ordinances, an act is
prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense or a
misdemeanor, or whenever the doing of any act is required or the failure to do
any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is otherwise
provided, whoever violates or fails to comply with any such provision is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the first degree for each offense. A separate offense shall
be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance
occurs or continues, unless otherwise provided.
   (I)   Surcharges; Equitable Remedies. The imposition of any penalty provided
for in this section shall be in addition to any surcharge levied for a
violation of or noncompliance with a provision of this Code of Ordinances, or a
provision of a technical or other code adopted by reference in this Code of
Ordinances, or a rule, regulation, or order promulgated or made under authority
of either, and shall be in addition to any equitable remedy provided by a
provision of this Code of Ordinances, or a provision of technical or other code
adopted by reference in this Code of Ordinances, or a rule, regulation, or
order promulgated or made under authority of either, or provided by state law,
or a rule, regulation, or order promulgated or made under authority of state
law, including the enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
CHAPTER 204:  OFFICIAL STANDARDS
Section
204.01   Official flag and emblem
Cross-reference:
   Name and boundaries of municipality, see
CHTR. Art. I
   Form of government and powers, see
CHTR. Art. II
Statutory reference:
   State standard of time, see Ohio R.C. 1.04
   State legal holidays, see Ohio R.C. 1.14, 5.20 et seq.
   Other state standards, see Ohio R.C. 5.01 et seq.
§ 204.01  OFFICIAL FLAG AND EMBLEM.
   The flag presented to Council by the Bicentennial Year Committee, designed
by Mr. Gerald Hudack and now hanging on the north wall of the Council Chambers,
is hereby accepted and designated as the official flag and emblem of the city.
(Ord. 74-76, passed 9-20-1976)
CHAPTER 206:  WARDS AND BOUNDARIES
Section
206.01   Legal description; Ward One
206.02   Legal description; Ward Two
206.03   Legal description; Ward Three
206.04   Legal description; Ward Four
Cross-reference:
   Wards, see
CHTR. Art. III, § 2
   Zoning districts generally and Zone Map, see
Chapter 1264
Statutory reference:
   Division of city into wards, see Ohio R.C. 731.06
   Voting precincts, see Ohio R.C. 3501.18
§ 206.01  LEGAL DESCRIPTION; WARD ONE.
   Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of Wallings Road and
Broadview Road; thence easterly along the centerline of Wallings Road to the
centerline of Wyatt Road; thence southerly along the centerline of Wyatt Road
to the centerline of Harris Road; thence easterly along the centerline of
Harris Road to the centerline of Interstate 77; thence southerly along the
centerline of Interstate 77 to the centerline of Royalton Road; thence westerly
along the centerline of Royalton Road to the easterly corporation line of the
City of Broadview Heights; thence southerly along the easterly corporation line
of the City of Broadview Heights to the centerline of Boston Road; thence
westerly along the centerline of Boston Road to the centerline of Oxford Drive;
thence northerly along the centerline of Oxford Drive to the centerline of
Norwich Drive; thence northerly along the centerline of Norwich Drive to the
centerline of Hamilton Drive; thence westerly along the centerline of Hamilton
Drive to the centerline of Broadview Road; thence northerly along the
centerline of Broadview Road to the centerline of Wallings Road and place of
beginning.
(Ord. 176-06, passed 12-26-2006)
§ 206.02  LEGAL DESCRIPTION; WARD TWO.
   Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of Wallings Road and
Broadview Road; thence easterly along the centerline of Wallings Road to the
centerline of Wyatt Road; thence southerly along the centerline of Wyatt Road
to the centerline of Harris Road; thence easterly along the centerline of
Harris Road to the centerline of Interstate 77; thence southerly along the
centerline of Interstate 77 to the centerline of Royalton Road; thence westerly
along the centerline of Royalton Road to the southerly corporation line of the
City of Broadview Heights; thence easterly along the southerly corporation line
of the City of Broadview Heights to the easterly corporation line of the City
of Broadview Heights; thence northerly along the easterly corporation line of
the City of Broadview Heights to the centerline of Sprague Road; thence
westerly along  the centerline of Sprague Road to the centerline of Twin Oaks
Drive; thence southerly along the centerline of Twin Oaks Drive to the
centerline of Echo Lane; thence easterly along the centerline of Echo Lane to
the centerline of Briarwood Drive; thence southerly along the centerline of
Briarwood Drive to the centerline of Wallings Road; thence easterly along the
centerline of Wallings Road to the intersection of Broadview Road and place of
beginning.
(Ord. 176-06, passed 12-26-2006)
§ 206.03  LEGAL DESCRIPTION; WARD THREE.
   Beginning at the intersection of the centerlines of Wallings Road and
Broadview Road; thence southerly along the centerline of Broadview Road to the
centerline of the southerly branch of Chippewa Creek, said point being along
the northerly line of Perm. Pcl. No. 583-02-004; thence westerly along the
centerline of the Southerly Branch of Chippewa Creek and northerly line of
Perm. Pcl. No. 583-02-004 and southerly lines of Perm. Pcls. No. 584-10-004,
584-10-006, 584-10-005, 584-10-003, 584-10-007, 584-10-002, 584-10-001, 584-10-
009, 584-10-008, 584-09-004, 584-09-003, 584-09-007, 584-09-005, 584-09-006 and
the projection thereof to the westerly line of Perm. Pcl. No. 584-09-008;
thence northerly along the westerly line of Perm. Pcl. No. 584-09-008 to the
centerline of Royalwood Road; thence westerly along the centerline of Royalwood
Road to the westerly corporation line of the City of Broadview Heights; thence
northerly along the westerly corporation line of the City of Broadview Heights
to the centerline of Sprague Road; thence easterly along the centerline of
Sprague Road to the centerline of Twin Oaks Drive; thence southerly along the
centerline of Twin Oaks Drive to the centerline of Echo Lane; thence easterly
along the centerline of Echo Lane to the centerline of Briarwood Drive; thence
southerly along the centerline of Briarwood Drive to the centerline of Wallings
Road; thence easterly along the centerline of Wallings Road to the intersection
of Broadview Road and place of beginning.
(Ord. 176-06, passed 12-26-2006)
§ 206.04  LEGAL DESCRIPTION; WARD FOUR.
   Beginning at a point in the centerline of Royalwood Road at the westerly
corporation line of the City of Broadview Heights; thence southerly along the
westerly corporation line of the City of Broadview Heights to the southerly
corporation line of the City of Broadview Heights; thence easterly along the
southerly corporation line of the City of Broadview Heights and centerline of
Boston Road to the centerline of Oxford Drive; thence northerly along the
centerline of Oxford Drive to the centerline of Norwich Drive; thence northerly
along the centerline of Norwich Drive to the centerline of Hamilton Drive;
thence westerly along the centerline of Hamilton Drive to the centerline of
Broadview Road; thence northerly along the centerline of Broadview Road to the
centerline of the southerly branch of Chippewa Creek, said point being along
the northerly line of Perm. Pcl. No. 583-02-004; thence westerly along the
centerline of the southerly branch of Chippewa Creek and northerly line of
Perm. Pcl. No. 583-02-004 and southerly lines of Perm. Pcls. No. 584-10-004,
584-10-006, 584-10-005, 584-10-003, 584-10-007, 584-10-002, 584-10-001, 584-10-
009, 584-10-008, 584-09-004, 584-09-003, 584-09-007, 584-09-005, 584-09-006 and
the projection thereof to the westerly line of Perm. Pcl. No. 584-09-008;
thence northerly along the westerly line of Perm. Pcl. No. 584-09-008 to the
centerline of Royalwood Road; thence westerly along the centerline of Royalwood
Road to the westerly corporation line of the City of Broadview Heights and
place of beginning.
(Ord. 176-06, passed 12-26-2006)
CHAPTER 208:  PUBLIC MEETINGS
Section
208.01   Purposes; application of chapter
208.02   Definitions
208.03   Notice of regular and organizational meetings
208.04   Notice of special meetings
208.05   Notice to news media of special meetings
208.06   Notification of discussion of specific types of public business
208.07   General regulations
208.08   Posting notices of meetings of municipal bodies
Cross-reference:
   Council meetings, see §
220.01;
CHTR. Art. III, § 5
Statutory reference:
   Public meetings, see Ohio R.C. 121.22
§ 208.01  PURPOSES; APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   This chapter is adopted, pursuant to Ohio R.C. 121.22(F), for the
purposes of:
      (1)   Establishing a reasonable method for any person to determine the
time and place of all regularly scheduled meetings and the time, place and
purpose of all special meetings;
      (2)   Making provisions for giving advance notice of special meetings to
the news media that have requested notification; and
      (3)   Making provisions for persons to request and obtain reasonable
advance notification of all meetings at which any specific type of public
business is to be discussed.
   (B)   This chapter applies to each municipal body of the city, as defined in
§
208.02, and is in addition to any applicable legal requirement as to notices to
members of a municipal body or to others in connection with specific meetings
or specific subject matters.
(Ord. 6-76, passed 1-19-1976)
§ 208.02  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   “Clerk.” Means the Clerk of Council.
   “Day.” Means a calendar day.
   “Meeting.” Means any prearranged discussion of the public business of the
municipal body by a majority of the members of the municipal body.
   “Municipal body.” Means each of the following:
      (1)   Council;
      (2)   The Planning Commission;
      (3)   The Board of Zoning Appeals;
      (4)   The Civil Service Commission;
      (5)   The Parks and Recreation Advisory Board;
      (6)   The Sundry Claims Board; and
      (7)   Assessment equalization boards.
   “Oral notification.” Means notification given orally, either in person or by
telephone, directly to the person for whom such notification is intended, or by
leaving an oral message for such person at the address, or if by telephone at
the telephone number, of such person as shown on the records kept by the Clerk
under this chapter.
   “Post.” Means to post in an area accessible to the public during the usual
business hours at the office of the Clerk and at the locations given in §
222.01. A notice identifying the locations at which notifications will be
posted pursuant to this chapter shall be published by the Clerk within ten
calendar days after the enactment of this chapter (Ordinance 6-76, passed
January 19, 1976).
   “Published.” Means published once in a newspaper having a general
circulation in the municipality, as defined in Ohio R.C. 7.12, except that no
portion of such newspaper need be printed in the municipality. If at the time
of any such publication there is no such newspaper of general circulation, then
such publication shall be in a newspaper then determined by the Clerk to have
the largest circulation in the municipality.
   “Special meeting.” Means a meeting which is neither a regular meeting nor an
adjournment of a regular or special meeting to another time or day to consider
items specifically stated on the original agenda of such regular or special
meeting.
   “Written notification.” Means notification in writing mailed, telegraphed or
delivered to the address of the person for whom such notification is intended
as shown on the records kept by the Clerk under this chapter, or in any way
delivered to such person. If mailed, such notification shall be mailed by
first-class mail, deposited in a U.S. Postal Service mailbox not later than the
second day preceding the day of the meeting to which such notification refers,
provided that at least one regular mail delivery day falls between the day of
mailing and the day of such meeting.)
(Ord. 6-76, passed 1-19-1976; Ord. 104-98, passed 7-27-1998)
§ 208.03  NOTICE OF REGULAR AND ORGANIZATIONAL MEETINGS.
   (A)   The Clerk shall post a statement of the times and places of regular
meetings of each municipal body for each calendar year not later than the
second day preceding the day of the first regular meeting, other than the
organizational meeting, of the calendar year of that municipal body. The Clerk
shall check at reasonable intervals to ensure that such statement remains so
posted during such calendar year. If at any time during the calendar year the
time or place of regular meetings, or of any regular meeting, is changed on a
permanent or temporary basis, a statement of the time and place of such changed
regular meeting shall be so posted by the Clerk at least 24 hours before the
time of the first changed regular meeting.
   (B)   The Clerk shall post a statement of the time and place of any
organizational meeting of a municipal body at least 24 hours before the time of
such organizational meeting.
   (C)   Upon the adjournment of any regular or special meeting to another day,
the Clerk shall promptly post notice of the time and place of such adjourned
meeting.
(Ord. 6-76, passed 1-19-1976)
§ 208.04  NOTICE OF SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   (A)   Except in the case of a special meeting referred to in §
208.05(D), the Clerk shall, not later than 24 hours before the time of a
special meeting of a municipal body, post a statement of the time, place and
purposes of such special meeting.
   (B)   The statement under this section and the notifications under §
208.05 shall state such specific or general purpose or purposes then known to
the Clerk to be intended to be considered at such special meeting and may
state, as an additional general purpose, that any other business as may
properly come before such municipal body at such meeting may be considered and
acted upon.
(Ord. 6-76, passed 1-19-1976)
§ 208.05  NOTICE TO NEWS MEDIA OF SPECIAL MEETINGS.
   (A)   Any news medium organization that desires to be given advance
notification of special meetings of a municipal body shall file with the Clerk
a written request therefor. Except in the event of an emergency requiring
immediate official action as referred to in division (D) hereof, a special
meeting shall not be held unless at least 24 hours’ advance notice of the time,
place and purposes of such special meeting is given to the news media that have
requested such advance notification in accordance with division (B) hereof.
   (B)   News media requests for such advance notification of special meetings
shall specify: the municipal body that is the subject of such request; the name
of the medium; the name and address of the person to whom written notifications
to the medium may be mailed, telegraphed or delivered; the names, addresses and
telephone numbers (including addresses and telephone numbers at which
notifications may be given either during or outside of business hours) of at
least two persons to either one of whom, oral notifications to the medium may
be given; and at least one telephone number which the request identifies as
being manned and which can be called at any hour for the purpose of giving oral
notification to such medium. Any such request shall be effective for one year
from the date of filing with the Clerk or until the Clerk receives written
notice from such medium canceling or modifying such request, whichever is
earlier. Each requesting news medium shall be informed of such period of
effectiveness at the time it files its request. Such requests may be modified
or extended only by filing a complete new request with the Clerk. A request
shall not be deemed to be made unless it is complete in all respects, and such
request may be conclusively relied on by the municipal body that is the subject
of such request, and the Clerk.
   (C)   The Clerk shall give such oral notification or written notification,
or both, as the Clerk determines, to the news media that have requested such
advance notification in accordance with division (B) hereof, of the time, place
and purposes of each special meeting, at least 24 hours prior to the time of
such special meeting.
   (D)   In the event of an emergency requiring immediate official action, a
special emergency meeting may be held without giving 24 hours’ advance
notification thereof to the requesting news media. The persons calling such
meeting, or any one or more of such persons or the Clerk on their behalf, shall
immediately give oral notification or written notification, or both, as the
person or persons giving such notification determine, of the time, place and
purposes of such special meeting to such news media that have requested such
advance notification in accordance with division (B) hereof. The minutes or the
call, or both, of any such special emergency meeting shall state the general
nature of the emergency requiring immediate official action.
(Ord. 6-76, passed 1-19-1976)
§ 208.06  NOTIFICATION OF DISCUSSION OF SPECIFIC TYPES OF PUBLIC BUSINESS.
   (A)   (1)   Any person, upon written request and as provided herein, may
obtain reasonable advance notification of all meetings at which any specific
type of public business is scheduled to be discussed.
      (2)   Such person may file a written request with the Clerk specifying:
the person’s name and the addresses and telephone numbers at or through which
the person can be reached during and outside of business hours; the specific
type of public business the discussion of which the person is requesting
advance notification of; the municipal body that is the subject of such
request; and the number of calendar months, not to exceed 12, which the request
covers. Such request may be canceled by request from such person to the Clerk.
      (3)   Each such written request must be accompanied by cash, or a check
or money order payable to the city, in the amount of $5 for each month covered
by the request, which amount has been determined by Council to represent a
reasonable fee to cover costs of providing such advance notification. Each such
written request shall be accompanied by 120 stamped self-addressed envelopes to
cover the number of regular meetings during the time period covered by the
request and an estimated number of special meetings. The Clerk shall notify in
writing the requesting person when the supply of envelopes is running out, and
if the person desires notification after such supply has run out, such person
must deliver to the Clerk an additional reasonable number of stamped self-
addressed envelopes as a condition to receiving further notification.
      (4)   Such requests may be modified or extended only by filing a complete
new request with the Clerk. A request shall not be deemed to be made unless it
is complete in all respects, and such request may be conclusively relied on by
the municipal body that is the subject of such request, and the Clerk.
   (B)   (1)   The Clerk shall, if possible, give such advance notification
under this section by written notification. If such written notification cannot
be given or has not been given, the Clerk shall give oral notification.
      (2)   The contents of written notification under this division may be a
copy of the agenda of the meeting. Written notification under this division may
be accomplished by giving advance written notification, by copies of the
agendas, of all meetings of the municipal body that is the subject of such
request.
(Ord. 6-76, passed 1-19-1976)
§ 208.07  GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Any person may visit or telephone the office of the Clerk during that
office’s regular office hours to determine, based on information available at
that office: the time and place of regular meetings; the time, place and
purpose of any then known special meetings; and whether the available agenda of
any such future meeting states that any specific type of public business,
identified by such person, is to be discussed at such meeting.
   (B)   Any notification provided herein to be given by the Clerk may be given
by any person acting on behalf of or under the authority of the Clerk.
   (C)   A reasonable attempt at notification shall constitute notification in
compliance with this chapter.
   (D)   A certificate by the Clerk as to compliance with this chapter shall be
conclusive upon the city and the municipal body involved.
   (E)   The Clerk shall maintain a record of the date and manner, and time if
pertinent under this chapter, of all actions taken with regard to notices and
notifications under §§
208.04 through
208.06, and shall retain copies of proofs of publication of any notifications
or notices published thereunder.
   (F)   To better ensure compliance with this chapter as to notice and
notification, it shall be the responsibility of the Chairperson or Secretary of
a municipal body, other than Council, or the person or persons calling the
meeting, to timely advise the Clerk in writing of future meetings, and the
subject matters to be discussed thereat, of such municipal body.
(Ord. 6-76, passed 1-19-1976)
§ 208.08  POSTING NOTICES OF MEETINGS OF MUNICIPAL BODIES.
   (A)   The Clerk is hereby authorized and directed to post notices of
meetings of municipal bodies in the most public places, as amended in §
208.02.
      (1)   Regular Council meetings: first and third Mondays of the month - 7:
30 p.m.
      (2)   Council work sessions: second and fourth Mondays of the month - 7:
30 p.m., unless there are five Mondays in the month, in which case the days
shall be the second and fifth Mondays of the month - 7:30 p.m.
   (B)   Any deviation from the dates and times set forth in division (A)
hereof must follow the rules set forth in §§
208.01 through
208.07.
(Ord. 105-78, passed 12-4-1978; Ord. 57-09, passed 5-4-2009; Ord. 04-2018,
passed 2-19-2018)
CHAPTER 212:  INCIDENT MANAGEMENT
Section
212.01   Adoption of National Incident Management System
§ 212.01  ADOPTION OF NATIONAL INCIDENT MANAGEMENT SYSTEM.
   The City Council hereby adopts the National Incident Management System
(NIMS) as the city’s standard for incident management.
(Res. 05-15, passed 3-21-2005)
CHAPTER 214:  DONATIONS TO NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS
Section
214.01   In kind donations to non-profit organizations
214.02   Council consideration of donations
§ 214.01  IN KIND DONATIONS TO NON-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS.
   The City Council may consider providing in kind donations to non-profit
organizations only if the following has been provided to the city:
   (A)   Proof in a form acceptable to the city that the organization is in
fact a non-profit corporation in good standing with the Ohio Secretary of
State;
   (B)   Proof in a form acceptable to the city that the organization has
obtained tax exempt status with the Internal Revenue Service as a non-profit
organization; and
   (C)   A copy of the organization’s most recent tax return filed with the
Internal Revenue Service.
(Ord. 14-09, passed 1-20-2009)
§ 214.02  COUNCIL CONSIDERATION OF DONATIONS.
   Once the information required in §
214.01 has been provided to the city, Council may consider whether it wishes to
provide any type of in kind donation. Providing such information to the city is
a prerequisite for consideration and there is no requirement the city must
provide in kind donations upon the provision of said documentation.
(Ord. 14-09, passed 1-20-2009)
TITLE FOUR:  LEGISLATION
   
CHAP. 220.  COUNCIL
   
CHAP. 222.  ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND DOCUMENTS
CHAPTER 220: COUNCIL
Section
220.01   Meetings
220.02   Department and division heads required to attend meetings
220.03   Compensation periods
220.04   Council order and rules of business
Cross-reference:
   Authority to provide for additional departments, commissions, boards, etc.,
see
CHTR. Art. VI
   Authority to provide for departments, commissions, boards, etc., see
CHTR. Art. V, Sec. I
   Council, see
CHTR. Art. III
   Elections, see
CHTR. Art. VII
   Receptionist as back-up to Clerk of Council, see §
248.06
§ 220.01  MEETINGS.
   Council shall hold at least two regular meeting per month. During the month
of July and August only one meeting per month is required as set forth in
Article III, Section 5 of the City Charter.
(Ord. 1-72, passed 1-3-1972; Ord. 27-2017, passed 9-18-2017; Ord. 03-2018,
passed 2-19-2018)
§ 220.02  DEPARTMENT AND DIVISION HEADS REQUIRED TO ATTEND MEETINGS.
   The Directors of Law, Finance and Public Service, the Chiefs of Police and
Fire and the Commissioners of the Division of Streets, the Division of Public
Properties and the Building Department, shall attend all regular meetings of
Council and all special meetings or work sessions when requested to so attend
by a majority of Council.
(Ord. 81-80, passed 11-17-1980)
§ 220.03  COMPENSATION PERIODS.
   The compensation of the President of Council, Ward Councilpersons and
Councilpersons at large shall be payable in equal monthly installments.
(Ord. 6-83, passed 2-7-1983)
§ 220.04  COUNCIL ORDER AND RULES OF BUSINESS.
Rule 1.  Meetings
   In each calendar month, except for July and August, when only one meeting
per month is required, the Council shall hold at least two regular meetings.
The Mayor or any four members of Council may call special meetings upon at
least 24 hours’ written notice to each member, served personally or left at his
or her usual place of residence. Such notice shall state the time, date and
place hereof, and the subjects to be considered at the meeting, and no other
subject shall be there considered. All Council meetings shall be open to the
public at all times.
Rule 2.  Holiday Meetings
   When any regular meeting of Council falls due on a legal holiday, the
Council shall meet in regular session on the Tuesday following and at the place
and hour fixed by Rule 1. When any regular meeting of Council falls due on an
election day, the Council shall meet in regular session on the Wednesday
following and at the place and hour fixed by Rule 1.
Rule 3.  Opening Procedure
   The President of Council shall take the chair at the time specified for the
Council to meet, call the members to order and proceed with the order of
business. In the absence of the President of Council, the President Pro-Tem
shall perform such duties as are imposed upon the President. In the absence of
both the President and President Pro-Tem of the Council, the Council may
appoint a temporary Chairperson of the Council.
Rule 4.  Quorum
   A majority of all the members elected to Council shall constitute a quorum
to do business unless otherwise specified in the Charter or by the Constitution
or laws of the State of Ohio, but a lesser number may adjourn the meeting from
time to time and compel the attendance of absent members in such a manner and
under such penalties as are prescribed by ordinance.
Rule 5.  Presiding Officers
   The President of Council shall preserve order and decorum and confine
members in debate to the questions and shall, when in the chair, decide all
questions of order, subject to an appeal to the Council on the demand of two
members. On such appeal, there shall be no debate, but the member making the
appeal may briefly state his or her reason for the same. The President shall
then have the same right to a similar brief statement. Council will then decide
the appeal by majority vote.
Rule 6.  Heads of Departments
   The directors or heads of all departments and the director or head of any
department that may be established by ordinance are required to attend second
regular meeting of the Council and to answer at any such meeting such questions
relating to the affairs of the city under their respective management and
control as may be put to them by any member of Council.
Rule 7.  Standing Committees
   At the first regular meeting of the Council after its organization, the
President of Council shall appoint standing committees as follows. The First
Councilperson appointed to each committee shall be the Chairperson of that
committee.
   1.   Finance Committee.
   2.   Service/Safety Committee.
   3.   Recreation Committee.
   4.   Building Codes/Public Buildings/Growth, Planning and Zoning Committee.
   5.   Rules, Ordinances and Franchises Committee.
   6.   Community Improvement Corporation.
   7.   Energy Committee.
   Each member, however, shall be appointed and must serve on at least two
committees. All committee meetings shall be held in a public building of the
City of Broadview Heights as specified in the notice of the meeting.
Rule 8.  Committee Procedure
   The procedure to be followed by committees holding public hearings shall be
as follows:
   Any person desiring to be heard by said committee shall rise when addressing
the Chairperson, give his or her name, address and state for whom and for what
interest he or she appears before said committee. The committee holding such
hearing may call upon anyone who, in its opinion, may be able to give
additional information on the subject before the committee for a hearing.
Rule 9.  Order of Business.
   1.   Pledge of Allegiance.
   2.   Roll call.
   3.   Reading and disposal of meeting minutes on a monthly basis.
   4.   Reports and communications for the directors of departments and other
officials.
   5.   Reports and communications from Mayor.
   6.   Appointments and confirmations.
   7.   Communications, claims and petitions.
   8.   Reports of Council committees.
   9.   Resident participation. Limited to a single brief statement for each
individual wanting to comment on the ordinances or resolutions that pertain to
that evening’s agenda. Limited to three minutes.
   10.   Ordinances and resolutions.
      a.   Brief explanation of ordinance or resolution by sponsor.
   11.   Council discussion and miscellaneous business.
   12.   Council open to citizens who are residents (each of who will be
limited to three minutes).
   13.   Adjournment.
   Every member present shall vote on any question on the call of the yeas and
nays unless excused by the majority consent of the Council, and any member not
being excused, who refuses to vote on any question when the yeas and nays are
being taken, shall be deemed guilty of contempt of the Council, and may for
such contempt be censured by the majority of the Council.
   If a Councilperson believes that voting on a particular issue shall
constitute a conflict of interest pursuant to law, such member shall announce
the fact to the Council and the Council shall excuse that member from voting.
The Council may inquire as to the reason for the assertion of the conflict of
interest. If the reasons involve a matter ordinarily discussed in executive
session, said reason shall be discussed only in executive session of the
Council.
Rule 10.  Motions: When Debatable - Withdrawal
   When a motion is made and seconded, it shall be stated by the presiding
officer before any debate shall be in order and any such motion or amendment
thereto may be withdrawn by the movers thereof at any time before decision.
Rule 11.  Division of Question
   Any member or the presiding officer may call for a division of the question,
and the same shall be divided if it comprehends questions so distant that one
being taken away, the other will stand as an entire question for decision. If
division is opposed, then two members of Council may call for a majority
decision by Council.
Rule 12.  To Refer - Precedence
   When there is a question of referring a given subject to a standing
committee or to a select committee, the question of reference to a standing
committee shall be put first.
Rule 13.  To Adjourn
   The motion to adjourn shall always be in order, unless the Council is
engaged in voting.
Rule 14.  Order of Precedence
   When a question or proposition is before the Council or under debate, no
motion shall be received except the following:
   1.   To adjourn.
   2.   To recess.
   3.   To lay on the table.
   4.   For the previous question.
   5.   To postpone for a certain day.
   6.   To refer to committee.
   7.   To amend.
   8.   To postpone indefinitely.
   The several motions shall have precedence in the order in which they are
herein arranged. A motion to commit may not be reconsidered. Motions to adjourn
or to lay on the table or for the previous question or to recess shall be
decided without debate.
Rule 15.  Introduction of Legislation
   Ordinances and resolutions shall be introduced only by members of the
Council and/or the Mayor, with their name endorsed thereon. The Clerk shall
take no cognizance of any ordinance or resolution the original of which does
not indicate its sponsor. A copy of the ordinance or resolution shall be in the
hands of the President of Council at least three days before the introduction.
Each Councilperson shall have before him or her a copy of each ordinance or
resolution 24 hours before introduction. Each ordinance shall be introduced by
the President of Council pursuant to §
220.04 (Rule 9) (Sub. 9) (Order of Business). The President shall read the
ordinance number only. Thereafter, if there is a motion to suspend the Council
rule requiring three readings of the ordinance and such motion is adopted, the
Clerk of Council shall then read the ordinance, by title only, prior to debate
and discussion and/or vote on the ordinance in chief. If there is such a motion
and it is not adopted, or if there is no such motion, the Clerk of Council
shall read the ordinance by title as otherwise required by the Charter and the
Rules of Council of the city.
Rule 16.  Reference to Committee
   Any report, resolution, ordinance or matter before Council for consideration
before its final passage may be referred by the Rules, Ordinances and
Franchises Committee to the standing committee to which the subject matter is
most closely related. If any amendment shall be made to any ordinance after the
committee has reported thereon, the ordinance may, before its final passage, be
recommitted to said committee by motion for further report thereon. Any matter
referred to a committee may, by a majority vote of Council at any time prior to
such report of such committee, be taken from the hands of such committee for
consideration. No report, resolution, ordinance or matter referred to committee
shall be passed or receive final approval until a report has been made by the
committee or unless taken from the committee as above provided.
Rule 17.  Public Hearing
   During the regular order of business at any regular or special meeting of
Council, no public hearing on any matter pending before the Council shall be
had except by consent of Council.
Rule 18.  Suspension of Council Rules.
   These rules, or any of them, may be temporarily suspended at any meeting of
the Council by a concurrent vote of a majority of all members elected, except
when a greater number is required by law, or by the yeas and nays, and entered
on the journal. In case any rule herein shall not have been adhered to by the
Council, the same shall be regarded as having been suspended.
Rule 19.  Resignation
   The resignation of a member of the Council shall not take effect until the
same has been accepted by a vote of the majority of the elected or appointed
members exclusive of the same person tendering the resignation, but the same
must be acted upon by Council on or before the next regular meeting after the
resignation is tendered.
Rule 20.  Tapings and Recordings
   Any meeting or work session of City Council may be recorded by written,
audio and/or video reproduction methods either manually or electronically,
subject to the following rules.
   1.   Any and all recording equipment must operate silently and
unobtrusively.
   2.   Any and all recording equipment shall be self-contained and self-
powered.
   3.   No recording procedure shall interfere with the ability of those
present, including the Council and the public, to hear, see and participate in
the meeting.
   4.   Any person(s) desiring to install recording equipment shall first
report their name and intention to record to the Clerk of Council who shall
notify said person(s) of the conditions contained in this rule.
Rule 21.  Council Representatives to Commissions and Boards
   The President of Council shall appoint Council representatives to the
commissions and boards of the city, including the County Planning Commission,
the City Planning Commission, the Board of Zoning Appeals, the Civil Service
Commission, the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board, the Human Services
Advisory Board and the Shade Tree Commission.
Rule 22.  Clerk of Council
   The Clerk of Council shall be under the direction of the President. In the
event of the President’s absence, the agenda will be under the direction of the
Council President Pro-Tem and/or two Councilpersons.
Rule 23.  Emergency Meetings
   Any emergency meeting may be called by the Mayor and five Councilpersons
and/or six Councilpersons, and the 24 hour rule shall be waived. Cancellation
can be made if all voting members agree and, in any event, all members of
Council shall be notified. There shall be no cancellation of regular or special
meetings.
Rule 24.  Signing of Legislation
   Councilpersons shall be notified in writing by the Clerk of Council of any
resolution or ordinance passed by the Council and not signed by the Mayor after
the ten-day time period.
FINANCE COMMITTEE
OBJECTIVE – To advise the Council on the most efficient allocation and
disbursement of available revenues.
SERVICE COMMITTEE
OBJECTIVE – To ensure the most efficient use of available dollars to increase
services to all residents.
SAFETY COMMITTEE
OBJECTIVE – To ensure that the best available fire, police and building
services are rendered to residents by means of the city.
RECREATION COMMITTEE
OBJECTIVE – To ensure that the best available recreation activities are
available to all members of the city within the confines of budgetary
restraints.
GROWTH, PLANNING AND ZONING COMMITTEE
OBJECTIVE – To review present and future proposed development and to meeting
with developers as required, to enhance the city’s possibilities of acquiring a
desired project. To provide assistance to prospective developers by directing
them to the appropriate authority, i.e., the Planning Commission or the Zoning
Board of Appeals.
BUILDING CODE, PUBLIC BUILDINGS, ARCHITECTURAL AND INDUSTRIAL COMMITTEE
OBJECTIVE – To ensure that the city building codes are of high quality
standards and to recommend changes to codes as deemed necessary; and to review
current usage of public land and buildings and recommend future changes and use
thereof.
RULES, ORDINANCES AND FRANCHISES COMMITTEE
OBJECTIVE — To advise Council and the Administration of effective use of
ordinances and rules and the most cost effective award and use of franchises.
   COUNCIL REPRESENTATIVES TO COMMISSIONS AND BOARDS
Storm Water Task Force Representative
City Planning Commission
Board of Zoning Appeals
Civil Service Commission
Architectural Board of Review
Parks and Recreation Advisory Board
Human Services Advisory Board
Shade Tree Commission
   OBJECTIVES
   1.   Committee Chairperson to announce the time and place of each meeting at
Council meeting, work session, or otherwise at least one week in advance or as
required.
   2.   Committee to consist of the Chairperson and at least one Councilperson.
Appropriate department head to attend meeting. All meetings shall be tape
recorded.
   3.   Committee Chairperson will recommend to the entire Council, at a form
meeting, the course of action to be taken on all items his or her committee has
responsibility for.
   4.   Committee Chairperson will coordinate proposed recommended legislation
with the Council President for submission on the agenda. Council Clerk must
keep track of legislation in committee from first reading to third reading to
ensure proper timing is complied with or recommend tabling for further study.
   5.   When the Mayor, department heads, Councilpersons and/or Committee
Chairpersons desire to place proposed legislation on the agenda, the same shall
be submitted to the Council President who shall place the legislation on the
agenda or send it to the appropriate committee.
   6.   All Council representatives to commissions and boards will transmit to
the Council recommendations to adopt or not the proposed action of the
commission and boards as appropriate.
   7.   Committee Chairpersons or department heads and the Clerk of Council may
submit information for their areas of responsibility to the City Clerk of
inclusion in the quarterly newsletter to be sent to all residents. After review
by the Law Director, the City Clerk will coordinate printing and dissemination
to the residents. The City Clerk will coordinate with submitting parties if the
need arises for editing due to space restrictions.
   8.   All Committee Chairpersons will be responsible to coordinate proposed
legislation and plans, both present and future, with the Finance Committee for
feasibility and priority assignment.
   9.   Council Clerk to keep records and turn over filings on each piece of
legislation and proposed plan. Filing space to be provided in Council Clerk’s
office as required.
(Ord. 01-05, passed 1-10-2005; Ord. 56-10, passed 4-19-2010; Ord. 158-11,
passed 12-5-2011; Ord. 137-12, passed 9-17-2012; Ord. 27-2017, passed 9-18-
2017)
CHAPTER 222:  ORDINANCES, RESOLUTIONS AND DOCUMENTS
Section
222.01   Posting places
222.03   Copies of public records
222.04   Retention of copies of codified ordinances
Cross-reference:
   Ordinances and resolutions and effective dates, see
CHTR. Art. IX
   Powers of Council, see §
220.04 (Rules 16, 17, 25);
CHTR. Art. III, Sec. 7
   Securing writings by deception, see §
642.19
§ 222.01  POSTING PLACES.
   (A)   Ordinances, resolutions, statements, orders, proclamations, notices
and other reports shall be published by posting copies at City Hall.
   (B)   The Clerk of Council is hereby generally ordered and directed to
publish any and all ordinances, resolutions, statements, orders, proclamations,
notices and reports required by law to be published by posting the same at City
Hall without any express or special order or direction as to any such posting,
save and except where publication other than by posting is specially or
expressly ordered or directed by Council or by law required.
(Ord. 19-99, passed 2-1-1999; Ord. 180-03, passed 12-15-2003; Ord. 56-09,
passed 5-4-2009; Ord. 44-16, passed 10-17-2016)
§ 222.03  COPIES OF PUBLIC RECORDS.
   The city shall establish a fee schedule which shall be amended as is
necessary from time to time, for copies of public records. Said fee schedule
shall comply with the Ohio Public Records Law.
(Ord. 35-98, passed 2-17-1998; Ord. 230-99, passed 12-20-1999; Ord. 38-04,
passed 4-5-2004; Ord. 155-12, passed 10-15-2012; Ord. 37-2018, passed 11-5-
2018)
§ 222.04  RETENTION OF COPIES OF CODIFIED ORDINANCES.
   All Councilpersons, while in office, are entitled to one copy of the
codified ordinances and supplements thereto. Upon each Councilperson’s
termination of office, the Councilperson shall be permitted to retain the copy
of the codified ordinances and the supplements that he or she has acquired
while in office. Councilpersons, after leaving office, shall no longer be
entitled to any supplements or amendments to the codified ordinances which are
in their possession.
(Ord. 9-80, passed 2-4-1980)
TITLE SIX:  ADMINISTRATION
   
CHAP. 230.  ADMINISTRATION GENERALLY
   
CHAP. 232.  MAYOR
   
CHAP. 234.  DEPARTMENT OF LAW
   
CHAP. 236.  DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE
   
CHAP. 240.  DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY
   
CHAP. 242.  FIRE DEPARTMENT
   
CHAP. 244.  POLICE DEPARTMENT
   
CHAP. 248.  DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SERVICE
   
CHAP. 250.  DIVISION OF ENGINEERING
   
CHAP. 256.  RECREATION DEPARTMENT
   
CHAP. 258.  HUMAN SERVICES DEPARTMENT
   
CHAP. 260.  COMMUNITY IMPROVEMENT CORPORATION
CHAPTER 230: ADMINISTRATION GENERALLY
Section
230.01   Receptionist-Secretary
230.02   General Accounting Clerks
230.03   Office Clerks
230.04   Part-time office employees
230.05   Authority to sign vouchers and checks
230.06   Grant Administrator
230.07   Use of part-time clerical assistants
230.08   Returned check fee
230.09   Full-time Administrative Receptionist
Cross-reference:
   Accounting control; receipts, see §
236.02
   Administrative departments, boards, commissions and offices, see
CHTR. Art. V.
   Building Department, see
Chapter 1440
   Deposit of moneys; monthly statement, see §
236.03
   Municipal Architect, see
Chapter 1302
   Passing bad checks, see §
642.14
   Separate account for payroll; monthly statement, see §
236.04
   Trees, see
Chapter 1026
§ 230.01  RECEPTIONIST-SECRETARY.
   (A)   There is hereby established in and for the city the position of
Receptionist-Secretary. Said position may be filled by one or more persons
appointed by the Mayor, and such person or persons shall serve at the Mayor’s
pleasure.
   (B)   The compensation for such position will be as determined by Council.
   (C)   The hours of the Receptionist-Secretary shall be as specified from
time to time by the Mayor, provided that the aggregate of hours worked by the
person serving as Receptionist-Secretary will not exceed 80 hours in any week.
   (D)   The duties of the Receptionist-Secretary shall include, but shall not
be limited to, telephone answering and placing of calls, acting as a general
receptionist for the city, performing clerical and secretarial duties for
various city officials, including the preparation of reports and typing of
letters and notices, and any and all other duties set forth by the Mayor.
(Ord. 76-99, passed 5-17-1999; Ord. 132-99, passed 7-26-1999)
§ 230.02  GENERAL ACCOUNTING CLERKS.
   (A)   Establishment of Position; Classifications. There is hereby
established the position of General Accounting Clerk in classifications of
General Accounting Clerk I, General Accounting Clerk II and General Accounting
Clerk III.
   (B)   Qualifications.
      (1)   General Accounting Clerk III. This position requires a minimum of
six months experience in bookkeeping or one year of college or business school
training in bookkeeping or accounting.
      (2)   General Accounting Clerk II. This position requires a minimum of
one year experience in bookkeeping, or two years of college with courses in
bookkeeping or accounting, or other equivalent combination of training and
experience.
      (3)   General Accounting Clerk I. This position requires a minimum of
three years experience in bookkeeping or accounting, or three years of college
including some advanced accounting course, or other equivalent combination of
training and experience.
   (C)   Compensation. The compensation for the three classifications of
General Accounting Clerk shall be established and included in the pay ordinance
of the city approved by Council.
(Ord. 6-75, passed 1-6-1975)
§ 230.03  OFFICE CLERKS.
   (A)   There is hereby established the position of Office Clerk in three
classifications of Office Clerk First Class, Office Clerk Second Class and
Office Clerk Third Class.
   (B)   The compensation for the three classifications of Office Clerk shall
be established and included in the pay ordinance of the city approved by
Council.
(Ord. 7-75, passed 1-6-1975)
§ 230.04  PART-TIME OFFICE EMPLOYEES.
   There is hereby established the position of part-time office employee. The
persons filling such position shall work under the supervision of the Mayor, on
a part-time basis, and at such times as the Mayor deems necessary.
(Ord. 42-66, passed 10-3-1966)
§ 230.05  AUTHORITY TO SIGN VOUCHERS AND CHECKS.
   (A)   The Director of Finance, the City Clerk and Accounting Clerks are the
only officials authorized to sign vouchers and checks for the city.
   (B)   No other person is authorized to sign such checks and vouchers except
where authorized by motion of Council.
(Ord. 86-79, passed 8-27-1979)
§ 230.06  GRANT ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   There is hereby created the position of Grant Administrator.
   (B)   The Grant Administrator shall be compensated as determined from time
to time by Council.
   (C)   The Grant Administrator is hereby required to submit a written monthly
report to Council on or before the second meeting of each month. Such report
should include a summary of the status of all pending grants, applications and
programs for which grants have been received.
(Ord. 61-79, passed 7-9-1979; Ord. 42-80, passed 5-5-1980)
§ 230.07  USE OF PART-TIME CLERICAL ASSISTANTS.
   (A)   Each department utilizing part-time clerical assistants shall be
permitted to utilize said assistants consistent with the budget otherwise
approved for said department.
   (B)   Council recognizes and reaffirms the positions of part-time clerical
assistant as established in Ordinance 132-99, passed July 26, 1999, and
Ordinance 207-99, passed November 15, 1999.
   (C)   Any part-time clerical position may be staffed by one or more
individuals as may be designated by the Mayor or his or her designee at any
given time, provided that the maximum number of hours permitted in said
departmental budget is not exceeded.
(Ord. 11-00, passed 1-18-2000)
§ 230.08  RETURNED CHECK FEE.
   (A)   There is hereby established a returned check fee in the amount of $25
per returned check, which shall be levied and charged to any person who tenders
a check to the city and whose check subsequently is returned for any reason.
   (B)   All documents of the city advising of payment required to the city
shall contain a notice that any check tendered to the city that is returned
shall incur the $25 returned check fee.
   (C)   All departments of the city routinely receiving payments in the form
of checks shall immediately post a notice of the returned check fee in a
conspicuous place advising that any check tendered to the city that is returned
will incur the $25 fee.
(Ord. 33-01, passed 3-5-2001)
§ 230.09  FULL-TIME ADMINISTRATIVE RECEPTIONIST.
   (A)   The position of full-time Administrative Receptionist is hereby
created.
   (B)   Said position shall be classified as Level 4.
(Ord. 29-02, passed 2-19-2002)
CHAPTER 232:  MAYOR
Section
232.01   Secretary to the Mayor
232.02   Compensation; expenses; benefits; use of personal vehicle
232.03   Participation in contracts with the Ohio Department of Administrative
Services
232.04   Participation in contracts with the Ohio Department of Transportation
(ODOT)
232.05   Part-time Executive Assistant
Cross-reference:
   The Mayor, see
CHTR. Art. IV
§ 232.01  SECRETARY TO THE MAYOR.
   (A)   There is hereby established the position of Secretary to the Mayor who
shall perform all secretarial duties as determined by the Mayor.
   (B)   The compensation for such position shall be determined by Council.
(Ord. 3-74, passed 1-7-1974)
§ 232.02  COMPENSATION; EXPENSES; BENEFITS; USE OF PERSONAL VEHICLE.
   (A)   The salary of the Mayor shall be determined by Council and shall be
payable in equal bi-weekly installments.
   (B)   (1)   Council hereby authorizes the reimbursement of expenses incurred
by the Mayor in the discharge of his or her duties of office in the city in an
amount not to exceed $2,500, per year.
      (2)   Said reimbursement may be claimed by the Mayor by providing
documented evidence of said expenses to the Finance Director, along with a
requisite request for reimbursement in writing.
      (3)   The Mayor shall also receive full medical coverage. Effective
December 3, 2007 the Mayor shall contribute to the monthly medical insurance
premiums at the same rate as Level 1 non-bargaining full- time employees.
   (C)   For use of the Mayor/Safety Director’s personal motor vehicle for city
business, the Mayor/Safety Director shall receive $2,400 per year, to be paid
in equal monthly installments. Effective December 3, 2007, the Mayor shall
elect to either use a city-owned vehicle or receive the stipend for the use of
his or her personal vehicle at the beginning of the Mayor’s term and said
election shall remain in effect without change for the entire term.
   (D)   The Mayor shall not hold any other full-time employment.
(Ord. 6-83, passed 2-7-1983; Ord. 89-13, passed 1-23-1989; Ord. 13-98, passed
1-20-1998; Ord. 136-07, passed 11-5-2007)
§ 232.03  PARTICIPATION IN CONTRACTS WITH THE OHIO DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE
SERVICES.
   (A)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to agree in the name of the city to be
bound by all contract terms and conditions that the State Department of
Administrative Services, Office of State Purchasing, prescribes, in connection
with the purchase of supplies, services, equipment and materials pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 125.04. Such terms and conditions may include a reasonable fee to
cover the administrative costs which the Department of Administrative Services
incurs as a result of the city’s participation in a contract.
   (B)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to agree in the name of the city to
directly pay the vendor, under each such state contract in which it
participates, for items it receives pursuant to the contract.
   (C)   The Clerk of Council is hereby directed to file a copy of this section
with the State Office of State Purchasing.
(Res. 86-59, passed 8-18-1986)
§ 232.04 PARTICIPATION IN CONTRACTS WITH THE OHIO DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
(ODOT).
   (A)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to participate in Ohio Department of
Transportation contracts for the purchase by the city of machinery, materials,
supplies or other articles which the Department has entered into pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 5513.01(B).
   (B)   The city will be bound by all terms and conditions as the Director of
Transportation prescribes.
   (C)   The city will directly pay vendors, under each such contract of the
Ohio Department of Transportation in which the city participates, for items it
receives pursuant to the contract.
   (D)   The city agrees to hold the Director of Transportation and the Ohio
Department of Transportation harmless for any claim or dispute arising out of
participation in a contract pursuant to Ohio R.C. 5513.01(B).
(Res. 00-39, passed 4-3-2000)
§ 232.05  PART-TIME EXECUTIVE ASSISTANT.
   (A)   There is hereby established the position of part-time Executive
Assistant to the Mayor.
   (B)   The annual compensation for said position shall be set by the Mayor.
   (C)   The duties of the part-time Executive Assistant to the Mayor shall be
as described in the job description attached to original Ordinance 5-00, passed
February 7, 2000, as Exhibit “A”.
(Ord. 5-00, passed 2-7-2000)
CHAPTER 234:  DEPARTMENT OF LAW
Section
234.01   Presentation of bills for legal services; approval
Cross-reference:
   Authority of Law Director re unsafe buildings, see §
1338.06
   Department of Law, see
CHTR. Art. V, § 2
§ 234.01  PRESENTATION OF BILLS FOR LEGAL SERVICES; APPROVAL.
   (A)   The Law Director is hereby directed to present to the Finance Director
and the Finance Committee of City Council for approval all bills for legal
services rendered to the city. The Law Director is also directed to convey
copies of said bills to the Mayor and members of Council.
   (B)   Any and all bills presented to the Finance Director by the Law
Director and/or the Department of Law, other than the salary and/or any other
fixed remuneration, shall be presented by the Finance Director to the Finance
Committee of City Council for approval prior to payment. The Finance Committee
shall approve said payment if it finds said bills to be in order, and upon such
approval, the Finance Director is authorized to pay said bills. The Finance
Committee may, in its discretion, refer the matter of the payment of any
questionable bill to the City Council for approval.
   (C)   All bills presented by the Law Director and/or the Department of Law
shall specifically include the case or matter by name, the docket or case
number and the hours expended thereon.
(Ord. 13-90, passed 3-5-1990)
CHAPTER 236:  DEPARTMENT OF FINANCE
Section
236.01   Director of Finance; responsibility of Director to collect, preserve
and disburse funds
236.02   Accounting control; receipts
236.03   Deposit of moneys; monthly statement
236.04   Separate account for payroll; monthly statement
236.05   Tax Administrator
236.06   Compensation of Director
236.07   Merger of offices
236.08   Bidding for public contracts
236.09   Awarding of contracts to lowest responsible bidder
236.10   Enforcement and Education Fund
236.11   D.A.R.E. Fund
236.12   Mandatory Drug Fine Fund
236.13   Hiring of Finance Clerks
236.14   Fire Department Operating Fund
236.15   Storm Sewer Maintenance Fund
236.16   COPS FAST Grant Fund
236.17   BDC Debt Retirement Fund
236.18   Landfill Closure Fund
236.19   Avery Road Sanitary Sewer Fund
236.20   ODNR Grant Fund
236.21   Tree Commission Fund
236.22   East Wallings Road Sanitary Sewer Fund
236.23   East Sprague Road Sanitary Sewer Fund
236.24   Service Center Construction Fund
236.25   (Reserved)
236.26   Edgerton Road Sanitary Sewer Fund
236.27   Old Royalton Road Construction Fund
236.28   FEMA Grant Fund
236.29   Park and Recreation Facilities Capital Improvement Fund
236.30   Capital Project Fund
236.31   Purchase Order Policy
236.32   Petty Cash Policy
Cross-reference:
   Authority to sign vouchers and checks, see §
230.05
   Cooperative purchasing, see §§
232.03,
232.04
   Department of Finance, see
CHTR. Art. V, § 3
   Duties re Law Department bills, see §
234.01
   Earned income tax, see
Chapter 880
   General Accounting Clerks, see §
230.02
   Grant Administrator, see §
230.06
   Hotel tax, see
Chapter 884
   Housing Officer, see §
888.07
   Recreation Department finances, see §
256.04
§ 236.01  DIRECTOR OF FINANCE; RESPONSIBILITY OF DIRECTOR TO COLLECT, PRESERVE
AND DISBURSE FUNDS.
   (A)   There is hereby established the full-time position of Director of
Finance in the city.
   (B)   The duties of the Director of Finance shall be as those provided in
Article V, Section 3 of the City Charter.
   (C)   The Director of Finance shall, in addition to all the duties and
functions presently assigned to him or her by the City Charter, be responsible
for the collection and preservation of all moneys of the city, including
license fees, fines, court costs and waivers. He or she shall receive and
preserve such moneys in such manner and form and in such places as Council may
direct. He or she shall receive and disburse all public moneys coming into his
or her hands pursuant to such requirements as may be requested by the
authorities having lawful control over such funds.
(Ord. 89-74, passed 12-9-1974; Ord. 202-02, passed 12-16-2002)
§ 236.02  ACCOUNTING CONTROL; RECEIPTS.
   (A)   Each and every department of the city is required to turn in receipts
on all receipts received by each department, and each receipt shall be
accompanied by a prenumbered receipt form, for the purpose of accounting
control by the Department of Finance.
   (B)   Such receipts and prenumbered receipt forms shall be turned into the
Finance Department as required by the Finance Department from time to time.
(Ord. 4-79, passed 1-2-1979)
§ 236.03  DEPOSIT OF MONEYS; MONTHLY STATEMENT.
   (A)   A single account shall be maintained at a bank for the deposit of all
moneys collected by the city, except as provided in §
236.04.
   (B)   A statement showing the monthly cash balance deposited in this account
shall be given to Council monthly.
(Ord. 50-73, passed 6-25-1973)
§ 236.04  SEPARATE ACCOUNT FOR PAYROLL; MONTHLY STATEMENT.
   (A)   A separate account, effective April 1, 1973, shall be opened at a bank
for the deposit of moneys for payroll purposes.
   (B)   A statement showing the monthly cash balance deposited in this account
shall be given to Council monthly.
(Ord. 51-73, passed 6-25-1973)
§ 236.05  TAX ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The position of Tax Administrator is hereby established for the city.
   (B)   The Tax Administrator shall perform such duties and have such
obligations and responsibilities as are set forth in
Chapter 880 of this Code of Ordinances and all other ordinances or resolutions
passed by Council, or applicable statutes of the state, relative to municipal
income taxes and/or municipal tax administrators.
   (C)   Such services are included by way of example, but not by way of
limitation, and the Tax Administrator shall be part of the Department of
Finance and under the supervision of the Director of Finance.
(Ord. 5-70, passed 3-10-1970)
§ 236.06  COMPENSATION OF DIRECTOR.
   The Director of Finance shall be compensated as determined from time to time
by Council.
§ 236.07  MERGER OF OFFICES.
   The offices of Finance Director, Grants Administrator and Tax Administrator
are hereby merged under the single encompassing title of Finance Director.
(Res. 87-28, passed 3-16-1987)
§ 236.08  BIDDING FOR PUBLIC CONTRACTS.
   (A)   The provisions in Ohio R.C. 735.05, 735.051, 735.052 and 735.053
regarding bidding for all public contracts are hereby adopted by the city.
   (B)   Notwithstanding division (A) hereof, if, upon specific evidence
thereof, Council finds that needed goods and/or services in any given case can
be provided at a cost which, in the judgment of Council, is less than any cost
likely to be obtained through a public bidding process, Council may, in its
discretion, waive the public bidding provisions contained in division (A) of
this section and contract with the supplier of said goods and/or services
without public bidding, provided that any action pursuant to this division will
require the affirmative vote of at least six members of Council.
(Ord. 59-95, passed 5-1-1995)
§ 236.09  AWARDING OF CONTRACTS TO LOWEST RESPONSIBLE BIDDER.
   (A)   The city hereby adopts as its policy the requirement that each
contract competitively bid pursuant to this Code of Ordinances be awarded to
the lowest responsive and responsible bidder in accordance with Ohio R.C.
9.312.
   (B)   The other provisions of Ohio R.C. 9.312 be and are hereby incorporated
by reference into the bidding law of the city, including, but not limited to,
the low bidder protest procedure as contained in Ohio R.C. 9.312(B).
(Ord. 158-90, passed 11-19-1990)
§ 236.10  ENFORCEMENT AND EDUCATION FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby established a new special revenue fund to be known as
the Enforcement and Education Fund.
   (B)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized and instructed to effect
the intent of this section.
(Ord. 52-91, passed 7-22-1991)
§ 236.11  D.A.R.E. FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby established a new special revenue fund to be known as
the D.A.R.E. Fund.
   (B)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized and instructed to effect
the intent of this section.
(Ord. 35-91, passed 5-20-1991)
§ 236.12  MANDATORY DRUG FINE FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby created a special revenue fund to be known as the
Mandatory Drug Fine Fund.
   (B)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized and instructed to effect
the intent of this section.
(Ord. 64-92, passed 6-15-1992)
§ 236.13  HIRING OF FINANCE CLERKS.
   (A)   The Finance Department shall be authorized to employ three Finance
Clerks, until further order of Council, at rates of compensation as provided in
the annual compensation ordinance.
   (B)   In addition to the Finance Clerks herein authorized, the position of
part-time Finance Clerk is hereby established.
      (1)   The part-time Finance Clerk shall be compensated according to the
pay range ordinances enacted by the city.
      (2)   The part-time Finance Clerk may be utilized up to a total of no
more than 60 hours per pay period.
(Ord. 117-92, passed 11-2-1992; Ord. 106-99, passed 6-7-1999; Ord. 207-99,
passed 11-15-1999; Ord. 38-2018, passed 11-5-2018)
§ 236.14  FIRE DEPARTMENT OPERATING FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby established a special revenue fund to be known as the
Fire Department Operating Fund.
   (B)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized and instructed to effect
the intent of this section.
(Ord. 140-94, passed 11-21-1994)
§ 236.15  STORM SEWER MAINTENANCE FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby created a special revenue fund to be known as the
Storm Sewer Maintenance Fund.
   (B)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized and instructed to effect
the intent of this section.
(Ord. 34-95, passed 3-20-1995)
§ 236.16  COPS FAST GRANT FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby established a special revenue fund to be known as the
COPS FAST Grant Fund.
   (B)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized and instructed to effect
the intent of this section.
(Ord. 129-95, passed 9-18-1995)
§ 236.17  BDC DEBT RETIREMENT FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby established in and for the city a new debt retirement
fund to be known as the BDC Debt Retirement Fund.
   (B)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized and instructed to effect
the intent of this section.
(Ord. 112-96, passed 9-30-1996)
§ 236.18  LANDFILL CLOSURE FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby established the Broadview Heights Landfill Closure
Fund, which Fund is established for the purpose of providing public moneys for
the purpose of defraying the costs of the deposit of refuse and sanitary waste
from the city, at such time as costs may be incurred therefor.
   (B)   The Director of Finance is hereby directed to amend the financial
records of the city to establish the existence of said Fund.
   (C)   The moneys deposited into the Landfill Closure Fund shall be
designated and dedicated for purposes of defraying part or all of the costs of
the deposit of refuse and sanitary waste in the city, as such costs may be
incurred from time to time.
(Ord. 169-97, passed 11-3-1997)
§ 236.19  AVERY ROAD SANITARY SEWER FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby established a new capital projects fund to be known as
the Avery Road Sanitary Sewer Fund.
   (B)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized and instructed to effect
the intent of this section.
(Ord. 139-99, passed 8-23-1999)
§ 236.20  ODNR GRANT FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby established a new capital projects fund to be known as
the ODNR Grant Fund.
   (B)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized and instructed to effect
the intent of this section.
(Ord. 172-99, passed 9-20-1999)
§ 236.21  TREE COMMISSION FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby established a new capital projects fund to be known as
the Tree Commission Fund.
   (B)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized and instructed to effect
the intent of this section.
(Ord. 101-00, passed 6-19-2000)
§ 236.22  EAST WALLINGS ROAD SANITARY SEWER FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby established a new capital projects fund to be known as
the East Wallings Road Sanitary Sewer Fund.
   (B)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized and instructed to effect
the intent of this section.
(Ord. 155-00, passed 10-16-2000)
§ 236.23  EAST SPRAGUE ROAD SANITARY SEWER FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby established a new capital projects fund to be known as
the East Sprague Road Sanitary Sewer Fund.
   (B)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized and instructed to effect
the intent of this section.
(Ord. 73-01, passed 5-21-2001)
§ 236.24  SERVICE CENTER CONSTRUCTION FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby created a new capital projects fund to be known as the
Service Center Construction Fund.
   (B)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized and instructed to effect
the intent of this section.
(Ord. 39-03, passed 4-7-2003)
§ 236.25  (RESERVED)
§ 236.26  EDGERTON ROAD SANITARY SEWER FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby created the Edgerton Road Sanitary Sewer Fund.
   (B)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized and instructed to effect
the intent of this section.
(Ord. 90-03, passed 7-21-2003)
§ 236.27  OLD ROYALTON ROAD CONSTRUCTION FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby created a new capital projects fund to be known as the
Old Royalton Road Construction Fund.
   (B)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized and instructed to effect
the intent of this section.
(Ord. 149-03, passed 10-6-2003)
§ 236.28  FEMA GRANT FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby created a new special revenue fund to be known as the
FEMA Grant Fund.
   (B)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized and instructed to effect
the intent of this section.
(Ord. 116-04, passed 9-20-2004)
§ 236.29  PARK AND RECREATION FACILITIES CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby created a new capital projects fund to be known as the
Park and Recreation Facilities Capital Improvement Fund.
   (B)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized and instructed to effect
the intent of this section.
(Ord. 25-16, passed 3-14-2016)
§ 236.30  CAPITAL PROJECT FUND.
   A Capital Project Fund shall be established to account for the construction
phase of the Route 82 Widening Project.
(Res. 2019-75, passed 5-20-2019)
§ 236.31  PURCHASE ORDER POLICY.
   (A)   Purpose. To establish limits to "Blanket" Purchase Order as required
by Ohio R.C. 5705.41(D)(3), and to establish general policy and guidelines for
all purchase orders.
   (B)   General Blanket Purchase Order Limit and Procedures.
      (1)   The limit for general blanket purchase orders is $10,000. General
blanket purchase orders do not need to be vendor specific but no more than one
general blanket purchase order can be open for a specific line item at one
time; however multiple blankets for the same line item may be issued over the
course of the year provided total blankets issued to one account do not exceed
$50,000 and no more than $25,000 is spent with any one vendor, unless
additional approval is obtained from Council.
      (2)   Departments are required to maintain an itemized spreadsheet of all
obligations and expenditures made on general blanket purchase orders and submit
such itemized statement to the Finance Department on the first day of each
month. Such statement should contain the date of obligation/purchase, the
vendor used, and the exact amount of the purchase. Failure to provide such
statement may result in the Finance Director closing the general blanket
purchase order. The use of a general blanket purchase order is for purchases
made on a normal reoccurring basis for various miscellaneous small dollar value
items such as office products and auto parts. Individual purchases in excess of
$300 are prohibited except in the case of an emergency or with the prior
approval of the Finance Director. Purchases made from Amazon, or with a city
credit card or any other commercial card held by the city are strictly
prohibited except in the case of an emergency or with the prior approval of the
Finance Director. No purchases can be made on a general blanket purchase order
after November 30th as the Finance Department needs to review the November
itemized statement provided by the Department to ensure that all purchases are
paid for and general blanket purchase orders closed by year end.
   (C)   Project/Season Purchase Order. Project/season purchase orders are
similar to general blanket purchase orders but can be issued in an amount not
to exceed $50,000. Examples of a project/season blanket purchase order would be
for events such as home days, holiday party/event, or season programs such as
basketball. It is subject to the same reporting requirements, $300 purchase
limit, and use of Amazon/credit cards and general blanket purchase orders;
however a project/season order can be open to the same line item at the same
time a general blanket purchase order since the project/season may also be
linked to a project number.
   (D)   Super Blankets. Super blankets are used for purchases/expenditures for
a specific item or a few similar items that are made on a routine ongoing basis
throughout the year from a specific vendor at a known price. Examples of super
blankets are utilities, phone and cell phone service, concrete, salt, and fuel.
In many cases super blankets will have an underlying contract such as salt and
fuel. Super blankets are generally vendor specific and if not formalized by a
contract the city should have some type of supporting documentation regarding
the pricing of the item or items being purchased, such as a pricing catalog.
With the exception of items such as utilities and phone service Council must
authorize purchases from a vendor if the estimated annual amount is $10,000 or
more. Since super blankets are vendor specific monthly reporting is not
required, however adequate records must be retained by the Departments so that
all super blankets can be reduced at year end to the exact amount of pending
invoices that will either be paid or received in the subsequent year for items
purchased prior to year-end. All super blankets for items such as utilities and
phone service will be closed after the December statement is received. January
statements will be paid from the subsequent year appropriations even if a
portion of the statement is for December of the previous year.
   (E)   Contract/Multi-Year Project Purchase Orders. These purchase orders
will have either a contract and/or agreement to support them. They will be
vendor specific and are generally for construction projects but could also be
for professional services such a contract negotiations, engineering services,
financial services, or other similar type services. They should be issued in
the actually amount of the contract or if on a time and material basis the
estimate cost of the project. Only items specifically related to the contract/
project can be charged to these purchase orders and they must be closed upon
completion of the project.
   (F)   Emergency Purchase Orders. These purchase orders are similar to
general blanket purchase orders but issued to encumber funds in the event
repairs are need immediately and it is not feasible to obtain a quote or
estimate for the repair prior to work starting. Examples of emergency purchase
orders would be for road and/or sewer repairs. These purchase orders do not
have to be vendor specific. Normally no charges will occur against these
purchase orders as a normal and/or contract purchase order should be requested
as soon as an estimate or the actual cost of the work is known.
   (G)   General Provisions. The issuance of all types of blanket purchase
orders is at the sole discretion of the Finance Director. With the exception of
the dollar limits established within this policy the Finance Director may make
necessary amendments as deemed necessary for the effective, efficient operation
of the city. Such amendments, if made, should be brought to Council for formal
approval no less than annually.
(Res. 2019-76, passed 5-20-2019)
§ 236.32  PETTY CASH POLICY.
   (A)   Purpose. This policy details the establishment of petty cash/change
funds in various departments of the city and provides for operating rules and
procedures for reimbursing petty cash expenses and replenishing the petty cash
fund(s).
   (B)   (1)   Petty Cash Funds will be established for the following
departments to improve operational efficiency and reduce the level of paperwork
and manual effort involved in executing minor expenditures:
      (2)   Petty Cash Funds:
         (a)   City Clerk (Mayor’s Office): $100.
         (b)   Recreation Department: $100.
         (c)   Police Department: $100.
   (C)   (1)   Change Funds will be established for the following departments
to provide for adequate monies to make change for customers making cash
purchases:
      (2)   Change Funds:
         (a)   Recreation: $600.
         (b)   Building: $150.
         (c)   Mayor's Court: $101.
         (d)   Finance (Utilities): $125.
   (D)   The following rules apply to operation of the Petty Cash Funds of each
department:
      (1)   Custodians of petty cash funds must be designated by department
heads to monitor funds and insure compliance with all procedures. Custodians
will be responsible for any losses incurred in petty cash funds due to non-
compliance with procedures or improper security.
      (2)   Petty cash advances or reimbursements shall not exceed $25.00 per
transaction. Transactions are not to be artificially split to keep
reimbursement requests under the $25.00 limit. The city is tax exempt and every
effort should be made to avoid paying sales tax on purchases. The petty cash
custodian and/or Finance Director may elect to not reimburse employees who pay
sales tax on a continual basis.
      (3)   Petty cash advances or reimbursements shall be authorized only for
transactions having a proper public purpose. Expenses unrelated to city
business are not to be processed through petty cash.
      (4)   Petty cash advances or reimbursements must be supported by a valid
receipt submitted to the custodian by the individual requesting the use of
petty cash. Receipts must readily identify the nature of the purchase;
reimbursements cannot be co-mingled with personal expense items on receipts.
Petty cash requests unsupported by appropriate receipts are to be rejected by
the petty cash custodian.
      (5)   Petty cash is not to be used in place of the regular purchasing
process. Advances or reimbursements are to be approved only for items that are
not recurring in nature. Petty cash reimbursement or advance requests that
could be administered through the purchasing process without undue hardship
should not be approved by the custodian.
      (6)   Petty cash funds may be used in one of two ways:
         (a)   An employee purchases an item for $25.00 or less and submits the
appropriate receipt to the petty cash fund custodian for reimbursement; or
         (b)   A cash advance for a proposed valid petty cash expense of $25.00
or less is given to the employee who then returns with a receipt and any change
due (difference between advance and actual price).
      (7)   Petty cash custodians should document the date of each transaction
and the name of the employee who initiated the transaction. In that custodians
have responsibility for their respective petty cash funds, any areas of
questionable expense should be brought to the attention of the Finance Director
before funds are expended.
   (E)   Replenishing Petty Cash Funds. Custodians should replenish petty cash
when the remaining available cash is 50% or less of the initial petty cash fund
balance. Custodians should file a requisition with the Finance Department in
the amount of any replenishment, and should support the request with all
documentation from transactions that have been processed through petty cash.
Finance will process a check in the amount of the approved replenishment; have
the check cashed at a financial institution, and present the custodian with
funds equal to the approved replenishment. The Finance Department will document
any inappropriate use to the department head and petty cash custodian. Repeated
inappropriate use may result in the petty cash custodian being held
responsible. The Finance Director may request reimbursement from any employee
who was paid for inappropriate transaction by the petty cash custodian.
   (F)   The following rules apply to operation of the Change Funds of each
department:
      (1)   Change funds should only be used for providing change to customers
making cash purchases. Use of change funds to make petty cash purchases is
strictly prohibited.
      (2)   Change funds should be reconciled at the close of business each day
and any shortage or overage should be timely reported to the Finance
Department.
      (3)   Progressive disciplinary action should be taken against any
employee who is repeatedly responsible for shortages and/or overages up to and
including repayment of shortages and/or termination.
   (G)   Amendments. If necessary for the operational efficiency of the city,
or for the safety of taxpayers, customers, or employees the Finance Director
may approve deviations and or amendments to this policy as needed. Any
amendments should be presented to Council no less than annually, if needed.
(Res. 2019-77, passed 5-20-2019)
CHAPTER 240:  DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY
Section
240.01   Emergency services outside city limits
240.02   Law Enforcement Trust Fund
Cross-reference:
   Building Department, see
Chapter 1440
   Department of Public Safety, see
CHTR. Art. V, § 5
   Fire Department, see
Chapter 242
   Police Department, see
Chapter 244
§ 240.01  EMERGENCY SERVICES OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS.
   (A)   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 9.60 and 737.041, as amended, Council hereby
authorizes the Chiefs of the Police and Fire Departments, and the officers on
duty in charge of the Police and Fire Departments, to render the services of
such Departments to other municipalities, townships, counties or the state in
times of emergency, whether or not the city has entered into mutual aid
contracts for police or fire services with any of those political subdivisions
or the state. The determination of “times of emergency” shall be made only by
the Chiefs of the Police and Fire Departments, or the officers on duty in
charge of the Police and Fire Departments, upon a call for emergency police or
fire protection services by the state or another political subdivision of this
state.
   (B)   The personnel of the Police and Fire Departments rendering emergency
services to other political subdivisions shall, as provided by state law, be
entitled to all of their usual wages and benefits, shall be covered by workers’
compensation and shall be immune from any liability arising from the
reasonable, good-faith rendering of emergency police and fire protection
services.
(Res. 90-9, passed 2-5-1990)
§ 240.02  LAW ENFORCEMENT TRUST FUND.
   (A)   The Director of Public Safety is hereby authorized to accept all
contraband or other property seized as part of a criminal investigation or
prosecution and forfeited to the city or pursuant to federal law and required
to be used for law enforcement purposes.
   (B)   Property forfeited to the city and accepted by the Director of Public
Safety pursuant to division (A) hereof may be destroyed or retained by the city
to be used solely in the Police Department for law enforcement purposes, as
determined by the Director of Public Safety. Property forfeited to the city may
be sold, following notice, and without appraisal, at a public auction to the
highest bidder for cash, upon the recommendation of the Director of Public
Safety.
   (C)   In accordance with state law, there is hereby established the Law
Enforcement Trust Fund. All money and the proceeds of the sale of other
property forfeited to the city pursuant to state law or pursuant to federal law
and required to be used for law enforcement purposes, except as may be required
by law to be disposed of in another manner, shall be credited to the Law
Enforcement Trust Fund.
   (D)   If property forfeited to the city is sold pursuant to division (B)
hereof, the proceeds of the sale shall be disposed of in the following order:
      (1)   To the payment of the costs incurred in the forfeiture proceedings
pursuant to state law;
      (2)   To the payment of the balance due on any security interest
preserved pursuant to state law;
      (3)   To the payment of any costs incurred by the Police Department in
connection with the storage, maintenance, security and forfeiture of the
property; and
      (4)   To the Law Enforcement Trust Fund.
   (E)   Moneys deposited in the Law Enforcement Trust Fund shall be used in
conformance with the revised written internal control policy of the city’s
Police Department, a copy of which is attached to original Ordinance 11-99,
passed January 19, 1999, and made a part thereof as if fully rewritten therein.
(Ord. 37-92, passed 4-6-1992; Ord. 11-99, passed 1-19-1999)
CHAPTER 242:  FIRE DEPARTMENT
Section
242.01   Composition
242.02   Rescue Squad
242.03   Accidental death and dismemberment and disability insurance
242.04   Staffing; classification
Cross-reference:
   Appointments of full-time firemen, see
CHTR. Art. V, Sec. 9(e)
   Bureau of Fire Prevention, see
Chapter 1620
   Composition; appointments, see
CHTR. Art. V, Sec. 5(a)
   Emergency services outside municipality, see §
240.01
   Fire Department Operating Fund, see §
236.14
   Uniform allowances, see §
264.14
§ 242.01  COMPOSITION.
   The Fire Department of the city shall consist of a Fire Chief, an Assistant
Fire Chief and such other officers and personnel as Council determines from
time to time.
(Ord. 11-83, passed 3-21-1983; Ord. 28-06, passed 3-6-2006) 
§ 242.02  RESCUE SQUAD.
   (A)   There is hereby established a charge, to be consistent with the usual
and customary charge amount set forth by the Federal Medicare Program and to be
determined by the Fire Chief, for each transporting run made by the Rescue
Squad which is under the supervision of the Fire Department.
   (B)   Every person using the services of the Rescue Squad or the guardian of
such person shall be liable for the payment of such charge unless waived by the
Fire Chief.
   (C)   The city will provide ambulance emergency squad services in exchange
for an assignment of insurance company proceeds available to the user, whether
a resident or nonresident, provided that the user shall be responsible to pay
any amount of the cost of said services in excess of the insurance payments
received.
   (D)   The Mayor is authorized to enter into an agreement with a company that
will provide electronic claims filing systems for the purpose of collecting
insurance proceeds indicated in division (C) hereof.
(Ord. 13-77, passed 2-21-1977; Ord. 46-80, passed 5-5-1980; Ord. 72-86, passed
7-14-1986; Ord. 150-90, passed 10-15-1990; Ord. 146-97, passed 9-15-1997; Ord.
28-06, passed 3-6-2006)
§ 242.03  ACCIDENTAL DEATH AND DISMEMBERMENT AND DISABILITY INSURANCE.
   (A)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized to make payments on
behalf of the Fire Department members to the Ohio State Firemen’s Association
for the premiums for accidental death and dismemberment and disability
insurance.
   (B)   The total premium paid by the city shall not exceed $3,000 per year.
(Ord. 10-79, passed 2-5-1979; Ord. 28-06, passed 3-6-2006)
§ 242.04  STAFFING; CLASSIFICATION.
   The Fire Department shall employ and be staffed by employees classified in
the following classifications, provided that there shall be no greater number
of employees employed in any one classification than specified herein.
 
Classification (Job Title) Maximum No. of Employees
Fire Chief             1
Assistant Chief        1
Lieutenants            4
Full-time firefighters 24
Full-time Secretary    1
Part-time firefighters 20
Part-time Secretary    1
 
(Ord. 217-98, passed 11-16-1998; Ord. 193-02, passed 12-2-2002; Ord. 52-05,
passed 5-2-2005; Ord. 28-06, passed 3-6-2006; Ord. 8-2017, passed 5-1-2017)
CHAPTER 244:  POLICE DEPARTMENT
Section
244.01   Jail guards
244.02   Correction Officer
244.03   Police Dispatcher Clerk Jail Guard
244.04   Supervisor of Dispatchers
244.05   Age limits for original appointments
244.06   Personnel; duties; hours
244.07   Bureaus; other personnel
244.08   Auxiliary Unit
244.09   General regulations
244.10   Unscheduled absences and manpower shortages
244.11   Secretary to Chief
244.12   Full-time Records Clerk
Cross-reference:
   Assaulting police dog or horse, see §
642.08
   Composition; appointments, see
CHTR. Art. V, § 5(a)
   COPS FAST Grant Fund, see §
236.16
   Emergency services outside municipality, see §
240.01
   Rules, see
CHTR. Art. V, § 5(b)
   Uniform allowances, see §
264.14
§ 244.01  JAIL GUARDS.
   (A)   The Chief of the Department of Police is hereby authorized to hire
guards, subject to the approval of the Director of Public Safety, to guard and
protect prisoners lodged in the jail cell block in the Police Department
quarters in the City Hall when the need arises.
   (B)   Such guards shall be subject to call at any time and shall only work
such hours as designated by the Chief of Police.
(Ord. 78-73, passed 12-3-1973)
§ 244.02  CORRECTION OFFICER.
   (A)   There is hereby established in and for the city the position of
Correction Officer in the Police Department, in such numbers as Council shall
determine.
   (B)   Correction Officers shall be appointed by the Mayor pursuant to the
City Charter.
   (C)   Correction Officers shall perform such duties as are contained in the
job descriptions on file with the Police Department.
(Ord. 170-98, passed 9-21-1998)
§ 244.03  POLICE DISPATCHER CLERK JAIL GUARD.
   (A)   There is hereby established the position of Police Dispatcher Clerk
Jail Guard, which office shall be under the supervision of the Mayor. The Mayor
shall, subject to the rules and regulations of the Civil Service Commission,
employ a Police Dispatcher Clerk Jail Guard.
   (B)   The compensation for such position shall be established and included
in the city pay ordinance and approved by Council.
   (C)   The Civil Service Commission shall set forth the duties of the Police
Dispatcher Clerk Jail Guard and shall include the essential knowledge, ability,
skills and qualifications required of applicants.
(Ord. 48-74, passed 4-17-1974; Ord. 5-75, passed 1-6-1975)
§ 244.04  SUPERVISOR OF DISPATCHERS.
   (A)   There is hereby established the position of Supervisor of Dispatchers
in the city.
   (B)   (1)   The Supervisor of Dispatchers shall assume all of the duties of
supervision of the dispatchers in the city and shall report to the Police
Lieutenant. He or she shall evaluate and develop subordinates and perform all
usual supervisory functions. He or she shall maintain accurate records for
payroll, police records, audits to CRIS, LEADS and NCIC; shall be the
Department’s 911 PSAP Manager; and shall be responsible for forwarding all
computer entries of the Mayor’s Court to the Bureau of Motor Vehicles in
Columbus, Ohio.
      (2)   He or she shall train all new dispatchers by ensuring that they
perform in accordance with proper Police Department procedures. He or she shall
provide all necessary paperwork to the appropriate court officials and Law
Director. He or she shall manage the ordering and stocking of supplies for the
Police Department.
      (3)   He or she shall be responsible for jail custodian duties, including
the ordering and stocking of food and supplies for prisoner meals. He or she
shall control and maintain all prisoner work release programs and related
accounts receivable records. He or she shall assume the duty of dispatcher if
needed.
   (C)   The Supervisor of Dispatchers shall be compensated as provided from
time to time by Council and shall receive such benefits as are payable to
members of the Police Department as otherwise provided in this Code of
Ordinances.
(Ord. 45-91, passed 6-17-1991)
§ 244.05  AGE LIMITS FOR ORIGINAL APPOINTMENTS.
   A person 21 years old or older may receive an original appointment to the
Police Department, provided he or she meets all the other requirements provided
for by the Civil Service Commission, the ordinances of the city and the laws of
the state.
(Ord. 74-82, passed 12-27-1982)
§ 244.06  PERSONNEL; DUTIES; HOURS.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall be under the direction of the Director of
Public Safety. The Chief of Police shall be the executive head of the Police
Department. In his or her absence from duty or incapacity, the next ranking
member of the Police Department shall act as Chief of Police. He or she shall
be subject to call to duty at all times and shall be on active duty 40 hours
each week.
   (B)   The Lieutenant of Police shall be on active duty 40 hours each week
and be subject to call to duty at all times.
   (C)   The Sergeants of Police shall be subject to call to duty at all times.
   (D)   Patrol officers shall be subject to duty at all times and shall be
classified as follows:
      (1)   Patrol officer First Class - Patrol officers serving more than two
years;
      (2)   Patrol officer Second Class - Patrol officers serving from one year
to two years; and
      (3)   Patrol officer Third Class - Patrol officers serving their 12-month
probationary period before permanent appointment.
   (E)   The policewoman shall be subject to call to duty at all times.
   (F)   There shall be part-time patrol officers.
   (G)   There shall be a Police Matron Clerk.
   (H)   There shall be dispatchers.
   (I)   There shall be school traffic guards.
   (J)   There shall be auxiliary police.
   (K)   There shall be a Police Dispatcher Clerk Jail Guard.
   (L)   There shall be a Dog Warden.
   (M)   The number of personnel for each position provided in this section
shall be determined by Council.
§ 244.07  BUREAUS; OTHER PERSONNEL.
   In addition to the personnel provided in §
244.06, the Police Department shall consist of a Detective Bureau (comprised of
one supervisory officer and an additional police officer), a Juvenile Bureau
and such other bureaus and personnel, and in such numbers, as Council
determines from time to time.
(Ord. 65-84, passed 9-17-1984; Ord. 88-163, passed 10-3-1988)
§ 244.08  AUXILIARY UNIT.
   (A)   An Auxiliary Police Unit is hereby established in the city.
   (B)   The Director of Public Safety shall direct the organization of such
Auxiliary Police Unit, shall prescribe all rules and regulations for the
administration, control, training and conduct of such Unit, and shall perform
all necessary administrative acts relating to the Unit.
   (C)   Members of the Auxiliary Police Unit are not eligible for membership
in the Police Relief and Pension Funds under state law, nor are they in the
classed civil service of the city.
   (D)   The Mayor is hereby authorized as otherwise provided by law to employ
up to 15 auxiliary police officers in the Auxiliary Police Unit in the city.
   (E)   The Director of Public Safety shall appoint an administrative head of
the Auxiliary Police Unit. Said administrative head’s rank shall be that of
Captain.
   (F)   All auxiliary police officers shall receive $250 as an initial
allowance for uniforms. Thereafter, each auxiliary police officer shall receive
$100 as an annual uniform maintenance allowance.
   (G)   The administrative head of the auxiliary police shall be granted a
yearly salary as compensation for time spent on the necessary scheduling and
related paperwork in connection with the operation of the Auxiliary Police
Unit. Said salary shall be as determined from time to time by Council.
(Ord. 6-68, passed 2-19-1968; Ord. 75-90, passed 6-4-1990; Ord. 27-00, passed
2-22-2000; Ord. 142-00, passed 9-18-2000)
§ 244.09  GENERAL REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Definitions. Wherever the words “Force” and “Police Force” appear in
this section, they shall be interpreted to mean all police officers, including
the Chief of Police.
   (B)   General Duties. The primary purpose of an efficient Police Force is to
preserve peace and good order, to protect life and property and to prevent
crime. It is the duty of the Police Force of the city at all times of the day
or night, and the members of such Force are so authorized, to especially
preserve the public peace, prevent crime, detect offenders, suppress riots,
mobs and insurrections, disperse unlawful or dangerous assemblages and
assemblages which obstruct the free passage of public streets, sidewalks, parks
or places; to protect the rights of persons and property, guard the public
health, preserve order at elections and all public meetings and assemblages; to
regulate, direct, control and restrict the movement of all animals, motor
vehicles and other vehicles on streets and bridges and in parks and public
places; to protect human life and health; to remove all nuisances in the public
streets and highways; to provide proper police attendance at fires; to assist,
advise and protect strangers and travelers in public amusement and all places
having a license to carry on any business or practice; and to enforce and
prevent the violation of all laws and ordinances in force in the city. For the
purpose of effecting such results, it is the duty of each member of the Police
Force to detect and aid in securing the conviction of all violators of the law.
Rules cannot be made to meet every case that may arise; therefore every officer
on the Force is expected to study the laws of the state and ordinances of the
city.
   (C)   General Behavior of Police Officers. A police officer should possess
good judgment, be brave and fearless, honest, sober, neat in appearance and
attire, obey and respect orders from his or her superiors and be courteous to
residents. A police officer should avoid any chance of complaint and endeavor
to earn the good opinion of the best residents; be willing to learn and execute
orders promptly and with good judgment; uphold and respect all decisions made
by the administration; and avoid causing friction and animosity among other
members of the Force and administration. A police officer should be punctual in
reporting for duty, court and Council meetings when requested by his or her
superior officer. A police officer should make out written reports
intelligently. These reports should be concise and as accurate as possible,
giving full details, with correct and full information and descriptions of all
parties concerned. A police officer, when attending court, shall give his or
her utmost attention and respect towards the court at all times. Evidence
should be given with the strictest accuracy, confining himself or herself to
the case then before the court and neither suppressing nor overstating the
slightest circumstance with a view toward favoring any person, or from ill will
to either side. When cross examined, a police officer shall answer with the
same readiness and civility as when giving evidence in support of a charge.
Smoking or chewing of tobacco is prohibited while the court is in session.
   (D)   Testimony in Civil Cases. A police officer shall not testify in any
civil case without legally being summoned to do so and unless he or she has
received permission or orders to do so from his or her superior officer.
   (E)   Supervision; Special Orders. The Mayor shall have general supervision
over the Police Force. The Chief of Police shall be the executive head of the
Police Force under the Mayor. All other employees of the Police Department
shall be responsible to the Chief of Police and, in his or her absence, to the
Lieutenant of Police. All special orders of major importance issued by the
Mayor or Council for execution by the Police Department and not contained in
this section shall be made in writing to the Chief of Police. If such orders
are not promptly and judiciously executed, the Mayor shall reassign such orders
to other members of the Police Department as he or she may deem best.
   (F)   Responsibilities of Lieutenant. The Lieutenant of Police shall keep
and prepare all police records, files, and the like, in a careful, orderly and
proper manner, and shall file any and all necessary reports with the proper
officials or departments.
   (G)   Following School Buses. All school buses operated on the main highways
shall be followed by a member of the Police Department when it is possible.
   (H)   Liquor Dispensing; Places. Loitering in any establishment where
alcoholic beverages are sold will not be tolerated while on duty. Visits made
in a city owned police car to any establishment dispensing alcoholic beverages,
except those within the city limits while on official police business, are
prohibited and shall constitute cause for dismissal. If any member of the Force
should desire to drink intoxicating beverages occasionally when off duty, he or
she should do so with discretion. Drunkenness or being under the influence of
liquor on the part of any member of the Force while on duty is positively
prohibited and will constitute cause for dismissal.
   (I)   Police Chief. The Police Chief shall obey all orders of the Mayor and
all rules and regulations of the Police Force which have been adopted by
Council, enforce all city ordinances and comply with the duties assigned to him
or her by the Mayor and city ordinances. He or she shall set an example for
sobriety, skill, discretion, industry and promptness to the officers under his
or her command and shall at all times appear neatly attired and clean in his or
her person and equipment. He or she must carefully study and thoroughly
understand the rules and regulations of the Police Force and note every case of
misconduct or neglect of duty of subordinates and report the same to the Mayor.
   (J)   Residents’ Lawful Business; Religious or Political Discussions. All
members of the Police Force are prohibited from influencing or attempting to
influence, by threat or otherwise, the lawful business of any resident of the
city. Members of the Force shall avoid all religious or political discussions
in the City Hall. They shall not take part, interfere in or make use of the
influence of their office in elections, but may quietly exercise their right of
sufferage.
   (K)   Police Insignia, and the Like. Whenever any member of the Police Force
loses his or her shield or other insignia of his or her office or any other
property of the city, he or she shall immediately make a report of such loss to
the Mayor and shall, within 30 days, reimburse the city for such loss;
provided, however, that if such loss is not caused by any carelessness or
negligence on the part of such member, he or she shall not be required to
reimburse the city for such loss. In case of death, resignation or dismissal of
any member of the Police Force, all city property shall immediately be returned
to the Mayor, who shall give a receipt for the same. All members of the Police
Force shall be careful in the use of all city property, whether fixed or
movable. Roughness and carelessness is not to be tolerated.
   (L)   Police Cars. Blankets, stretchers, double handcuffs, a fire
extinguisher and first-aid equipment shall be kept in police cars at all times.
All cars used for police purposes must be equipped with a siren and markings in
accordance with state regulations. It shall be the responsibility of the Police
Chief to see that the police cars are in good running condition at all times,
which includes having them greased and with the oil changed at regular
intervals, having the wheel alignment checked periodically, having an adequate
gas supply and keeping the car clean. The police cars shall stay within the
city limits unless otherwise directed by the Mayor, with the following
exceptions: emergency hospital service; emergency medical service; emergency
police service requested by neighboring municipalities; and servicing the cars.
Passengers, with the exception of city officials and emergency service
previously mentioned, are prohibited from riding in police cars. The police
cars shall be used only for police service which excludes pushing or towing of
other vehicles.
   (M)   Police at Fires. A member of the Police Force, upon discovering a
fire, shall at once turn in an alarm and remain to direct the firefighters
arriving. He or she shall keep the adjacent streets clear. A member of the
Police Force while on duty shall attend all fires when possible to direct
traffic and protect property, life and the like.
   (N)   Target Practice; Revolvers. The Chief of Police and all police
officers should attend target practice. The Chief of Police shall make all
arrangements for such target practice, whether in or outside the city, with the
approval of the Mayor. All members of the Force shall acquaint themselves with
the handling and working of their revolvers, see that they are clean and ready
for use and carry them at all times while on duty.
   (O)   First-Aid. Each member of the Police Force shall be capable of
rendering first-aid in cases of emergency.
   (P)   Police Service at Public Activities. If it should be deemed necessary
that police service is essential on special occasions at public functions,
church services and the like, some member of the Police Force shall serve in
that capacity upon approval of the Mayor.
   (Q)   Attending Council Meetings. The Chief of Police shall attend all
regular Council meetings. In cases of emergency he or she may be excused by the
Mayor. However, he or she is expected to remain at Council meetings at least
until all Council committees have made their reports and he or she has made an
oral summary of the Police Department activities. It shall be the
responsibility of the Chief of Police to furnish the Mayor with odometer
readings of the city police cars at each Council meeting.
   (R)   Jail Guards. Any member of the Police Force finding it necessary to
place his or her party in jail because of the absence of sufficient bond to
guarantee his or her appearance in court, must obtain a guard before leaving
the building.
   (S)   Accidents. Any member of the Police Force who is called to an
accident, whether on or off duty, should respond at once. Accidents that have
resulted in personal injury should be given special care in that the injured
parties should be made comfortable while waiting for an ambulance or
transportation to a hospital. All pertinent facts should be carefully obtained
and recorded for further authentic use. It shall be the responsibility of the
police officer handling the accident to see that all broken glass or other
obstacles injurious to automobile tires are removed from the highway.
§ 244.10  UNSCHEDULED ABSENCES AND MANPOWER SHORTAGES.
   When unscheduled absences and manpower shortages in the Police Department
are filled, they shall be filled with preference given to full-time certified
personnel.
(Ord. 39-85, passed 6-3-1985)
§ 244.11  SECRETARY TO CHIEF.
   (A)   The position of Secretary to the Chief of Police of the city is hereby
created.
   (B)   The duties of the Secretary to the Chief of Police shall consist of
those duties contained in the job description attached to original Ordinance
27-92, passed March 30, 1992, as Exhibit “A” and made a part thereof as if
fully rewritten therein.
(Ord.27-92, passed 3-30-1992)
§ 244.12  FULL-TIME RECORDS CLERK.
   (A)   The position of full-time Records Clerk is hereby established in the
city’s Police Department.
   (B)   The duties of the full-time Records Clerk shall consist of those
duties contained in the job description attached to original Ordinance 177-03,
passed December 1, 2003, as Exhibit “A” and made a part thereof as if fully
rewritten therein.
   (C)   Said full-time position of Records Clerk for the Police Department
shall be classified as Level 4.
(Ord. 111-03, passed 8-18-2003; Ord. 177-03, passed 12-1-2003)
CHAPTER 248:  DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SERVICE
Section
248.01   Appointment of Director
248.02   Composition
248.03   Supervisor of Maintenance
248.04   Full-time employees
248.05   Part-time employees
248.06   Full-time Secretary
248.07   Part-time Municipal Environmental Maintenance Specialist
248.08   Part-time Supervisor
248.09   Part-time Specialty Clerk
Cross-reference:
   Department of Public Service, see
CHTR. Art. V, Sec. 6
   Division of Engineering, see
Chapter 250
   Maintenance of recreation areas, see §
256.03
   Recreation maintenance specialist, see §
256.13
§ 248.01  APPOINTMENT OF DIRECTOR.
   The Mayor is hereby directed to appoint a qualified elector to fill the
office of Director of Public Service on a full-time basis, subject to the
approval of Council, as of January 1, 1973.
(Ord. 88-72, passed 12-18-1972)
§ 248.02  COMPOSITION.
   The Department of Public Service shall be staffed according to the following
staffing plan:
 
Position Number of Employees Authorized
Supervision
Foreman                   1
Assistant Foreman         3
Facilities Manager        1
Pump Station Operator     1
Sewer Division
Operator                  1
Maintenance Workers       3
Building Maintenance Division
General Mechanics         3
Maintenance Workers       4
Custodian                 4
Streets, Construction, Maintenance Division
Automotive Mechanic
Operator                  (20 combined)
Construction Maintenance
Maintenance Workers
    Part-Time Maintenanc12
    Part-Time Seasonal  12
    Part-Time Custodian 4
 
(Ord. 7-00, passed 1-3-2000)
§ 248.03  SUPERVISOR OF MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   There is hereby created the position of Supervisor of Maintenance in
the Department of Public Service.
   (B)   (1)   The Supervisor of Maintenance shall have charge of all public
works and construction thereof and of all inspections in connection therewith.
He or she shall be responsible for the construction, improvement, repair and
maintenance of streets, sidewalks, lanes and bridges; of sewers, sewerage
systems, drains, ditches and culvert streams; and of all public places
belonging to the city or dedicated to public use.
      (2)   He or she shall manage all public utilities of the city supported
wholly or in part by taxation and shall enforce all obligations of privately
owned or operated public utilities enforceable by the city.
      (3)   He or she shall have charge of the making and preserving of all
surveys, maps, plans, drawings and estimates for public work; the cleaning,
resurfacing, repairing, sprinkling and lighting of streets and public places;
the collection and disposal of waste; and the preservation of all property
belonging to the city and pertaining to the functions thereof.
      (4)   He or she shall perform such other duties as directed by the
Director of Public Service.
(Ord. 110-77, passed 12-19-1977)
§ 248.04  FULL-TIME EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   The Foreman, the Assistant Foreman, the Pump Station Operator and the
Facilities Manager shall be compensated as otherwise provided in this Code of
Ordinances and shall receive such benefits as may otherwise be provided in this
Code of Ordinances.
   (B)   The automotive mechanics, operators, construction maintenance workers,
environmental maintenance workers, general mechanics, custodians and
maintenance workers, shall be compensated according to, and shall enjoy such
benefits as provided in, the collective bargaining agreement between the city
and the Communication Workers of America.
(Ord. 7-00, passed 1-3-2000)
§ 248.05  PART-TIME EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   Part-time employees in the Department of Public Service shall not be
entitled to any additional benefits other than the payroll compensation
provided for by Council and shall be limited to performing services for no more
than 35 hours per week.
   (B)   Notwithstanding anything else contained in this section, any part-time
custodian employed as of the effective date of this section (Ordinance 183-97,
passed November 24, 1997) shall receive compensation for all holidays listed
below. Payment shall be based on a four-hour day, provided that upon
termination as a part-time custodian, this exception shall abate. This section
shall not be construed to grant the aforesaid vacation compensation to any
part-time employee hired subsequent to the effective date of this section:
      (1)   New Year’s Day;
      (2)   Martin Luther King Day;
      (3)   Thanksgiving Day;
      (4)   Employee Birthday;
      (5)   Good Friday;
      (6)   Memorial Day;
      (7)   Christmas Day;
      (8)   Independence Day;
      (9)   Labor Day; and
      (10)   Presidents’ Day.
   (C)   Compensation for part-time maintenance and part-time seasonal workers
shall be as established from time to time by Council.
(Ord. 183-97, passed 11-24-1997; Ord. 7-00, passed 1-3-2000)
§ 248.06  FULL-TIME SECRETARY.
   (A)   The position of full-time Service Department Secretary is hereby
established in the city.
   (B)   The full-time Service Department Secretary shall be paid at a rate to
be determined from time to time by the Council, plus benefits as otherwise
provided in this Code of Ordinances.
   (C)   The duties of the full-time Service Department Secretary shall include
the provision of clerical support to the Service Director, the Service
Department Foreman, the Broadview Center Facility, the Sewer Department Pump
Station Operator and the Staff Engineer; coordination of Service Department
purchases; vehicle and equipment inventory; provision of clerical support at
meetings attended by the Service Director; scheduling, supervising, training
and acting as first substitute for all part-time receptionists; acting as
Secretary to the Director of Public Service; and acting as back-up to the Clerk
of Council, as needed.
(Ord. 44-98, passed 3-2-1998)
§ 248.07  PART-TIME MUNICIPAL ENVIRONMENTAL MAINTENANCE SPECIALIST.
   (A)   The position of part-time Municipal Environmental Maintenance
Specialist in the Department of Public Service is hereby established.
   (B)   The duties of the part-time Municipal Environmental Maintenance
Specialist shall consist of the duties of the full-time Municipal Environmental
Maintenance Specialist as delineated in Ordinance 55-92, passed June 16, 1992.
   (C)   Chapter 264, as amended, is hereby amended to reflect the
establishment of the position of part-time Municipal Environmental Maintenance
Specialist in the Department of Public Service of the city.
   (D)   The part-time Municipal Environmental Maintenance Specialist shall be
compensated as determined by the Mayor from time to time within limits
established by Council from time to time.
   (E)   Notwithstanding division (D) hereof, whenever the part-time Municipal
Environmental Maintenance Specialist is called to work on an emergency basis,
as defined by the city, and at a time when he or she is not regularly scheduled
to report for work, he or she shall receive a minimum of four hours of work or
four hours of pay at the applicable rate of pay.
(Ord. 41-96, passed 4-29-1996; Ord. 137-96, passed 11-4-1996)
§ 248.08  PART-TIME SUPERVISOR.
   (A)   Effective July 1, 1995, the position of a part-time Supervisor in the
Public Service Department is hereby established.
   (B)   Said position shall be classified as an exempt position for purposes
of all applicable laws relating to benefits.
   (C)   The duties of the part-time Supervisor shall be as follows:
      (1)   Generally. Provide supervisory assistance to the Service Director,
the Foreman and the Recycling Coordinator;
      (2)   Daily Duties.
         (a)   Set daily and weekly schedules for the mechanics, the custodian
and Service Department recreation workers;
         (b)   Order materials and supplies for jobs being performed by the
mechanics, custodian and Service Department recreation workers;
         (c)   Provide supervision to road crews or rubbish and recycling crews
if the Foreman or the Recycling Coordinator is absent; and
         (d)   Provide periodic written reports.
      (3)   Suggested Procedure.
         (a)   Set up written communications with mechanics, the custodian and
recreation employees, i.e., provide an in and out message box for each; and
         (b)   Check the completed jobs of the mechanics for completeness and
quality.
   (D)   The work schedule of the part-time Supervisor will be as determined by
the Director of Public Service, based upon availability.
   (E)   The part-time Supervisor shall be compensated at an hourly rate as
determined from time to time by Council. The part-time Supervisor shall not be
entitled to any other benefits by virtue of his or her employment as part-time
Supervisor in the Department of Public Service.
   (F)   This position shall be abolished within six months of the date that
the Supervisor position is staffed full time.
(Ord. 106-95, passed 7-17-1995; Ord. 122-95, passed 8-21-1995)
§ 248.09  PART-TIME SPECIALTY CLERK.
   (A)   There is hereby established the position of part-time Specialty Clerk
in the Public Service Department.
   (B)   Compensation for the position of part-time Specialty Clerk shall be as
determined from time to time by Council.
(Ord. 105-00, passed 6-19-2000)
CHAPTER 250:  DIVISION OF ENGINEERING
Section
250.01   Full-time Clerical
250.02   Assistant Engineer
250.03   Authorized positions
Cross-reference:
   Authority of City Engineer re flood damage prevention, see §§
1314.20,
1314.21
   Authority of City Engineer re grade levels, see
Chapter 1316
   Department of Public Service, see
Chapter 248;
CHTR. Art. V, § 6
   Fees for services of City Engineer, see §
1449.06
   Sewer inspections, see §§
1042.06 et seq.
Editor’s note:
   For specifications regarding the qualifications and duties of the Division
of Engineering, see Exhibit “A” attached to Ordinance No. 22-01 and Ordinance
No. 104-04, passed August 23, 2004. Copies of these ordinances are available
during business hours in the office of the City Clerk.
§ 250.01  FULL TIME CLERICAL.
   The position of full-time Engineering Clerical is hereby created.
(Ord. 63-06, passed 5-15-2006)
§ 250.02  ASSISTANT ENGINEER.
   (A)   The full-time position of Assistant Engineer is hereby created.
   (B)   Said position shall be appointed by the Mayor.
(Ord. 69-08, passed 5-19-2008)
§ 250.03  AUTHORIZED POSITIONS.
 
Position                                          Number Authorized
Assistant Engineer                                1
City Engineer                                     1
Engineer 1                                        1
Engineering Administrative Assistant              1
Part-time Inspectors and/or Secretaries as needed 1-4
 
(Ord. 147-08, passed 10-20-2008; Ord. 05-2018, passed 2-19-2018)
CHAPTER 256:  RECREATION DEPARTMENT
Section
256.01   Composition
256.02   Activities and facilities
256.03   Maintenance of buildings and grounds
256.04   Capital improvements
256.05   Finances
256.06   (Reserved)
256.07   Recreation Director
256.08   Assistant Recreation Director
256.09   Park/Athletic Manager
256.10   Part-time concession stand workers
256.11   Grounds Crew Chief
256.12   Purchasing Agent
256.13   Recreation Maintenance Specialist
256.14   Part-time Program Director
256.15   Permanent part-time Recreation Coordinator
256.16   Full-time Clerical Assistant
256.17   Instructional services
256.18   Full-time Receptionist
256.19   Part-time Head Lifeguard
256.20   Recreation center membership rates
256.21   City Recreation Center membership for employees
Cross-reference:
   Department of Finance, see
Chapter 236
   Parks and Recreation Advisory Board, see
Chapter 276;
CHTR. Art. V, § 10
   Parks and recreation areas, see
Chapter 1062
   Recreation fees, see §
1448.04
§ 256.01  COMPOSITION.
   (A)   The Recreation Department shall be staffed according to the following
staffing plan:
 
Position Number of Employees Authorized
Administrative Assistant             1
Aquatics Manager                     1
Full-time Receptionist               1
Maintenance Workers                  4
Park/Athletic Manager                1
Part-time Building Supervision Staff 6
Part-time Concession Workers         15
Part-time Fitness Center Supervisors 6
Part-time Groundskeepers             12
Part-time Head Lifeguards            3
Part-time Lifeguards                 30
Part-time Program Director           1
Part-time Recreation Coordinator     2
Part-time Recreation Receptionists   10
Part-time Water Safety Instructors   30
Recreation Manager                   1
 
   (B)   The wages and benefits for the Administrative Assistant, the Aquatics
Manager, the Recreation Manager, the Park/Athletic Manager, the full-time
Receptionist, the part-time Program Director, the part- time Recreation
Coordinator, the part-time concession workers, part-time groundskeepers, part-
time water safety instructors, part-time head lifeguards, part-time lifeguards,
part-time fitness center supervisors, part- time building supervision staff,
and part-time Recreation Receptionists shall be as otherwise provided from time
to time by ordinance.
(Ord. 6-00, passed 1-3-2000; Ord. 143-01, passed 11-5-2001; Ord. 31-02, passed
2-19-2002; Ord. 133-02, passed 8-19-2002; Ord. 28-03, passed 4-7-2003; Ord.
118-04, passed 9-20-2004; Ord. 122-06, passed 9-5-2006; Ord. 29-08, passed 2-
19-2008)
§ 256.02  ACTIVITIES AND FACILITIES.
   (A)   All activities in the name of recreation shall be under the direction
and supervision of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board.
   (B)   The Board shall be responsible for scheduling the facilities and
setting the fees for use of the Recreation Hall and recreational facilities.
   (C)   The Mayor shall be notified of the time, place and manner of the
proposed use of the recreation facilities prior to such use, in writing, by the
Director of Recreation, or his or her duly authorized agent.
(Res. 72-14, passed 4-3-1972; Ord. 104-98, passed 7-27-1998)
§ 256.03  MAINTENANCE OF BUILDINGS AND GROUNDS.
   (A)   The city shall be responsible for the maintenance of the building and
the grounds of the recreation area.
   (B)   The Recreation Department shall be responsible for lining of fields
and cleaning of the Recreation Hall.
(Res. 72-14, passed 4-3-1972)
§ 256.04  CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Capital improvements shall be a cooperative effort of the city and the
Recreation Department in accordance with law.
   (B)   No capital improvement shall be undertaken without the approval of the
Mayor and Council in accordance with law.
(Res. 72-14, passed 4-3-1972)
§ 256.05  FINANCES.
   (A)   The Director of Recreation shall prepare a budget for the activities
contemplated for the ensuing year by January 31 of such year.
   (B)   The Ways and Means Committee of the Recreation Department shall strive
to raise funds to supplement the recreational budget allocated by Council.
   (C)   The moneys raised by the Ways and Means Committee of the Recreation
Department shall be deposited in a special Parks and Recreation Advisory Board
account of the city under the jurisdiction of the Director of Finance.
   (D)   Purchases shall be made by purchase orders issued by the Director of
Finance certifying that the funds are available for such purchase, upon request
upon a purchase requisition signed by the Director and the Treasurer of the
Parks and Recreation Advisory Board.
   (E)   Disbursements from the Recreation Fund by the Director of Finance
shall be made only when, as and if such bills are approved by the Director and
the Treasurer of the Parks and Recreation Advisory Board in writing and such
purchases were made pursuant to a properly executed purchase requisition and a
properly executed purchase order.
   (F)   The Director of Finance shall prepare a monthly statement of the
recreation account by the fifteenth day of each month, showing the transactions
and the balance as of the last day of the previous month.
   (G)   All moneys deposited in the special Parks and Recreation Advisory
Board account of the city shall be used for recreation purposes only.
(Res. 72-14, passed 4-3-1972; Ord. 104-98, passed 7-27-1998)
§ 256.06  (RESERVED)
§ 256.07  RECREATION DIRECTOR.
   (A)   The position of full-time Recreation Director is hereby established in
the city.
   (B)   The duties of the Recreation Director shall be those duties delineated
in Exhibit “A” attached to original Ordinance 138-96, passed November 4, 1996,
and made a part hereof as if fully rewritten herein.
(Ord. 138-96, passed 11-4-1996)
§ 256.08  ASSISTANT RECREATION DIRECTOR.
   (A)   There is hereby established the position of Assistant Recreation
Director in the city.
   (B)   The salary to be paid to the Assistant Recreation Director shall be as
provided in the annual compensation ordinance of the city.
   (C)   The duties of the Assistant Recreation Director shall be as described
in Exhibit “A” attached to original Ordinance 8-95, passed January 17, 1995,
and incorporated herein by reference.
(Ord. 8-95, passed 1-17-1995)
§ 256.09  PARK/ATHLETIC MANAGER.
   (A)   There is hereby established the full-time position of Park/Athletic
Manager in the city.
   (B)   The duties of the Park/Athletic Manager shall be those duties
delineated in Exhibit “A” attached to original Ordinance 27-03, passed April 7,
2003, and made a part hereof as if fully rewritten herein.
(Ord. 27-03, passed 4-7-2003)
§ 256.10  PART-TIME CONCESSION STAND WORKERS.
   (A)   The position of part-time concession stand worker is hereby
established in the city.
   (B)   The Mayor is hereby authorized to hire up to 15 part-time concession
stand workers per season.
   (C)   The compensation for part-time concession stand workers shall be as
established from time to time by Council.
(Ord. 66-95, passed 5-15-1995; Ord. 85-98, passed 5-18-1998)
§ 256.11  GROUNDS CREW CHIEF.
   (A)   The position of Grounds Crew Chief is hereby established in the city.
   (B)   The Grounds Crew Chief shall directly supervise the activities of all
Recreation Department groundskeepers and shall report directly to the
Recreation Director.
   (C)   The Grounds Crew Chief shall be compensated at a rate determined from
time to time by Council.
(Ord. 65-95, passed 5-15-1995)
§ 256.12  PURCHASING AGENT.
   (A)   There is hereby established the position of Purchasing Agent in the
Recreation Department of the city.
   (B)   The Purchasing Agent shall be appointed by the Mayor upon the
recommendation of the Recreation Director.
   (C)   The Purchasing Agent shall perform such duties as are described in
Exhibit “A” attached to original Ordinance 67-96, passed 6-17-1996, and made a
part hereof as if fully rewritten herein.
   (D)   Compensation for the Purchasing Agent shall be as established from
time to time by Council.
(Ord. 67-96, passed 6-17-1996)
§ 256.13  RECREATION MAINTENANCE SPECIALIST.
   (A)   There is hereby established the position of Recreation Maintenance
Specialist in the city.
   (B)   The Recreation Maintenance Specialist shall perform such duties as are
described in Exhibit “A” attached to original Ordinance 23-97, passed March 31,
1997, and made a part hereof as if fully rewritten herein.
   (C)   The Recreation Maintenance Specialist will be a Service Department
employee. The Recreation Maintenance Specialist shall be compensated according
to, and shall enjoy such benefits as are provided in, the collective bargaining
agreement between the city and the Communications Workers of America.
(Ord. 23-97, passed 3-31-1997)
§ 256.14  PART-TIME PROGRAM DIRECTOR.
   The position of part-time Program Director in the Recreation Department is
hereby ratified as established in said Department. There shall be only one
Program Director. Compensation for the part-time Program Director shall be as
established from time to time by Council.
(Ord. 148-97, passed 9-15-1997)
§ 256.15  PERMANENT PART-TIME RECREATION COORDINATOR.
   (A)   The position of permanent part-time Recreation Coordinator is hereby
established in the Recreation Department.
   (B)   The part-time Recreation Coordinator shall be authorized to work no
more than 30 hours per week.
   (C)   Compensation for the part-time Recreation Coordinator shall be at the
discretion of the Mayor and considering the recommendation of the Recreation
Director.
(Ord. 32-98, passed 2-17-1998)
§ 256.16  FULL-TIME CLERICAL ASSISTANT.
   (A)   The position of full-time Clerical Assistant in the Recreation
Department is hereby established as a permanent position in the Recreation
Department.
   (B)   The full-time Clerical Assistant shall be categorized as a Level 4
employee for purposes of application of working conditions and benefits.
   (C)   The full-time Clerical Assistant for the Recreation Department shall
be paid as otherwise provided by ordinance.
(Ord. 62-98, passed 4-6-1998)
§ 256.17  INSTRUCTIONAL SERVICES.
   (A)   Subject to division (B) of this section, the Mayor is hereby
authorized to enter into agreements with various individuals from time to time
for the provision of recreation instructional services for programs in the
Recreation Department, including, but not limited to, aquatics, the Fitness
Center, gymnasium programs, arts and crafts programs, aerobics and dance, the
game room and other programs as delineated by the Recreation Director.
   (B)   The staffing ordinance of the Recreation Department shall be modified
to provide for up to 30 contracted instructors, the total compensation of which
shall not exceed the limits contained in division (D) hereof.
   (C)   Instructors shall be compensated according to the pay range ordinances
enacted by the city.
   (D)   Notwithstanding division (B) hereof, the total amount paid to
Recreation Department instructors in any given year shall not exceed the
appropriation therefor as otherwise determined by Council from time to time.
   (E)   Any agreement with a recreation instructor shall be approved as to
form by the Law Director.
(Ord. 68-99, passed 5-17-1999; Ord. 39-2018, passed 11-5-2018)
§ 256.18  FULL-TIME RECEPTIONIST.
   (A)   The position of full-time Receptionist is hereby established in the
Department of Parks and Recreation.
   (B)   Said position shall be classified as Level 4.
(Ord. 30-02, passed 2-19-2002)
§ 256.19  PART-TIME HEAD LIFEGUARD.
   (A)   Established. The position of part-time Head Lifeguard is hereby
established in the Department of Parks and Recreation.
   (B)   Qualifications. All qualified candidates must possess current American
Red Cross Water Safety Instructor and Lifeguard Instructor certifications.
Other certifications include Certified Pool Operator and Babysitting Instructor
(desired but not mandatory).
   (C)   Job Duties. Duties would include assisting Aquatics Manager in general
operation and maintenance of the facility. The Head Lifeguard would monitor
lifeguards and water safety instructors to assure strict compliance with all
policies and procedures. Other duties will include interviewing, scheduling,
skill testing, perform water tests, cleaning of the facility, and overseeing
the Learn-to-Swim Program.
   (D)   Pay Range: Part-time head lifeguards shall be compensated according to
the pay range ordinances enacted by the city.
(Ord. 132-02, passed 8-19-2002; Ord. 40-2018, passed 11-5-2018)
§ 256.20  RECREATION CENTER MEMBERSHIP RATES.
   (A)   Resident Membership.
 
                                        Yearly Monthly
Youth up to 18 years                    $105   $17
College student 18–23 years           $105   $17
Senior (60 years+) and veteran          $95    $15
Adult 19–59 years                     $210   $27
2 adults or single parent with children $335   $45
Family                                  $355   $47
 
   (B)   Nonresident Membership.
 
                                        Yearly Monthly
Youth up to 18 years                    $220   $27
College student 18–23 years           $220   $27
Senior (60 years+) and veteran          $200   $25
Adult 19–59 years                     $370   $48
2 adults or single parent with children $608   $69
Family                                  $640   $72
 
   (C)   Corporate Membership.*
 
                                        Yearly Monthly
Youth up to 18 years                    $170   $22
College student 18–23 years           $170   $22
Senior (60 years+) and veteran          $170   $20
Adult 19–59 years                     $280   $37
2 adults or single parent with children $450   $60
Family                                  $475   $63
 
*Corporate memberships are memberships for nonresidents who are employed by a
business located in the city. Applicant must provide a copy of a current pay
stub with employee name and business address at time of application and with
each renewal. Corporate members will receive all member benefits with an active
membership.
   (D)   Drop-In Fees.
 
                      Resident Nonresident
Toddler (2 and under) Free     Free
Youth (3–18)        $7       $9
Adult (19–59)       $8       $10
Senior (60 and over)  $6       $8
 
   (E)   Adjustments.
      (1)   The Recreation Director has the ability to adjust fees for
promotional periods to increase membership as needed.
      (2)   Current members will receive a 10% discount if renewing before
their expiration date.
      (3)   Current annual members receive one month free for referring a new
annual membership.
(Ord. 171-02, passed 10-21-2002; Ord. 130-04, passed 10-18-2004; Ord. 75-05,
passed 6-20-2005; Ord. 13-06, passed 2-6-2006; Ord. 19-06, passed 2-13-2006;
Ord. 35-07, passed 3-5-2007; Ord. 43-14, passed 10-6-2014; Ord. 13-15, passed
5-4-2015; Ord. 21-16, passed 2-22-2016; Ord. 20-2018, passed 5-21-2018)
§ 256.21  CITY RECREATION CENTER MEMBERSHIP FOR EMPLOYEES.
   (A)   (1)   All full-time employees of the city shall be permitted to obtain
a family or individual membership for the City Community and Recreation Center,
continuing through the duration of their employment.
      (2)   All part-time employees of the city shall be permitted to obtain an
individual membership for the City Community and Recreation Center, continuing
through the duration of their employment.
      (3)   The rate to be charged shall be as follows:
         (a)   Annual family rate:  $100; and
         (b)   Annual individual rate: $50.
      (3)   If said employee becomes voluntarily or involuntarily separated
from the city at any time during the term of said membership, membership shall
cease and the cost thereof shall be pro-rated in accordance with the beginning
date of the membership and the date of separation.
      (4)   Contractors are not considered to be employees of the city.
   (B)   All part-time nonresident employees of the city shall be permitted to
participate in all recreation activities of the city and to obtain a recreation
membership for the City Recreation Center at the same individual rates as
otherwise charged to full-time nonresident employees during the duration of
their employment. Family membership shall not be available to part-time
nonresident employees. If said nonresident employee becomes voluntarily or
involuntarily separated from the city at any time during the term of said
membership, membership shall cease and the cost thereof shall be pro-rated in
accordance with the beginning date of the membership and the date of
separation.
(Ord. 172-02, passed 10-21-2002; Ord. 23-16, passed 2-22-2016; Ord. 32-2018,
passed 10-1-2018)
CHAPTER 258:  HUMAN SERVICES DEPARTMENT
Section
258.01   Establishment
258.02   Mission statement
258.03   Appointment of Director; full-time position established
258.04   Compensation of Director
258.05   Powers and duties
258.06   Human Services Advisory Board
258.07   Human Services Administrative Assistant
Cross-reference:
   Authority to establish offices, see
CHTR. Art. V, Sec. 1
   Class B-5 Senior Citizen District, see
Chapter 1275
   Grant Administrator, see §
230.06
   Snow removal for senior citizens, see
Chapter 1028
Editor’s note:
   This chapter, previously a codification of Ordinance 21-85, passed April 15,
1985, was re-enacted in its entirety by Ordinance 33-86, passed May 5, 1986.
   Ordinance 15-93, passed February 1, 1993, changed the title of Chapter 265
from “Senior Citizen and Human Resources Office” to “Senior Citizens and
Community Services Department”.
   Ordinance 29-94, passed March 7, 1994, changed the title of Chapter 265 from
“Senior Citizens and Community Services Department” to “Human Services
Department”.
Statutory reference:
   Old age survivor’s insurance, see Ohio R.C. 144.01 et seq.
§ 258.01  ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby established in and for the city a Human Services Department.
(Ord. 33-86, passed 5-5-1986; Ord. 15-93, passed 2-1-1993; Ord. 28-94, passed
3-7-1994)
§ 258.02  MISSION STATEMENT.
   The mission statement of the Human Services Department is hereby accepted
and adopted, as follows:
   The Human Services Department of the City of Broadview Heights, Ohio, is a
community organization whose mission, as established by the Human Services
Advisory Board, is threefold:
   (1)   To provide, develop and cultivate social, psychological and security
needs for senior citizens and the needy of the community in a supportive,
caring atmosphere;
   (2)   To encourage and assist public and private agencies in establishing
facilities and programs within the city that provide human services; and
   (3)   To bring together individuals willing to donate their time or services
in helping others.
(Res. 96-53, passed 5-20-1996)
§ 258.03  APPOINTMENT OF DIRECTOR; FULL-TIME POSITION ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   There is hereby established the position of Director of the Human
Services Department, which position shall be appointed by the Mayor, with the
concurrence of five or more members of Council. Such Director shall serve at
the pleasure of the Mayor and shall be directly responsible for carrying out
the purposes set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   There is hereby established in and for the city the position of full-
time Director of Human Services. A job description for such position is
attached to original Ordinance 27-99, passed March 1, 1999.
(Ord. 33-86, passed 5-5-1986; Ord. 15-93, passed 2-1-1993; Ord. 28-94, passed
3-7-1994; Ord. 27-99, passed 3-1-1999)
§ 258.04  COMPENSATION OF DIRECTOR.
   The salary of the Director of the Human Services Department shall be
determined by Council.
(Ord. 33-86, passed 5-5-1986; Ord. 15-93, passed 2-1-1993; Ord. 28-94, passed
3-7-1994)
§ 258.05  POWERS AND DUTIES.
   The Human Services Department shall provide a central resource wherein
individuals with social concerns can obtain general or specific assistance or
information. The Department shall:
   (A)   Develop, cultivate and bring together human resources in the community
in assisting persons in the area of social concerns;
   (B)   Encourage and work with public and private agencies in establishing
facilities and programs within the city that deal with needs, such as needs of
the elderly, problems of mentally or physically handicapped persons and family
counseling problems; and
   (C)   Direct or bring together individuals willing to donate their time or
services in helping others.
(Ord. 33-86, passed 5-5-1986; Ord. 15-93, passed 2-1-1993; Ord. 28-94, passed
3-7-1994)
§ 258.06  HUMAN SERVICES ADVISORY BOARD.
   (A)   Establishment.
      (1)   There is hereby established an Advisory Board to be known as the
Human Services Advisory Board, which Board shall consist of one member of
Council, to be appointed by Council for a period of time in conformance with
the rules of Council, and six electors of the municipality, not holding other
municipal office or appointment, who shall be appointed by the Mayor and
confirmed by a majority of Council, for the following terms:
         (a)   Two for terms of one year;
         (b)   Two for terms of two years; and
         (c)   Two for terms of three years.
      (2)   As each of the citizen member terms expires, subsequent
appointments to the Board shall be for terms of three years. Any vacancy shall
be filled in the same manner for the unexpired term.
   (B)   Powers and Duties. The Board shall meet and organize and thereafter
shall meet at least monthly for the purpose of advising and assisting the
Director of the Human Services Department in the establishment of policies and
procedures with respect to prospective programs or activities deemed necessary
to carry out the purposes of the office. The Board shall also confer with the
Mayor and Council relative to the establishment of programs designed to meet
the human needs of the residents of the city.
   (C)   Rules and Regulations. The Board shall adopt rules and regulations
with respect to conducting meetings, which rules and regulations shall be
consistent with the purpose and intent of the powers and duties set forth in
this section.
   (D)   Reports. The Board shall file a written annual report with the
administration and Council not later than the first regular meeting of Council
in February of each year, setting forth such details of its activities for the
previous year as Council and the Mayor may require.
(Ord. 33-86, passed 5-5-1986; Ord. 81-92, passed 8-17-1992; Ord. 15-93, passed
2-1-1993; Ord. 28-94, passed 3-7-1994)
Editor’s note:
   Ordinance 28-94, passed March 7, 1994, changed the title of the “Senior
Citizens and Community Services Advisory Board” to the “Human Services Advisory
Board”.
§ 258.07  HUMAN SERVICES ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANT.
   (A)   There is hereby established the position of full-time Human Services
Administrative Assistant in the Human Services Department.
   (B)   Compensation for the position of full-time Human Services
Administrative Assistant shall be as determined from time to time by Council.
(Ord. 205-99, passed 11-15-1999)
CHAPTER 260:  COMMUNITY IMPROVEMENT CORPORATION
Section
260.01   Designation of corporation as agency for development
260.02   Confirmation of plan
260.03   Agreement between city and corporation
Cross reference:
   Community reinvestment areas, see
Chapter 888
Editor’s note:
   Ordinance 69-79, passed July 9, 1979, authorized the Mayor to renew the
contract between the city and the Community Improvement (Growth) Corporation.
Statutory reference:
   Community Improvement Corporations, see Ohio R.C. 1724.01 et seq.
   Community Urban Redevelopment Corporations, see Ohio R.C. 1728.01 et seq.
§ 260.01  DESIGNATION OF CORPORATION AS AGENCY FOR DEVELOPMENT.
   For the purposes of creating jobs and employment opportunities and improving
the economic welfare of the people, as provided in Article VIII, Section 13, of
the State Constitution, Council, pursuant to the provisions of Ohio R.C.
1724.10, hereby finds and determines that it is the policy of the city to
promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of its inhabitants
through the designation of a Community Improvement Corporation of the city as
the agency and instrumentality of the city for the city’s industrial,
commercial, distribution and research development, and the Community
Improvement Corporation of the city, being such a community improvement
corporation and a corporation not for profit, is hereby designated as the
city’s agency and instrumentality for its industrial, commercial, distribution
and research development.
(Ord. 48-81, passed 10-5-1981)
§ 260.02  CONFIRMATION OF PLAN.
   The Plan of Industrial, Commercial, Distribution and Research Development
for the city (hereinafter called the “Plan”), prepared and submitted to Council
by the Community Improvement Corporation of the city, which Plan is the
Agreement which the Mayor is hereinafter authorized to enter into on behalf of
the city with the Community Improvement Corporation of the city, is hereby
confirmed by Council.
(Ord. 48-81, passed 10-5-1981)
§ 260.03  AGREEMENT BETWEEN CITY AND CORPORATION.
   The Mayor and Director of Finance are hereby authorized to enter into an
agreement with the Community Improvement Corporation of the city in
substantially the form and containing the provisions set forth in original
Ordinance 48-81, passed October 5, 1981, as approved by the Director of Law.
(Ord. 48-81, passed 10-5-1981)
TITLE EIGHT:  EMPLOYMENT PROVISIONS
   
CHAP. 264   EMPLOYEES GENERALLY
   
CHAP. 266   WAGE ENFORCEMENT REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 264: EMPLOYEES GENERALLY
Section
264.01   Purpose; scope
264.02   Position/classification level
264.03   Probationary employment period
264.04   Mileage allowance; use of city vehicle
264.05   Travel allowance
264.06   Holidays
264.07   Sick leave
264.08   Vacations
264.09   Educational reimbursement
264.10   Funeral leave
264.11   Jury duty leave
264.12   Longevity
264.13   Personal days
264.14   Uniform allowance
264.15   Insurance
264.16   Overtime; compensatory time
264.17   Disability leave
Cross-reference:
   Accidental death and dismemberment and disability insurance for
firefighters, see §
242.03
   Administrative departments, boards, commissions and offices, see CHTR.
Art. V,
Art. VI
   Age limitations for original appointments to Police Department, see §
244.05
   Classification of service, see
CHTR. Art. V, § 9(d)
   Council’s powers, see
CHTR. Art. III, § 7
   Snow removal for city officials, see §
1028.11
Editor’s note:
   The city enters into agreements, from time to time, with representatives of
various classes of municipal employees. Such agreements provide for
compensation, benefits and other incidents of employment.
     The provisions of this chapter, therefore, apply only to those persons and
those subjects not otherwise provided for in such agreements.
   This chapter was re-enacted in its entirety by Ordinance 24-01, passed
February 5, 2001. Ordinance 24-01 was repealed by Ordinance 114-03, passed
August 18, 2003, codified herein. Ordinance 114-03, passed August 18, 2003 and
Ordinance 07-04, passed January 5, 2004 were repealed by Ordinance 159-04,
passed January 24, 2005, codified herein.
§ 264.01  PURPOSE; SCOPE.
   This chapter consolidates all terms and conditions of employment for non-
elected, non-bargaining, full-time positions of the city.  It specifically
repeals Ordinance 36-2019, as it relates to all full-time positions and any
amendments thereto. This chapter extends not only to all currently existing
non-elected, non-bargaining, full-time positions but also to all such non-
elected, non-bargaining, full-time positions hereafter created or established.
(Ord. 159-04, passed 1-24-2005; Ord. 27-2018, passed 9-17-2018; Ord. 07-2020,
passed 2-17-2020)
§ 264.02  POSITION/CLASSIFICATION LEVEL.
   (A)   For purposes of determining the benefits and terms of employment of
existing and future non- elected, non-bargaining, full-time positions, the
following classifications are now in effect.
 
Position Classification Level
Building Commissioner                    Level 1
Chief of Police                          Level 1
City Engineer                            Level 1
Economic Development Director            Level 1
Finance Director                         Level 1
Fire Chief                               Level 1
Human Services Director                  Level 1
Recreation Director                      Level 1
Service Director                         Level 1
Assistant Engineer                       Level 2
Assistant Fire Chief                     Level 2
Assistant Service Foreman                Level 2
Clerk of Courts                          Level 2
Facilities Manager                       Level 2
Service Department Foreman               Level 2
Assistant Human Services Director        Level 3
City Clerk/Mayor’s Secretary           Level 3
Clerk of Council                         Level 3
Human Services Transportation Specialist Level 3
IT Coordinator                           Level 3
Pump Station Operator                    Level 3
GIS Technician                           Level 3
 
   (B)   For all non-elected, non-bargaining, full-time positions created after
the enactment of this chapter, Council shall, in the enabling ordinance
designate the appropriate classification level of said position.
(Ord. 159-04, passed 1-24-2005; Ord. 170-06, passed 12-18-2006; Ord. 13-08,
passed 1-22-2008; Ord. 148-08, passed 11-3-2008; Ord. 20-13, passed 2-18-2013;
Ord. 45-14, passed 10-20-2014; Ord. 27-2018, passed 9-17-2018; Ord. 07-2020,
passed 2-17-2020)
§ 264.03  PROBATIONARY EMPLOYMENT PERIOD.
   For a period of 2,080 work hours subsequent to being appointed to a new
position, a new employee shall be considered to be in a probationary status and
subject to removal by the city at the city’s discretion.
(Ord. 159-04, passed 1-24-2005; Ord. 13-08, passed 1-22-2008; Ord. 148-08,
passed 11-3-2008; Ord. 20-13, passed 2-18-2013; Ord. 45-14, passed 10-20-2014;
Ord. 27-2018, passed 9-17-2018; Ord. 07-2020, passed 2-17-2020)
§ 264.04  MILEAGE ALLOWANCE; USE OF CITY VEHICLE.
   (A)   Any employee, subject to this chapter, who is required to use his or
her personal automobile for city business, shall be reimbursed at the
prevailing Internal Revenue Service allowable rate. Mileage requests must be
approved by the employee’s department head. Mileage requests of department
heads must be approved by the Mayor.
   (B)   City-owned or leased motor vehicles shall be used exclusively for city
business.
   (C)   For purposes of this chapter, “city business” shall include use of
motor vehicle between the municipal building(s) and the user’s home, for
positions deemed to require access to a motor vehicle on a 24-hour basis. The
Mayor shall specify, in writing, which positions are required to have access to
a motor vehicle on a 24-hour basis.
(Ord. 159-04, passed 1-24-2005; Ord. 13-08, passed 1-22-2008; Ord. 148-08,
passed 11-3-2008; Ord. 20-13, passed 2-18-2013; Ord. 45-14, passed 10-20-2014;
Ord. 27-2018, passed 9-17-2018; Ord. 07-2020, passed 2-17-2020)
§ 264.05  TRAVEL ALLOWANCE.
   An employee required to travel shall receive an allowance for meals at an
average of $55 per diem. Each employee shall be reimbursed at the prevailing
cost for overnight accommodations. All requests for reimbursement must be
accompanied by appropriate receipts and approved by the employee’s department
head or the Mayor. Requests for reimbursement from department heads must be
accompanied by appropriate receipts and approved by the Mayor and the Finance
Director.
(Ord. 159-04, passed 1-24-2005; Ord. 13-08, passed 1-22-2008; Ord. 148-08,
passed 11-3-2008; Ord. 20-13, passed 2-18-2013; Ord. 45-14, passed 10-20-2014;
Ord. 27-2018, passed 9-17-2018; Ord. 07-2020, passed 2-17-2020)
§ 264.06  HOLIDAYS.
   (A)   Each employee shall be entitled to the following 11 paid holidays:
      (1)   New Year’s Day;
      (2)   Martin Luther King Jr. Day;
      (3)   Good Friday;
      (4)   Memorial Day;
      (5)   Fourth of July;
      (6)   Labor Day;
      (7)   Thanksgiving Day;
      (8)   Day after Thanksgiving Day;
      (9)   Christmas Eve;
      (10)   Christmas Day; and
      (11)   New Year’s Eve.
   (B)   In all instances where one of the above holidays falls on a Saturday,
employees shall be entitled to the preceding Friday as a paid holiday. Where
one of the above holidays falls on a Sunday, employees shall be entitled to the
following Monday as a paid holiday. If a Level 3 employee is required to work
on a holiday, that employee shall receive time and one-half for hours worked on
the holiday in addition to holiday pay of eight hours.
(Ord. 159-04, passed 1-24-2005; Ord. 13-08, passed 1-22-2008; Ord. 148-08,
passed 11-3-2008; Ord. 20-13, passed 2-18-2013; Ord. 45-14, passed 10-20-2014;
Ord. 27-2018, passed 9-17-2018; Ord. 07-2020, passed 2-17-2020)
§ 264.07  SICK LEAVE.
   (A)   Each employee shall be entitled to one and one-quarter days of sick
leave per month of service, to be cumulative without limit.
   (B)   Sick leave shall be granted for the absence from duty because of a
doctor appointment, illness, injury, disease, exposure to contagious disease,
or attendance upon members of the family whose illness requires the car of such
employee. Substantiation for sick leave requests may be required at the
discretion of the Mayor or the department head.
   (C)   At the time of retirement from service with the city, an employee
shall be paid, in cash for one-third of the employee's accrued but unused sick
leave, up to a maximum accrual of 120 days (i.e., 40 days pay maximum).
   (D)   Notwithstanding the above division, all employees covered by the
chapter, hired prior to January 1, 1996, shall at the time of retirement with
the city, be paid in cash, for one-third of the employee's accrued but unused
sick leave, up to a maximum accrual of 160 days (i.e. 53.33 days maximum).
   (E)   All employees covered by this chapter, may convert unused sick leave
above and beyond the maximum accrual as stated above to days off at the rate of
two unused sick days to one day off.
   (F)   Payment for accrued sick leave upon retirement shall not be applicable
to any removal, voluntary or involuntary resignation or any termination except
a retirement pursuant to state retirement laws.
   (G)   In the event that a city employee has exhausted his or her sick leave
due to a catastrophic illness as documented by the employee's physician the
Mayor may request that other employees of the city be permitted to donate up to
24 hours of sick leave to be deducted from the donating employee's accumulated
sick leave. Employees must have a minimum of 500 hours of accumulated sick
leave in order to be eligible to donate time. The actual hours received by the
receiving employee shall be based on the dollar value of the donated time
divided by the receiving employee's current rate of pay, rounded to the nearest
hour. The actual hours transferred are subject to the approval of Council, who
may limit the total number of hours transferred. The actual transfer will not
take place until the pay period in which the receiving employee has exhausted
all of their accrued time. Once time is transferred, it will not be returned to
the donating member, even if it is not used by the receiving member. In the
event that the receiving member separates service for any reason, the donated
time is not subject to cash conversion irrespective of any other section of
this chapter.
   (H)   All request to transfer time shall be submitted to the Finance
Department in writing on the form and in the manner as designated by the
Finance Director. The donation of time is purely voluntary and no employee
shall be coerced to donate time.
   (I)   Unless addressed by specific language in a bargaining unit agreement,
the sick leave transfer may also be offered to bargaining unit employees.
However, if a bargaining unit agreement has specific language relating to
donating of sick time, the bargaining unit agreement shall prevail.
(Ord. 159-04, passed 1-24-2005; Ord. 13-08, passed 1-22-2008; Ord. 148-08,
passed 11-3-2008; Ord. 20-13, passed 2-18-2013; Ord. 45-14, passed 10-20-2014;
Ord. 27-2018, passed 9-17-2018; Ord. 07-2020, passed 2-17-2020)
§ 264.08  VACATIONS.
   (A)   Subject to administrative approval with respect to scheduling, all
employees covered under this chapter, on the anniversary date of their hire,
shall be entitled, each year, to the following paid vacation, provided that
they have worked at least 1,040 hours (inclusive of holidays and vacation days)
in the year preceding their anniversary date and have accrued and completed the
required years of service:
 
Years of Service Number of Weeks
1 through 5      2
6 through 10     3
11 through 15    4
16 and over      5
 
   (B)   Vacation time may be carried over from one anniversary year to the
next anniversary year only. Such carry-over shall be limited to the employee’s
annual vacation eligibility only.
(Ord. 159-04, passed 1-24-2005; Ord. 13-08, passed 1-22-2008; Ord. 148-08,
passed 11-3-2008; Ord. 20-13, passed 2-18-2013; Ord. 45-14, passed 10-20-2014;
Ord. 27-2018, passed 9-17-2018; Ord. 07-2020, passed 2-17-2020)
§ 264.09  EDUCATIONAL REIMBURSEMENT.
   (A)   All employees covered under this chapter requesting permission to
attend any school, training session or seminar shall submit such request to the
department head, stating the objective, benefit to the department, relevance to
employee’s job performance and the estimated expense. Such department head may
then authorize payment of tuition or fees in advance, or, if said tuition or
fees have been paid by the employee, may authorize reimbursement to the
employee.
   (B)   Such attendance shall be compensated at the regular straight time for
travel time and attendance, not to exceed eight hours in any one day.
(Ord. 159-04, passed 1-24-2005; Ord. 13-08, passed 1-22-2008; Ord. 148-08,
passed 11-3-2008; Ord. 20-13, passed 2-18-2013; Ord. 45-14, passed 10-20-2014;
Ord. 27-2018, passed 9-17-2018; Ord. 07-2020, passed 2-17-2020)
§ 264.10  FUNERAL LEAVE.
   In case of the death of an employee’s family member, including spouse,
child, parent, brother, sister, step-parent, grandparent, father-in-law,
mother-in-law, or grandparent, that employee shall be granted three days of
funeral leave without loss of pay, benefits, days off, holiday, vacation or
sick leave, to attend the funeral or memorial service of the decedent. If time
beyond the three days is necessary, the employee may  request such additional
time as the department head may grant at his or her discretion, to which the
employee may apply sick, holiday, compensatory and/or vacation time as the
employee may have accumulated.
(Ord. 159-04, passed 1-24-2005; Ord. 13-08, passed 1-22-2008; Ord. 148-08,
passed 11-3-2008; Ord. 20-13, passed 2-18-2013; Ord. 45-14, passed 10-20-2014;
Ord. 27-2018, passed 9-17-2018; Ord. 07-2020, passed 2-17-2020)
§ 264.11  JURY DUTY LEAVE.
   Any employee covered by this chapter who is called for jury duty, either
federal, county or municipal, shall be paid his or her regular salary, but
shall reimburse the city for any compensation received from the court as a
result of said jury duty.
(Ord. 159-04, passed 1-24-2005; Ord. 13-08, passed 1-22-2008; Ord. 148-08,
passed 11-3-2008; Ord. 20-13, passed 2-18-2013; Ord. 45-14, passed 10-20-2014;
Ord. 27-2018, passed 9-17-2018; Ord. 07-2020, passed 2-17-2020)
§ 264.12  LONGEVITY.
   (A)   All employees covered by this chapter shall receive longevity pay at
the rate of $9 per month of service after five continuous years of service to a
maximum annual longevity pay of $2,160. Longevity pay shall be paid on the
employee's anniversary date, or on the employee's next biweekly paycheck.
   (B)   Full-time employees hired prior to January 1, 1996, shall be permitted
to include prior full-time employment with the city for purposes of
establishing eligibility for longevity and shall not be required to have the
five-year requirement on a continuous basis. However, the calculation for the
sum of longevity owed such employee shall not consider the prior service, but
only the current service period.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the above, incumbent Level 1 employees, hired prior to
January 1,1996, shall, after five continuous years of service, receive
longevity pay at the rate of $10 per month of employment, not to exceed $3,500.
Employees appointed to Level 1 positions after January 1, 1996, shall after
five consecutive years of service, receive longevity pay at the rate of $10 per
month of employment, not to exceed $2,160.
   (D)   Incumbent Level 2 employees, hired prior to January 1, 1996, shall
receive, after five continuous years of service, receive longevity pay at the
rate of $10 per month of employment, not to exceed $2,500. Employees appointed
to Level 2 positions after January 1, 1996, shall after five consecutive years
of service, receive longevity pay at the rate of $10 per month of employment,
not to exceed $2,160.
(Ord. 159-04, passed 1-24-2005; Ord. 13-08, passed 1-22-2008; Ord. 148-08,
passed 11-3-2008; Ord. 20-13, passed 2-18-2013; Ord. 45-14, passed 10-20-2014;
Ord. 27-2018, passed 9-17-2018; Ord. 07-2020, passed 2-17-2020)
§ 264.13  PERSONAL DAYS.
   (A)   In addition to the vacation eligibility schedule set forth in §
264.08, employees covered by this chapter shall be entitled, annually, to two
personal days.
   (B)   Personal days shall not be carried over from one calendar year to the
next.
(Ord. 159-04, passed 1-24-2005; Ord. 13-08, passed 1-22-2008; Ord. 148-08,
passed 11-3-2008; Ord. 20-13, passed 2-18-2013; Ord. 45-14, passed 10-20-2014;
Ord. 27-2018, passed 9-17-2018; Ord. 07-2020, passed 2-17-2020)
§ 264.14  UNIFORM ALLOWANCE.
   Employees covered by this chapter shall be entitled to an annual uniform
and/or maintenance allowance consistent with the amount provided other
employees of the same department, provided that no such allowance shall be paid
unless the city requires said employee to wear a uniform.
(Ord. 159-04, passed 1-24-2005; Ord. 13-08, passed 1-22-2008; Ord. 148-08,
passed 11-3-2008; Ord. 20-13, passed 2-18-2013; Ord. 45-14, passed 10-20-2014;
Ord. 27-2018, passed 9-17-2018; Ord. 07-2020, passed 2-17-2020)
§ 264.15  INSURANCE.
   (A)   Employees covered by this chapter shall receive coverage consistent
with coverage provided other full-time employees of the city, and under the
terms and conditions as Council may provide.
   (B)   Employees covered by this chapter shall contribute either 5% of the
monthly medical insurance premiums up to a maximum of $40 per month for family
coverage or 5% of the monthly medical insurance premiums up to a maximum of $20
per month for single coverage. If the city is able to obtain coverage through a
health maintenance organization, the employee may have the option of choosing
the HMO coverage. If the cost for the HMO coverage is below 95% of the premium
costs for the coverage under the city's non-HMO plan, no contribution will be
required for medical insurance premiums. If the premium costs for the HMO are
above 95% of the premium costs for non-HMO plan, the employee will be required
to contribute as stated above.
(Ord. 159-04, passed 1-24-2005; Ord. 13-08, passed 1-22-2008; Ord. 148-08,
passed 11-3-2008; Ord. 20-13, passed 2-18-2013; Ord. 45-14, passed 10-20-2014;
Ord. 27-2018, passed 9-17-2018; Ord. 07-2020, passed 2-17-2020)
§ 264.16  OVERTIME; COMPENSATORY TIME.
   (A)   The normal work hours for full-time employees appointed to positions
contained in this chapter shall be 40 hours per week, Monday through Friday.
Employees covered by this chapter shall receive a one-half hour paid lunch
period or a one-half hour unpaid lunch period within an eight hour workday, to
be scheduled and/or taken consistent with the operating requirements of the
department.
   (B)   Full-time employees appointed to positions in Level 1 and Level 2
(Management Level Positions) have "exempt" status under the Fair Labor
Standards Act (FLSA) and are not entitled to overtime. However, Level 1 and 2
employees who are required to work over and above their normal work schedules
shall be entitled to paid time off, on an hour for hour basis, for hours that
exceed their normal schedule hours, up to a maximum of 200 hours per year. Such
hours shall be paid and/or taken prior to December 31st of each calendar year.
   (C)   Notwithstanding anything contained in this division, employees in the
Level 1 category hired on or after April 7, 1997, shall not be eligible for any
additional compensation and/overtime off for hours worked in excess of their
normal work hours as defined above. However, consistent with their salary
exempt status, such employees may be scheduled for time-off as may be
determined by their supervisors, consistent with operating requirements.
   (D)   Employees classified as Level 3 are non-exempt and accordingly are
subject to the Fair Labor Standards Act (FLSA) and as such are entitled to
overtime pay or compensatory time at the rate of one and one-half times their
hourly rate or hours worked above and beyond their 40 hour work schedule.
Except for holiday pay and vacation pay, all other hours paid but not worked
shall be excluded in determining the total number of hours worked for the 40
hour work week. Employees who request and obtain approval for compensatory time
in lieu of overtime pay shall be permitted to accumulate up to a maximum of 80
hours which includes the straight time and one-half time hours. Any overtime
earned in excess of the aforementioned 80 hours shall be paid to the employee,
at time and one-half, in the next pay period.
   (E)   Upon retirement or termination of service, all employees shall receive
payment for all accumulated compensatory time.
(Ord. 159-04, passed 1-24-2005; Ord. 13-08, passed 1-22-2008; Ord. 148-08,
passed 11-3-2008; Ord. 20-13, passed 2-18-2013; Ord. 45-14, passed 10-20-2014;
Ord. 27-2018, passed 9-17-2018; Ord. 07- 2020, passed 2-17-2020)
§ 264.17  DISABILITY LEAVE.
   (A)   An employee, covered by this chapter, who is disabled as a result of
the performance of duties within the scope of his employment, shall be paid, if
such disability prevents him from performing his duties, regular compensation
during the continuance of such service-related disability, but for a period not
to exceed 180 work days from the date that such service-related disability
occurred. During such disability leave, compensation shall be paid in
accordance with this section, whether or not the employee has accumulated sick
leave. In the event accumulated sick leave is available, and a service related
disability occurs, the first ten days of said service-related disability shall
be charged to said employee's accumulated sick leave, or if less than ten days
accumulated sick leave is available, the existing sick leave available shall be
charged to disability leave. In no event will an employee receive more than his
regular compensation while on disability leave.
   (B)   An employee who obtains a paid leave under this section shall file for
Workers' Compensation and sign a waiver assigning to the employer those sums of
money (temporary total disability) he would ordinarily receive as his weekly
compensation as determined by law for those number of weeks he receives
benefits under this section.
(Ord. 159-04, passed 1-24-2005; Ord. 13-08, passed 1-22-2008; Ord. 148-08,
passed 11-3-2008; Ord. 20-13, passed 2-18-2013; Ord. 45-14, passed 10-20-2014;
Ord. 27-2018, passed 9-17-2018; Ord. 07- 2020, passed 2-17-2020)
CHAPTER 266:  WAGE ENFORCEMENT REGULATIONS
Section
266.01   Legislative intent and purpose
266.02   Definitions
266.03   Reporting wage theft and payroll fraud
266.04   Contractor or agreement language
266.05   Wage theft monitoring, investigation and compliance
266.06   Application to new contracts
§ 266.01  LEGISLATIVE INTENT AND PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of this chapter to assure that when the city provides
incentives to private parties or entities to support development within the
city, those private parties or entities fully comply with state and federal
payroll and wage and hour laws, thereby ensuring that workers receive proper
compensation for their work. Where there are violations of those state and
federal wage and payroll laws on city supported developments, this chapter
obligates any parties involved in the development who know, are aware, or
should be aware of violations report them to the city in a timely manner. This
chapter also puts parties or entities that receive development incentives from
the city on notice that if they or their subcontractors violate wage or payroll
laws, the city intends to recoup its investment to the extent allowed under the
laws and regulations governing those city-sponsored incentives.
(Ord. 33-16, passed 6-6-2016)
§ 266.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the words and phrases defined in the
section hereunder shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by the
Ohio Revised Code and state common law, unless specifically defined by this
chapter.
   “Adverse determination.” A determination that person has committed wage
theft or payroll fraud. Such determination involves an administrative
determination, arbitration award or decision, or civil judgement, including any
determination made in or through an administrative hearing, any government
body, or industry-specific regulatory or investigative body.
   “Agreement.” Means any contract entered into between the city and person or
business entity which the city provides an incentive or benefit that is
projected to exceed $25,000, including, but not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Tax abatements;
      (2)   Tax increment financing contract or agreement;
      (3)   Any commercial loan, provided by or backed by the city; and
      (4)   Any conveyance of land for less than fair market value.
   “Complaint.” Means any report made to the city or any governmental agency
having relevant jurisdiction that a person, business entity, non-profit, or
other entity has committed wage theft or payroll fraud. A complaint may be such
a report submitted to the U.S. Department of Labor, the Ohio Department of
Commerce, or another body with authority to investigate and adjudicate such
reports, which comes to the attention of the city. If a report is made directly
to the city and not to another agency, it must include the following
information in order to be considered a valid complaint: name the person,
business entity, non-profit, or other entity to have allegedly committed the
wage theft or payroll fraud; the project during which or the agreement under
which the person is alleged to have committed the theft or fraud; a description
of the theft or fraud suspected to have been committed; the name of the
complainant; and the name of at least one witness or victim of the theft or
fraud, which personally be the complainant.
   “Contractor.” Means individuals, partnerships, corporations, association or
other for-profit or non-profit entities that are leading the construction or
provision or goods or services on a development site.
   “Development site.” Means the property that is the subject of an agreement
or on which the contractual undertaking is to be performed.
   “Payroll fraud.” Means concealing a person’s true tax or other financial
liability to a government agency from government licensing, regulatory, or tax
agencies through tax evasion or fraud; misclassification of employees, the
unreported or underreported payment of wages; paying a business transaction in
cash without keeping appropriate records of reporting and withholding; or any
other means.
   “Subcontractor.” Means any individuals, partnerships, corporations,
associations or other for profit or non-profit entities that enter into a
contract with a contractor to perform work on a development site or work
pursuant to, related to, or in furtherance of an agreement.
   “Wage theft.” Means a violation of Ohio Prompt Pay Statute, Ohio R.C.
4113.15; the Ohio Minimum Fair Wage Standards Act, Ohio R.C. Chapter 411;
Ohio’s Minimum Wage Constitutional Amendment, Section 34a of Article II of the
Ohio Constitution; Ohio R.C. Chapters 4109 or 4115; Ohio R.C. 4113.17, 4113.18,
4113.52, or 4113.61; or statute or regulation of another state that may apply
to a particular agreement.
(Ord. 33-16, passed 6-6-2016)
§ 266.03  REPORTING WAGE THEFT AND PAYROLL FRAUD.
   (A)   Any individual, partnership, corporation, association or other for-
profit or non-profit entity entering into an agreement with the city shall
include provisions in solicitations and contractors regarding a development
site that require all employers, contractors and subcontractors to provide a
sworn statement  as to whether there has been any adverse determination against
the employers, contractors and subcontractors within the preceding five-year
period for wage theft or payroll fraud.
   (B)   Any individual, partnership, corporation, association or other for-
profit or non-profit entity entering into an agreement shall require that any
contractor or subcontractor preforming work or proposing to preform work on
development site shall provide a sworn statement whether there has been an
adverse determination rendered against that contractor or subcontractor in the
preceding five-year period for wage theft or payroll fraud.
   (C)   Any individual, partnership, corporation, association or other for-
profit or non-profit entity entering into an agreement shall include provisions
in solicitations and contractors regarding the development site that require
all contractors, subcontractors and employer to provide it with an updated
sworn statement within 30 days of any adverse determination rendered against
the employer for any wage theft or payroll fraud.
   (D)   Any individual, partnership, corporation, association or other for-
profit or non-profit entity, who have entered into an agreement with the city,
the term of which is not expired, shall report to the city in a sworn statement
any complaint of wage theft or payroll fraud against the person or any of its
contractors or subcontractors.
   (E)   All such sworn statements shall be submitted to the city within 30
days of receipt by the person who entered into the agreement.
(Ord. 33-16, passed 6-6-2016)
§ 266.04  CONTRACTOR OR AGREEMENT LANGUAGE.
   (A)   All agreements subject to this chapter shall contain the following two
provisions or substantially similar language.
      (1)   This contract is subject to the wage enforcement provision of the
City Municipal Code. These provisions require that any individual, partnership,
corporation, association or other for-profit or non-profit entity who has an
agreement with the city or with a contractor or subcontractor of that person
shall report all complaints or adverse determinations of wage theft and payroll
fraud, as defined by this chapter to the Finance Director within 30 days of
notification of the complaint or adverse determination.
      (2)   Under the wage enforcement provision, the city shall have the
authority, to terminate this agreement or reduce the incentives or subsidies to
be provided under this agreement and seek other remedies.
   (B)   The omission of the contractor language above in any agreement shall
not constitute a waiver of this chapter’s requirements or of any other legal
requirement with respect to such agreement, the development site or any
contractor or subcontractor.
(Ord. 33-16, passed 6-6-2016)
§ 266.05  WAGE THEFT MONITORING, INVESTIGATION AND COMPLIANCE.
   (A)   The city shall develop rules and regulations for the following:
      (1)   Review of agreements to ensure that language required by this
chapter is included;
      (2)   Monitoring of agreements to ensure compliance with this chapter,
including reviewing complaints, referring complaints to appropriate agency for
investigation and monitoring the outcome of complaints, for any complaints
about the practice of any person, contractor or subcontractor relating to the
provisions of this chapter; and
      (3)   Allow third parties to submit a complaint to the city alleging wage
theft or payroll fraud by an individual, partnership, corporation, association
or other for-profit or non-profit entity that has entered into an agreement
with the city.
   (B)   Whenever the city becomes aware of any complaint against a person or
the person’s contractor or subcontractor for wage theft or payroll fraud with
respect to any work done on a development site, the following shall apply.
      (1)   The Finance Director or his or her their designee shall report the
complaint to the appropriate state or federal agency responsible for
investigation and enforcement of a particular type of violation.
      (2)   The Finance Director or his or her designee reserves the right to
investigate wage theft and payroll fraud and take appropriate action.
      (3)   The Finance Director will provide a written notice to the person
stating that, if an adverse determination is rendered against an individual,
partnership, corporation, association or other for-profit or non-profit entity,
contractor or subcontractor, the city will pursue any available legal,
contractual or equitable remedies, which may include without limitation any or
all of the penalties listed in divisions (C) and (D) of this section. The
notice also will state that the person or contractor may provide the city with
information showing that the adverse determination is under review, contested
or appealed.
   (C)   Whenever any adverse determination is rendered against an individual,
partnership, corporation, association or other for-profit or non-profit entity
or its contractor, or subcontractor, for wage theft or payroll fraud with
respect to any work on a development site, or, if the adverse determination is
appealed, then whenever the final decision on appeal confirms the adverse
determination, the city will pursue any available legal, contractual or
equitable remedies, which may include without limitation any or all of the
following remedies whether or not provided for in the agreement:
      (1)   Termination of the agreement with the person or unilateral
reduction of the incentive or benefit to be provided under the agreement up to
100% of the yet to be paid or provided incentive or benefit;
      (2)   Deeming the individual, partnership, corporation, association or
other for-profit or non-profit entity, or its contractor or subcontractor,
ineligible for future agreement or other contractors with the city until all
wage theft and payroll fraud penalties have been paid in full;
      (3)   Debarment of individual, partnership, corporation, association or
other for-profit or non-profit entity, or its contractor, or subcontractors
from future agreements or other contracts with the city for a period of five
years; and
      (4)   Informing the relevant city departments of the adverse
determination, including, but not limited to, the Tax Commissioner, the
Department of Finance and the City Prosecutor, in order to determine if further
action is necessary.
   (D)   Whenever any adverse determination is rendered against any individual,
partnership, corporation, association or other for-profit or non-profit entity
subcontractor, if there is no resolution of the wage theft violation or payroll
fraud satisfactory to the city within 30 days of the city’s receipt of the
notification of the adverse determination or final decision of an appeal, the
city will pursue any available legal, contractual or equitable remedies, which
may include without limitation the following remedies whether or not provided
for in the agreement:
      (1)   Termination of the agreement with the person or unilateral
reduction of the incentive or benefit to be provided under the agreement up to
100% of the yet to be paid or provided incentive or benefit;
      (2)   Deeming the individuals, partnerships, corporations, association or
other for-profit or non-profit entities, or its contractor or subcontractor,
ineligible for future agreement or other contractors with the city until all
wage theft and payroll fraud penalties have been paid in full;
      (3)   Debarment of individuals, partnerships, corporations, association
or other for-profit or non-profit entities, or its contractor, or
subcontractors from future agreements or other contracts with the city for five
years; and
      (4)   Informing the relevant city departments of the adverse
determination, including, but not limited to the Tax Commissioner, the
Department of Finance, and the City Prosecutor, in order to determine if
further action is necessary.
   (F)   The city shall be the department/agency with the primary
responsibility for investigation, recording, keeping and enforcement of this
chapter.
(Ord. 33-16, passed 6-6-2016)
§ 266.06  APPLICATION TO NEW CONTRACTS.
   The provision of this chapter shall apply to the following:
   (A)   Agreements entered into after the effective date of the ordinance
codified in this chapter; and
   (B)   Renewals and/or amendments to agreements entered into after the
effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter which renewal or
amendment alone meets the financial thresholding requirement of this chapter.
(Ord. 33-16, passed 6-6-2016)
TITLE TEN:  BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES
   
CHAP. 270.   PLANNING COMMISSION
   
CHAP. 272.   BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
   
CHAP. 274.   CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
   
CHAP. 275.   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT BOARD
   
CHAP. 276.   PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD
   
CHAP. 278.   SUNDRY CLAIMS BOARD
   
CHAP. 283.   STRATEGIC PLAN ADVISORY COMMITTEE
   
CHAP. 288.   SHADE TREE COMMISSION
   
CHAP. 289.   RECORDS COMMISSION
CHAPTER 270: PLANNING COMMISSION
Editor’s note:
   Provisions relating to the Planning Commission are codified in
Chapter 1220 of Part Twelve - the Planning and Zoning Code.
CHAPTER 272:  BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
Cross-reference:
   Appeals; Board of Zoning Appeals, see §
1262.04
   Board of Zoning Appeals, see
CHTR. Art. V, § 8
   Fees for variances and appeals, see §
1262.05
Editor’s note:
   There are no sections in Chapter 272. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross-references and any future legislation.
CHAPTER 274:  CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
Section
274.01   Civil Service Administrator
274.02   Rules and Regulations
Cross-reference:
   Civil Service Commission, see
CHTR. Art. V, § 9
   Employees generally, see
Chapter 264
Statutory reference:
   Civil service, see Ohio Const., Art. XV, § 10
   Civil Service Commission, see Ohio R.C. 124.40
   Civil Service Law, see Ohio R.C. Chapter 124
§ 274.01  CIVIL SERVICE ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   The position of Civil Service Administrator is hereby established in
the city.
   (B)   The Civil Service Administrator shall, among other functions, act as
the Civil Service Secretary as provided in
Article V, Section 9(a)(3), of the City Charter.
   (C)   The Civil Service Administrator shall have the following function and
duties:
      (1)   Basic Function. To maintain all records and proceedings relating to
the Civil Service Commission in compliance with the Rules and Regulations
established by the Commission, the Ohio Revised Code, the Charter of the City
of Broadview Heights and the Ohio Constitution.
(ORC 124.09(A))
      (2)   Duties and Responsibilities.
         (a)   Attend all meetings of the Civil Service Commission;
         (b)   Record, type and maintain on file all minutes of meetings;
         (c)   Post notification of any such meetings;
         (d)   Post and advertise any classified openings within the Police and
Fire Departments;
         (e)   Secure any facility, testing agency and equipment necessary to
administer entrance and promotional exams;
         (f)   Develop, copy and collate all application packets relating to
positions available;
         (g)   Dispense and collect applications;
         (h)   Screen all applications according to provisions required;
         (i)   Answer all phone inquiries relating to civil service testing;
         (j)   Keep records of all proceedings, applications and examinations;
(ORC 124.09)
         (k)   Prepare, continue and keep in the office of the Commission a
complete roster of all persons in the classified service;
(ORC 124.09(C))
         (l)   Maintain a list of job classifications, duties and
responsibilities and job descriptions; (ORC 124.14)
         (m)   Prepare and post an eligible list containing the names of
persons qualified for appointment to positions in the classified service;
(ORC 124.26)
         (n)   Transmit a certified list of names for appointment to the
appointing authority;
         (o)   Maintain on file all records of efficiency and seniority as
required;
(ORC 124.31)
         (p)   Schedule hearings and issue notices on rulings of all appeals
relating to reduction, suspension or removal;
(ORC 124.33)
         (q)   Maintain employee files for all classified employees;
         (r)   File with the State of Ohio a yearly report of activities
relating to the administration of the Civil Service Commission;
(ORC 124.40)
         (s)   Make an investigation of any violation of Ohio R.C. Chapter 124
and file a report of such to the Mayor or other chief appointing authority;
(ORC 124.56)
         (t)   Sign the payroll for classified departments upon authorization
of the Civil Service Commission;
         (u)   Attend all meetings and seminars of importance to the
functioning of the Civil Service Commission; and
         (v)   Carry out any and all other duties as directed by the
Chairperson of the Commission and the Administration.
(Ord. 43-95, passed 4-3-1995)
§ 274.02  RULES AND REGULATIONS.
Editor’s note:
   The Rules and Regulations of the Civil Service Commission were originally
adopted on June 6, 1985, and were amended and re-adopted by Council by
Ordinance 24-95, passed March 27, 1995. They were amended again on May 6, 1996,
May 19, 1997, May 12, 1998, January 31, 2000, April 19, 2001, April 24, 2009,
April 9, 2013, June 3, 2013, October 15, 2018, February 4, 2019, and June 17,
2019. They are included herein in full at the request of the city.
   City of Broadview Heights
   Civil Service Commission
   RULES AND REGULATIONS
   OF THE
   CIVIL SERVICE COMMISSION
   AMENDED AND ADOPTED
   June 17, 2019
   William W. Baker, Chairperson
   Clayton P. Tober, Member
   George J. Balasko, Member
PREAMBLE
   The following set of rules and regulations is hereby adopted in accordance
with the authority conferred upon the Civil Service Commission of the city, by
the Constitution of the State of Ohio and the Ohio Revised Code, including but
not limited to R.C. Chapter 124 pertaining to Municipal Civil Service
Commissions. Where rules and regulations of the Civil Service Commission do not
address a specific matter, the Commission shall follow the Ohio Revised Code if
germane to an issue under consideration.
SECTION I - ADMINISTRATION
1.1  Civil Service Commission.
   It shall be the duty of each member of the Commission to attend all meetings
of the Commission and to devote as much time as is necessary to the management
of the business and affairs of the Commission. This Commission will meet on the
second Tuesday of each month as needed in a meeting open to the public.
1.2  Commission Duties and Powers.
   (A)   The Civil Service Commission shall exercise all powers and duties
consistent with what is prescribed and conferred upon the Director of
Administrative Services and the State Personnel Board of Review as granted to
the Commission.
(ORC 124.40(A))
   (B)   The Commission shall elect one of its members as Chairperson, who
shall serve until a new member is appointed and qualified at which time a
successor, as Chairperson shall be elected. It shall be the duty of the
Chairperson to preside at all meetings of the Commission.
   (C)   The Chairperson may, on his or her own initiative, and shall, upon the
request of the other two members of the Commission, call a special meeting of
the Commission to be held not earlier than 24 hours nor later than ten days
from the date of notice of such meeting. In the absence of the Chairperson, any
other member shall act as Chairperson. Two members of the Commission shall
constitute a quorum at any meeting of the Commission; and it shall require the
affirmative vote of at least two members to adopt any motion or resolution.
   (D)   The order of business for meetings of the Commission shall be:
      (1)   Call to order;
      (2)   Roll call;
      (3)   Disposition of unapproved minutes;
      (4)   Reports and communications;
      (5)   Unfinished business;
      (6)   New business; and
      (7)   Adjournment.
   (E)   The Commission shall employ a suitable person to act as Administrator
of the Commission. The Administrator shall attend all meetings and shall
perform such duties as may be prescribed or required by the Commission.
   (F)   Any member or Administrator of the Commission shall be authorized to
certify payrolls.
1.3  Records.
   The following records shall be made available free of charge for public
inspection at all reasonable hours. An appointment to view such records shall
be made with the Commission Administrator or in his or her absence, the
Commission Chairperson. Fees will be assessed at rates established by city
ordinance for individual copies of any document requested unless specifically
modified by the Commission. Such records shall include the Rules, Commission
Minutes, Certified Exam Results, and any records designated as public records
under state law. However, disclosure of physical, medical and or mental
examinations, written examinations, performance evaluations (R.C. § 124.09) and
other personal information, the specific release of which is prohibited by
state law shall be reviewed by the Commission and those authorized by the
Commission only and shall not be released to the public, except where the
applicant or employee has provided written permission or upon order from a
court of competent jurisdiction. The Commission shall prepare, continue and
keep a complete roster of all persons in the classified civil service. In
addition, the Commission shall require performance evaluations to be submitted
annually at the beginning of the year, but in no case later than the last day
of March of each year.
1.4  Retention.
   All examination papers of competitors shall be kept on file as long as the
eligible list created from the examination remains in effect.
1.5  Amendments.
   Any amendments proposed to the rules and regulations of the Civil Service
Commission shall be presented in writing at any regular or special meeting of
the Commission, but final action thereon shall not be taken until at least two
readings and discussion of such proposed amendment (3/21/03) except that such
delay in action thereon may be suspended by the unanimous vote of the
Commission. The amended and adopted Civil Service rules and regulations must be
approved by City Council prior to codification.
1.6  Appointments and Promotions.
   Appointments and promotions in the Civil Service of the city shall be made
according to merit and fitness, to be ascertained as far as practicable by
competitive examinations. Laws shall be passed providing for the enforcement of
this provision.
1.7  Jurisdiction.
   The Civil Service Commission of the city does not include local school or
health districts in their function.
SECTION II - DEFINITION OF TERMS
   The several terms herein specified whenever used in the rules and
regulations of the Civil Service Commission of the city or in the
administration of the Ohio Revised Code shall be construed as follows:
   Active Service - As applied to probationary employees; performing required
duties of a position exclusive of all training time and any paid time for hours
not worked, except vacation and holiday pay.
   Additional Credits - Additional points added to examinations for military
service, college, city service and seniority, which add value to the applicants
overall qualifications.
   Appointing Authority - The Mayor of the City of Broadview Heights
   Certification - The act of supplying names from an official eligible list,
and recording thereon, to the appointing authority for the purposes of
employment selection.
   Certified Eligible - Applications who have met the minimum requirements of
examination and who are thus certified for appointment to a position for which
the exam was held.
   Charter - Shall mean the Charter of the City of Broadview Heights, Ohio.
   City - City of Broadview Heights, Ohio.
   City Service - Current city employees in good standing who have completed
all probationary requirements as part-time employees and are moving to full-
time status, within the same job classification, in either the Police or Fire
Department.
   Civil Service - All offices and positions of trust or employment in the
service of the city as defined by the Charter.
   Class - One or more positions sufficiently distinct from all other positions
in duties, responsibilities and qualifications required to warrant a separate
title.
   Classified Service - All persons employed full-time within the Police and
Fire Department for which it is practicable to determine the merit and fitness
of the applicants by competitive examination and as defined by the Charter.
   Commission - The Civil Service Commission of the City of Broadview Heights.
   Competitive Examination - An examination given for the purposes of
establishing an eligible list arranged in the order of merit.
   Demotion - The movement of any employee from a position in one class to a
position in another class having a lower maximum salary rate due to
disciplinary reasons, incapacity to perform the work, inefficiency, or
unsatisfactory work performance or by the request of the employee.
   Eligible List - A list of names of persons found qualified through
examination for the purpose of filling vacancies in the classified service.
   Employee - Any person holding a position subject to appointment, removal,
promotion or reduction by an appointing authority.
   Employee Status - An employee’s title, salary range and type of employment
(temporary, seasonal, permanent and the like).
   He - The masculine pronoun “he” and its derivatives, whenever employed,
include the feminine pronoun and its derivatives.
   Permanent Employees - An employee in the classified service who, following
certification, has completed the applicable probationary period and occupies a
duly authorized position involving full-time year round service.
   Objective Test - Written tests consisting of multiple choice or true and
false questions.
   Ohio Revised Code (ORC) - The rules and regulations of the Civil Service
Commission are derived from the R.C. Chapter 124.
   Paramedic - An applicant or employee certified by the State of Ohio holding
medical certification as a paramedic.
   Point of Service - Commences upon taking the oath of office.
   Part- Time Employees - A paid employee working less than full-time,
consistent with the Fair Labor Standards Act.
   Position - Any specific office, employment, or job calling for the
performance of certain duties, either full-time or part-time and for the
exercise of certain responsibilities by one individual.
   Position Classification - The arrangement of positions into classes
including grades. Positions shall be classified in accordance with the duties
and responsibilities of the position.
   Promotion - A vertical movement from one class to a higher class, involving
a change in grade and rate of compensation attained by competitive exam.
   Promotional Examination - An examination which is open only to employees who
meet the qualifications set forth by the Commission and given for the purpose
of establishing an eligible list.
   Provisional Employee - Any employee appointed under the emergency and
temporary appointments provision of these rules.
   Rules - The rules and regulations of the Civil Service Commission of the
City of Broadview Heights.
   Seniority - All references to seniority shall mean the anniversary date of
employment full-time within the respective department of employment.
   Transfer - Movement of an employee from one class to a like or related class
not involving an increase or decrease in grade.
   Unclassified Service - Comprises those positions set forth as such in the
Charter. Positions in the unclassified service shall be exempt from all
examination requirements of the Commission.
   Weights - Used in connection with scoring examinations to indicate the
relative importance of the subjects or parts of the examinations.
SECTION III - POSITION CLASSIFICATION
3.1  Classified Service.
   The classified service shall comprise all persons employed full-time within
the Police and Fire Department for which it is practicable to determine the
merit and fitness of applicants by competitive examination. The classified
service shall be defined according to the Charter. All members of the
classified service, who have permanent status, must be a citizen of the United
States, or hold a valid permanent resident card.
(ORC 124.22)
3.2  Classification Plan.
   A classification plan for the employees in the classified service shall be
adopted and maintained by the Civil Service Commission, which plan shall
provide for the standardization and classification of all positions and
employments in the classified service of the city. Such classification into
groups and subdivisions shall be based upon and graded according to duties and
responsibilities, and so arranged as to permit the filling of the higher
grades, so far as practicable, through promotions.
3.3  Power of Commission to Change Classes.
   The Commission may, from time to time, designate new classes, combine,
alter, or abolish existing classes. The Commission shall have the sole power to
create new classifications.
3.4  Content of Classification Plan.
   The classification plan, which shall be maintained by the Commission, shall
include an alphabetical listing of all classifications, which have been
established together with job descriptions for each classification. The
categorization of classes into groups and subdivisions shall be reflected in
the job descriptions, which also identify the general duties, responsibilities
and qualification requirements for the kinds of positions included in each
classification.
3.5  Amending Official Classification.
   It shall be the duty of the Commission to study new positions or existing
positions in which there is doubt as to the appropriate titling. The Commission
shall amend as necessary the official classification to reflect the results of
such studies.
SECTION IV - APPLICATION
4.1  General.
   Every applicant for admission to any examination for a position in the
classified service must be citizen of the United States or hold a valid
permanent resident card and meet the age requirements as stated in the exam
announcement. Applications shall be furnished by the Commission.
4.2  Applications.
   Applications for admission to any examination shall be made upon application
forms approved by the Commission. All applications shall be legibly printed in
ink or be typed, shall be signed by the applicant, in his or her own
handwriting, notarized, and filed in the office of the Commission within the
time limit fixed by the Commission for the particular examination.
4.3  Rejection of Applications.
   All applications shall be preliminarily reviewed by an authorized
representative of the Commission who shall report the results of such review to
the Commission for acceptance, rejection or modification. Applications may be
rejected for any of the following reasons:
   (A)   If the applicant has not met the qualifications specified on the
announcement by the filing deadline or has intentionally made false statements
on his or her application with regard to any material.
   (B)   That the applicant will not attain the prescribed minimum age or has
exceeded the maximum age specified on the announcement on or prior to the date
of the written examination.
   (C)   That the applicant was previously in the classified service or any
branch of public service or any other type of employment and was removed for
cause or did not resign in good standing.
   (D)   That the applicant cannot speak and write the English language.
   (E)   Any other just and reasonable cause.
   Upon rejection of any application, the applicant shall be promptly notified
of such fact and the reason therefore, whereupon, he or she may within three
working days after receipt of such notice, file a written complaint against
such rejection. If any such complaint from a rejection is pending at the time
an examination is scheduled to be held, the applicant shall be allowed to take
the examination pending the decision in such inquiry. If the Commission finds
the rejection justified, the examination paper shall not be included among
those to be eligible for certification.
SECTION V - EXAMINATIONS
POLICE DEPARTMENTS AND FIRE DEPARTMENTS
   Whenever the Commission shall decide that the good of the civil service will
be promoted thereby, it may hold an examination for any office or position in
the classified service. Appointments and promotions in the civil service of the
state shall be made according to merit and fitness, to be ascertained, as far
as practicable, by competitive examinations. Laws shall be passed providing for
the enforcement of this provision (Article XV, Sec. 10, Ohio Constitution).
5.1  Place.
   Examinations may be held as such places as the Commission deems advisable
and shall be administered under its direction.
5.2  Notice of Examination.
   All notices of examination shall clearly state the time, place and location
of the examination and its terms, conditions and components including but not
limited to citizenship, minimum age, type of examination, which shall consist
of: written, physical agility, complete medical exam including drug testing and
psychological exam which shall consist of a written exam and a personal
interview.
   (A)   Entrance examination notice of competitive entrance examinations for
the positions in the classified service shall be done by posting notices via
electronic media, by posting notices conspicuously at the city designated
posting boards, city web site (R.C. § 124.23(G)) and in such other places as
may be deemed advisable, not less than two weeks prior to such examination.
   (B)   Promotional examinations notice of competitive promotional
examinations to be held shall be given by posting of bulletins in conspicuous
places in the departments whose employees may be interested or may be by
individual communications to the employees eligible for such promotion. Such
notice shall be given not less than two weeks prior to the examination.
5.3  Entrance Examination Fees.
   The Commission shall have the right and option to fix reasonable fees for
the privilege of taking entrance examinations. Said fees to be used to off-set
costs of administering the examination. The announced fees must be paid by the
applicant according to the requirements specified on the announcement. In the
event of willful misrepresentation, refunds will not be issued.
5.4  Identity of Examinees Concealed.
   The identity of all persons taking a competitive assembled written
examination shall be concealed by use of an identification number, which shall
be used on the examination papers. The examination shall be commenced by
requiring each competitor to fill out and sign an identification sheet,
containing his or her examination number and also his or her name and address,
and other such information as the Commission may require, and seal the same in
an official envelope. All identification sheets shall be placed in a sealed
package and deposited in a safe place, and the package shall be opened for the
identification of papers only after the marking has been completed on all
papers. All exam papers submitted by competitors shall contain their numbers
only, and any paper bearing the name of the applicant or any other
identification mark shall be rejected. Specific announcement of these facts
shall be made at the commencement of the examination.
5.5  Admitting Applicants to Examination.
   No applicant shall be admitted to any assembled examination more than 30
minutes after the advertised time for beginning such examination. Late arrivals
shall only be given the balance of the stated time allotted to complete the
examination
5.6  Examination Time Limitation.
   No applicant in any examination shall be given a longer time on any subject
than prescribed by the Commission when examination questions are approved.
Exception to be made in compliance with all ADA and 504 of the Rehabilitation
Act of 1973 (12/16).
5.7  Frauds in Examination Prohibited.
   No person or officer shall:
   (A)   Willfully or corruptly by himself or herself or in cooperation with
one or more persons defect, deceive, or obstruct any person in respect of his
or her right of examination, appointment or employment arising under the
Revised Code or under any rules and regulations described pursuant thereto or
herein;
   (B)   Willfully or corruptly, falsely mark, grade, estimate or report upon
the examination or proper standing of any person examined, registered or
certified pursuant to the provisions of the Ohio Revised Code or aid in doing
so;
   (C)   Willfully or corruptly make any false representation concerning the
results of such examination or concerning any person examined;
   (D)   Willfully or corruptly furnish to any person any special or secret
information for the purpose of either improving or injuring the prospects or
chances of any person so examined, registered or certified, or to be appointed,
employed or promoted;
   (E)   Willfully impersonate any other person, or permit or aid in any manner
any other person to impersonate him or her, in connection with any examination,
registration or appointment or application or request to be examined,
registered or appointed;
   (F)   Furnish any false information about himself or herself, or any other
person, in connection with any examination, registration or appointment or
application or request to be examined, registered or appointed;
   (G)   Make known or assist in making known to any applicant for examination,
any question to be asked on such examination;
   (H)   For any applicant taking an examination to assist any other applicant
in any manner whatsoever;
   (I)   Personally solicit a favor from any member of the Commission,
appointing officer, or have any person in his or her behalf solicit a favor;
   (J)   Any applicant in any examination found to be using any means of
information, other than that provided in the examination itself, such as
memoranda, technology devices of any sort, pamphlets or books of any kind to
assist him or her in answering the questions, shall have his or her examination
papers taken up and filed with a zero marking when the circumstances justify
such action; or
   (K)   Electronic devices of any kind shall not be permitted in the testing
room. (4/24/09)
5.8  Visitors at Examinations.
   No visitor shall be admitted to the examination room during any examination
except by special permission of the person in charge.
5.9  Types and Methods of Examination.
   The Commission shall determine and state in the announcement of each
examination whether it will be competitive, noncompetitive, recruitment or
promotional or any combination thereof.
5.10  Character of Examinations and Weights Thereof.
   An examination may include an evaluation of such factors as education,
training, capacity, knowledge, manual dexterity, and physical or psychological
fitness. An examination shall consist of one or more tests in any combination.
Test may be written, oral, physical, demonstration of skill or an evaluation of
training and experiences and shall be designed to fairly test the relative
capacity of the persons examined to discharge the particular duties of the
position for which appointment is sought. Tests may include structured
interviews, assessment centers, work simulation, examination of knowledge,
skills, and abilities, and any other acceptable testing methods (R.C. § 124.23
(D)). The Commission shall prescribe the subjects of each examination and the
relative weights to be attached thereto provided that any such determination
must have been adopted prior to the date of such examination.
5.11  Separate Exams for Police, Dispatch, Corrections Officer and Firefighter/
Paramedic.
   Separate examinations shall be given and separate eligibility lists
maintained by the Commission for original appointments to and promotions in the
above said categories. No person may be transferred from one list to the other.
Appointments and promotions in the departments shall be only from the separate
eligible lists maintained for each of the departments. Transfers of personnel
from one department to the other are hereby prohibited.
5.12  Parts of Examination.
   The Commission shall determine in the case of each examination the parts or
subjects into which it shall be divided and the weight to be assigned to each
part. The parts, which shall be recognized, will include written test, physical
agility, medical, psychological and other tests as the Commission deems
appropriate. No written examination shall be held except in the presence of the
examiner(s) duly assigned by the Commission.
5.13  Postponement and Cancellation.
   The Commission may postpone or cancel any examination because of an
inadequate number of applicants or for any other just and sufficient cause. The
qualifications for admission to a postponed examination may be altered at the
discretion of the Commission so as to secure an adequate number of applicants;
however, these alterations shall be adequately publicized. Notice shall be
given to all applicants when an examination is postponed or canceled and such
additional announcements and publications as needed shall be issued to notify
the public. Applicants in any postponed or canceled examination will be
eligible to compete in the next rescheduled examination without filing a
separate application or the payment of an additional fee. If a postponement
occurs, the age requirement will apply using the original test date.
5.14 Validation of Examination Results and Revocation of Lists.
   No examination shall be deemed to have been completed until the markings and
results have been determined, and the Commission has published an eligible
list. An eligible list may be revoked and another examination ordered only
when, in the judgment of the Commission, such action is deemed advisable by
reasons of errors, fraud or obviously inappropriate standards prescribed in
connection with any examination. All applicants in the first examination shall
be notified and shall be eligible to compete in the rescheduled examination
without filing a separate application or the payment of an additional fee. No
eligible list shall be altered or revoked except upon written notice to all
persons whose standing may be affected and upon entry in the minutes of the
Commission of the reasons for such alteration or revocation.
5.15  Examination Scores.
   The detailed score of all applicants shall be kept on file by the Commission
so long as the eligible list created from the examination remains in effect.
These scores may be inspected at the office of the Commission upon request to
the Commission Administrator or Chairperson of the Commission.
SECTION VI - ELIGIBLE LIST
6.1  Posting of Lists.
   The Commission, as soon as possible after every examination, shall prepare
and keep on file for public inspection, the list of applicants who have passed
the examination and who are otherwise eligible for appointment to the position
or class of positions for which the examination was held. All applicants who
receive a final average rating of 70% or more in all examinations, shall be
placed on the eligible list in the order of their relative standings as
determined by combining their examination points and additional credits
together with the date on which they are entered on the list and the date of
their examination.
6.2  Rank.
   Whenever two or more applicants competing for the same position(s) have the
same standings, their respective priorities on the eligible list shall be the
same as the order in which they scored on the examination. This is then
followed by the order in which their applications were filed, provided that
applicants eligible for veterans preference under R.C. §§ 124.23 and 124.26,
shall receive priority rank on the eligible list over non-veterans on the list
with a rating equal to that veteran.
6.3  Duration of Lists.
   The term of eligibility of each list shall be fixed by the Commission at not
less than one year or more than two years.
6.4  Transfer to Lower Class.
   At the discretion of the Commission, the name of any eligible may, at any
time, upon written request of the applicant, be transferred to the eligible
list for a lower class in the same series requiring qualifications of the same
general character. He or she shall be ranked thereon according to his or her
original grade.
6.5  Removal from Eligible List.
   Names may be removed from an eligible list only by action of the Commission
for the following reasons:
   (A)   Request of the eligible;
   (B)   Failure to accept appointment upon certification unless a waiver is
granted by the Commission;
   (C)   That the applicant does not meet the physical, medical or mental
requirements of the position to which he or she seeks appointment, is addicted
to the habitual use of drugs or intoxicating liquors to excess, who has a
pattern of poor work habits and performance with previous employers, has been
guilty of a crime or infamous or notoriously disgraceful conduct, has been
dismissed from employment for flagrant delinquency or misconduct, when
determined to be unsuitable based on background check or if applicant has
failed to be certified for appointment within the city three or more times.
   (D)   Upon conclusion of a disqualification hearing; and
   (E)   Any other just and reasonable cause.
6.6  Disqualification of Eligible Applicants.
   If at any time after the creation of an eligible list, the Commission has
reason to believe that any person whose name appears on any list is
disqualified for appointment because of incapacity subsequent to his or her
examination, because of deception or fraud in his or her application or in his
or her examination or for other just and reasonable cause, such person shall be
notified and given an opportunity to be heard. Such request must be sent by
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the Civil Service Commission and
postmarked within five working days upon receipt of notification. If such
person shall fail to appear for hearing, or upon being heard, fail to satisfy
the Commission, his name shall be removed from such eligible list.
6.7  Change of Address and Phone Number.
   Each person on an eligible list shall file with the Commission written
notice of any change of address or phone number. Failure to do so may be
considered sufficient reason for not certifying his or her name to the
appointing authorities for future appointments. Such notice shall include the
eligible name, the eligible list on which it appears, his or her new address
and phone number, and his or her last address and phone number registered with
the Commission.
SECTION VII - CERTIFICATION AND ORIGINAL APPOINTMENTS
   Appointments to all positions in the classified service that are not filled
by transfer, reduction, or temporary appointments, as provided by the rules and
regulations of the Commission, shall be made only from those persons whose
names are certified to the appointing authority in accordance with the rules of
the Commission and the Ohio Revised Code. All certifications for performance of
the job appointed to shall be maintained according to the oath of office and
job description given.
7.1  Number of Names to be Certified.
   (A)   The Mayor, Fire, or Police Chief shall notify the Commission of the
Classified Service to be filled. The Commission shall certify the names and
addresses of the top ten names, or top 25%, whichever is greater, to the
appointing authority.
   (B)   In the event that ten or fewer names are on the eligible list, the
appointing authority may select any of the listed candidates. Once Commission
receives a list of eligible candidates for a position, the appointing authority
shall fill such position by appointment of one of the top 25% eligible
certified applicants within 30 days.
   (C)   If more than one position is to be filled, the Civil Service
Commission may certify a group of names from the eligible list and the
appointing authority shall appoint in the following manner:
      Beginning at the top of the list, each time a selection is made it must
be from one of the remaining top 25% on the list who is willing to accept
consideration for the position. If less than ten names remain on a list, then
appointment from that list shall not be mandatory. This provision shall be
interpreted and applied consistent with R.C. § 124. 27.
7.2  Notice of Certification.
   Written notice of certification stating the test scores, extra credit, and
rank to his or her last address on file with the Commission, at the time such
certification is made to the appointing authority. If an eligible shall not
respond to such notice, or cannot be located by the postal authorities, he or
she shall be removed from the eligible list. However, if such eligible shall
make it apparent within 30 days after the mailing of such notice, that he or
she was unavoidably and without fault on his or her part prevented from
responding to such notice, he or she may be restored to the eligible list from
which he or she was removed, according to his or her percentage of standing for
such list for future consideration to appointment.
7.3  Certification Not More than Three Times.
   A person certified from an eligible list more than three times to the same
appointing authority for the same or similar positions, may be omitted from
future certification to such appointing authority provided that certification
for a temporary appointment shall not be counted as one of such certifications.
7.4  Notification of Appointment.
   (A)   The appointing authority shall forthwith report to the Commission the
name of such appointee, the title of the position, the duties, and
responsibilities of same (job description), the salary, or compensation
thereof, and such other information as the Commission may require in order to
keep its roster.
   (B)   Eligible applicants certified and not appointed shall thereupon be
restored to their proper position upon the eligible list, except as otherwise
provided. In the event that eligible appointed shall decline the appointment or
shall fail to accept the same, or shall fail to respond to the notice as above
provided, the appointing authority shall make no appointment but shall
immediately notify the Commission of such fact. The Commission thereupon shall
remove such eligible from the list and make a new certification to the
appointing authority.
7.5  Waiver of Certification.
   Eligible applicants on any list may waive certification before, but not
after being certified, upon giving reasons in writing satisfactory to the
Commission. If the reasons assigned are not approved by the Commission, an
eligible may be removed from the list. Within 30 days thereafter, an eligible
so removed may be restored to the list provided satisfactory reasons for such
action are presented to and approved by the Commission. An eligible so filing a
waiver shall not be entitled to certification as long as his or her waiver
remains on file and is not withdrawn; but no waiver shall be permitted for a
longer period than six months, after which time if the waiver is not withdrawn,
the eligible shall be removed from the list. A second waiver to the same list
shall not be allowed.
7.6  Probationary Period; Probationary Removal or Reduction.
   (A)   All original appointments, including provisional appointments to the
Police and Fire Departments, shall be for an uncontestable probationary period
of one year active service (provided for purposes of this section, the term
‘year’ shall include not less than 2080 hours of active service). Service as a
provisional employee in the same or similar class shall be included in the
probationary period. No appointment shall be final until the appointee has
satisfactorily served his or her probationary period.
   (B)   Unless the probationary appointee has been removed or reduce earlier,
the appointing authority, at any time during the ten-day period before the end
of the probationary period, shall inform the Commission, in writing, of his or
her decision to remove such appointee. If the appointing authority’s decision
is to remove the appointee, his or her communication to the Commission shall
state the reason for such decision.
7.7  Emergency and Temporary Appointments.
   In case of an emergency, a temporary appointment may be made without regard
to the rules and regulations of the Commission, but shall in no event continue
longer than six months nor shall successive temporary appointments be made.
Temporary appointments made necessary by reason of sickness or disability of
the regular employee, shall continue only during such period of sickness or
disability. All such emergency appointments shall be made, insofar as
practical, from the class or grade of positions immediately below the class or
grade in which the vacancy exists and shall be promptly reported to the
Commission by the appointing authority.
7.8  Age Requirements.
   No person shall be shall be eligible to receive an original appointment to
the Police Department unless the person has reached the age of 21 on or prior
to the date of the exam. No person shall be eligible to receive an original
appointment to the Fire Department unless the person has reached the age of 18
on or prior to the date of the exam. No person shall be eligible for original
appointment for either department on or after their 35th birthday. Applicants
attaining the age of 35 during the certification process shall be notified in
writing of their removal for appointment consideration on the certified list.
The maximum age for employment with the Police and Fire Department shall be 67.
(2/4/19; 6/17/19)
7.9  Physical Requirements.
   No person shall be eligible to receive an original appointment to either
department unless they have passed a physical exam in accordance with R.C. §§
124.41 and 124.42 no more than 120 days prior to such date of such appointment.
Such physical must certify that the applicant is free of cardiovascular and
pulmonary diseases and meets the physical requirements necessary to perform
their duties as required. Copies of the physical exam report will be filed with
the Police and Firemen’s Disability and Pension Fund by the appointed
authority. The fee for the physical exam shall be paid by the Commission.
7.10  Rating of Competitors.
   (A)   Examinations - The passing grade in all such examinations shall be a
total of 70%.
      (1)   Written examinations - The total examination grade attainable in
each examination shall be 100 points. In examinations composed of more than one
part, the method of scoring shall be:
         (a)   Each part of the examination shall be separately rated and the
proficiency of each competitor determined on the basis of a scale of 100 for
maximum possible attainment.
         (b)   Each part shall be assigned a weight, which shall be based on
the relative value of the part to that of the entire examination expressed in
terms of percent of the total.
         (c)   The total examination grade or each examinee in each part of the
examination shall be multiplied by the weight assigned to the part and the sum
of the totals shall be the total examinations grade for the participant.
      (2)   Physical Agility Exam - Physical examinations, when required, shall
include tests of bodily condition, muscular strength, agility and physical
fitness to perform the work of the position. When physical assessments are
requested by the Commission, the Commission shall designate who will administer
the physical assessment. The person(s) or company so designated shall submit
verification of attaining a passing score as set by the Commission in the
announcement in order to allow the Commission to certify the applicants’
qualifications. (4/24/09)
      (3)   Medical and Psychological Examinations - When medical and
psychological assessments are requested by the Commission, the Commission shall
designate who will administer said examinations. The person(s) or company so
designated shall submit a full report as to the suitability of the applicant
for the position in order to allow the Commission to certify the applicant’s
qualifications. Said results shall be used solely to determine an applicant’s
eligibility for appointment and results shall not become a part of the
applicant’s grade resulting from examination or earned additional credits.
Psychological results will not be a part of the applicant’s permanent record
and will be used solely by the Commission and appointing authority to determine
the applicant’s suitability to perform the required duties of the job. Except
as otherwise needed to determine applicant’s suitability for hire, all results
thereafter will be permanently sealed and released only upon order from a court
of competent jurisdiction.
   (B)   Additional Credit - Provided the applicant receives a total passing
grade of 70% on the examinations, additional credit may be granted for military
service, college degree and city service. Such credit shall not be a part of,
but shall be a credit to be added to the applicant’s earned grade resulting
from the competitive examination.  Under no circumstances will more than ten
points be awarded from one or any combination of extra credit criteria.
      (1)   Military Credit - When proper proof of an undeleted honorable
discharge (DD214 box #1-30) from the Armed Forces of the United States is
submitted to the Commission with the application, a candidate for entrance
examination shall be granted additional credit. Any person who has completed
service in the uniformed services, who has been honorably discharged from the
uniformed service or transferred to the reserve with evidence of satisfactory
service, and who is a resident of this state and any member of a reserve
component of the Armed Forces of the United States, including the Ohio National
Guard, who has completed more than 180 days of active duty service may file a
certificate of service or honorable discharge shall receive additional credit
of one point for each full year thereafter up to a maximum total of ten points
to the passing grade. 2.5% beginning at 180 days of active service and 2.5%
each full year thereafter up to a total of 20% of the passing grade (R.C. §
124.23(C)(1). Such credit does not apply to promotional examinations.
      (2)   College Credit for Original Appointment - An applicant who has
earned an Associate or Baccalaureate degree from an accredited institution may
receive an additional credit of two points for an Associate or four points for
Bachelors. Proper proof of degree granted, that being official college
transcript or copy of diploma, must be submitted at the time of filing
application. Such credit will be factored by the candidates total passing
examination grade.
      (3)   City Service - An additional credit of eight points shall be
granted to city employees who are in good standing, who have completed all
probationary requirements as part-time employees and are moving to full time
status, within the same job classification, in either the Police or Fire
Department (12/16). City service credit shall only apply to entrance level
examinations.
SECTION VIII - PROMOTIONS
8.1  Promotions.
   Vacancies in positions in the classified service shall be filled insofar as
possible from persons holding positions in a rank lower than the position to be
filled in the department and class from which the opening exists. Promotion in
the classified service is made based on merit and by conduct and capacity in
office.
(ORC 124.31)
8.2  Promotional Examinations.
   (A)   Whenever there is a vacancy in a position in any department above the
lowest grade, the Commission shall ascertain whether there are at least two
employees in the next lower rank who have served according to the rules
established by the Commission. Whenever the Commission determines there are
less than two employees holding positions in the rank lower than the position
to be filled, the Commission shall allow employees holding positions in the
next lower rank to compete with the employees holding positions in the rank
lower than the positions to be filled.
   (B)   In no case shall any person be considered for the position of Chief
unless he or she has served a minimum of seven years full time with that
department in the city. (4/24/09)
   (C)   Employees having less than five years seniority within the department
will not be eligible for supervisory promotions.
   (D)   Employees in supervisory positions will not be eligible for promotion
unless they have served a minimum of one year in a lower class supervisory
position in the Police Department and at least two years in the Fire
Department.
   (E)   Promotions shall in every case involve a definite change in duties and
an increase in compensation.
8.3  Separate Examinations for Police and Fire.
   Separate examinations shall be given and separate eligible lists maintained
by the Commission for promotional appointment in the Fire and Police
Departments. No person may be transferred from one list to the other.
Appointments of promotion in the departments shall only be from the separate
eligible lists maintained for each department. Transfers of personnel from one
department to the other are prohibited. Employees who wish to take a
promotional exam on the Fire Department must first show proof of being a
current State of Ohio certified paramedic.
8.4  Rating of Competitors.
   (A)   Exam and Assessment.
      (1)   Promotional testing shall be conducted by “industry professionals”
qualified to determine duties associated with the particular job classification
that the applicant seeks to occupy. The promotional appointments shall be
determined by percentage score total of two distinct categories each of which
carries its own weight to equal 100%. They are as follows:
 
                     Police Department  Fire Department
                    Chief Lt. Sgt.     Chief Asst. Chief Lt.
General written exam 60%   70% 75%      60%   70%         75%
Oral assessment      40%   30% 25%      40%   30%         25%
 
         (a)   General Written Exam - The written exam shall consist of several
parts, that being; technical, supervisory, administrative practices and legal.
The passing grade in all such examinations shall be a total of 70%.
         (b)   Oral Structured Interview and Assessment - This exam will be
conducted by a qualified testing and evaluation service determined by the
Commission and shall consist of measurement  in leadership and supervisory
ability, decision-making and communication skills. The passing grade shall be a
total of 70%.
      (2)   Whenever it is determined that there are less than four candidates
eligible for promotion then the “rule of three” is in effect, the top three
promotional candidates must be considered, the general written exam shall equal
100% of the total score. Each passing candidate will then complete an
administration leadership assessment for promotional consideration. The
assessment will be conducted by a qualified agency of the Commissions choice
(8/4/10).
      (3)   Rule of Three for Fire and Police.
         (a)   Fire Department.
            1.   When, in the employer’s sole determination, a vacancy or
vacancies exist in any of the ranks, the employer shall make such promotional
decisions consistent with the following rule of three:
               For one vacancy, the promotional selection will be made from the
three persons standing highest on the civil service eligibility list. For
example: for 2-4 candidates, add two to the number of vacancies.
            2.   The employer shall utilize the Civil Service rules and
regulations to establish the eligibility list.
         (b)   Police Department.
            1.   When, in the employer’s sole determination, a vacancy or
vacancies exist in any of the ranks, the employer shall make such promotional
decisions consistent with the following rule of three: for one vacancy, the
promotional selection will be made from the three persons standing highest on
the civil service eligibility list.
               a.   For 2-4 vacancies, add two to the number of vacancies.
               b.   For 5-8 vacancies, add four to the number of vacancies.
               c.   For 9-12 vacancies, add six to the number of vacancies.
               d.   For 13-16 vacancies, add eight to the number of vacancies.
            2.   The employer, at its sole discretion, may use any and all
evaluation methods including outside professional assessment, and the like, to
rank candidates for promotional consideration.
            3.   The employer shall utilize the Civil Service rules and
regulations to establish the eligibility list.
            4.   In the event the employer makes a temporary, provisional, or
emergency promotional appointment of a member in accordance with the Civil
Service rules and regulations, the member shall be entitled to the pay
applicable to the position to which the member was appointed on a temporary,
provisional or emergency basis, during the term of such appointment. No such a
temporary, provisional, or emergency appointment shall be construed to entitle
the member to a promotional appointment on a permanent basis as described
above.
   (B)   Additional Credit.  Provided that the applicant receives a total
passing grade of 70% on the examination, additional credit may be granted.
      (1)   College Credit. College shall be added as extra credit. College
credit will be given to candidates submitting a copy of the degree granted by
closing date and time posted for intent to participate in the examination. Such
credit shall only be factored to applicants achieving a minimum passing score
of 70% on the promotional examination. Credit shall be granted equal to two
additional points for an associate degree or four additional points for a
Bachelor degree. (1/17/03)
      (2)   Seniority.
         (a)   Seniority credit shall be rated according to each employee’s
anniversary date with the department and shall be applied relative to the date
of the exam.
         (b)   Employees taking promotional examinations shall receive credit
for seniority and experience, which shall be based on the following scale:
            Credit for seniority shall be given as follows: one point shall be
added for each of the first four years of service and six-tenths of a point
shall be added for each year for the next ten years of service. In computing
the credit for seniority, half of the credit specified in this paragraph shall
be given for a half year of service (R.C. § 124.45).
8.6  Inspection of Examination Papers.
   Any competitor, upon request to the Commission, shall have the right to
inspect his examination report.
   (A)   Prior to Grading.
      (1)   Participants in any promotional examination may inspect the
examination questions together with the answer key for objective tests for a
period of not more than five days after the date of receipt of test scores,
(Sundays and holidays excluded). An appointment to view the questions and
answer key shall be made with the Commission Administrator or in his or her
absence, with the Commission Chairperson. Participants can make notes on any
disputed questions. Any protest by a participant as to the questions asked or
the answer key must be filed in writing with the Commission Secretary within
the five-day period and must contain detailed supportive information and
authority therefore. Immediately following this inspection period, the
Commission shall carefully consider all objections and make such changes in the
answer key as are warranted after which the answer key adopted shall be used in
the actual scoring of the examination papers. Civil Service rules shall prevail
in all areas of inspection of examination paper (3/19/10).
      (2)   The examination papers of each applicant shall then be graded and
each competitor shall be notified by mail as to his grade.
   (B)   After Notice of Grade has been Received.
      (1)   Each participant shall have the right to inspect his or her
examination papers together with the answer key within ten days of the postal
date stamped on the mailed notice of his or her grade (Sundays and holidays
excluded) and to inform himself or herself as to the markings given to him or
her in each subject or question. An appointment to view the test paper and
answer key shall be made with the Commission Administrator or in his or her
absence, with the Commission Chairperson. Any protest as to errors in scoring
objective tests or grading essay tests must be filed in person by appointment
with the Commission Administrator.
      (2)   The Commission shall then consider all protests and make such
changes as are warranted. The Commission shall then establish the eligible list
and no grades given in any examination shall be changed after the posting of
any eligible list except that the Commission may correct clerical errors of
examiners or employees at any time before the expiration of such lists.
8.7  Certification.
   Certification of all eligible to promotional positions in the classified
service shall be made only from those persons that have achieved a final
passing score of 70%. The certified list for promotional appointment shall be
fixed by the Commission for not less than one year or more than two years
unless no eligible candidates remain for appointment. (4/24/09)
8.8  Probationary Time, Probationary Removal or Reduction.
   All promotional appointments, including provisional appointments to the
Police and Fire Departments respectively, shall be for an uncontestable
probationary period of one-year active service. Service as a provisional
employee in the same or similar class shall be included in the probationary
period. No appointment shall be final until the appointee has satisfactorily
served his probationary period.
8.9  Interrupted Service.
   When service in the city’s classified service is interrupted by service in
the Armed Forces of the United States, seniority credit shall be granted in
promotional examinations for the time so served, but shall not be credited
towards probationary service. No additional credit for military service shall
be allowed in promotional examinations for Police or Fire Departments.
8.10  Special Positions.
   If within any rank of the Police and Fire Departments, special positions
having special duties with preferential pay are established, as otherwise
provided by law such special positions shall not establish eligibility to the
next higher rank to the exclusion of other persons in the same rank who do not
hold such special positions. No special position established within the rank in
a Fire or Police Department shall be filled without promotional examination in
the same manner as promotions from rank to rank.
8.11  Filling Vacancies.
   (A)   Whenever a vacancy occurs in a promoted rank in a Police or Fire
Department and no eligible list for such rank exists, the appointing authority
shall certify the fact to the Civil Service Commission and the Commission
shall, within 60 days of such vacancy, conduct a competitive promotional
examination. After such examination has been held, an eligible list shall be
established, and the Commission shall certify to the appointing authority the
name(s) of the three persons receiving the highest grade. Upon such
certification, the appointing authority shall appoint one of the three persons
so certified within 30 days for the Police Department and within ten days for
the Fire Department. (4/24/09) Where the appointing authority chooses to
appoint an eligible other than the top scorer, the appointing authority shall
advise the eligible and the commission in writing of the reason for choosing
the appointment.
   (B)   When an eligible list is in existence and a vacancy occurs in a
position for which the list is established, the appointing authority shall
certify the fact to the Civil Service Commission. The three persons standing
highest on such list shall be certified to the appointing authority, and one of
the three persons shall be appointed within 30 days for the Police Department
and within ten days for the Fire Department. (4/24/09) Where the appointing
authority chooses to appoint an eligible other than the top scorer the
appointing authority shall advise the eligible and the commission in writing of
the reason for choosing the appointment.
(ORC 124.44, 124.45, 124.48)
SECTION IX - TRANSFERS, REINSTATEMENTS AND LAYOFFS
9.1  Layoff Procedures.
   Whenever it becomes necessary in any office or department other than the
Police and Fire Departments through lack of work or lack of funds to reduce the
number of employees within a class, provisional appointees, if any, shall be
next to be laid off.
9.2  Layoffs or Reductions in the Police and Fire Departments.
   Whenever it becomes necessary in the Police and Fire Departments, through
lack of work of funds, or for causes other than outlined in Section X to reduce
the force in such department, the youngest employee in point of service shall
be first laid off. Should a position in the Police or Fire Department, once
abolished or made unnecessary, be found necessary to be recreated or
reestablished within three years from the date of abolishment, or should a
vacancy occur through death, resignation or any other cause within three years
from the date of abolishment of the position of layoff, the oldest employee in
point of service of those laid off shall be entitled to the position, providing
he or she was at the date of his or her separation a regular and permanent
employee. When a position above the rank of patrolman in the Police Department
and above the rank of regular fireman in the Fire Department is abolished, and
the incumbent has been permanently appointed, he or she shall be demoted to the
next lower rank and the youngest officer in point of service in the next lower
rank shall be demoted, and so on down until the youngest person in point of
service has been reached, who shall be laid off.
9.3  Establishment of “Layoff” List.
   The names of persons holding permanent positions in the classified service
which have been abolished or made necessary to be placed by the Commission on
an appropriate “layoff” list in order of their original appointment and for a
period not to exceed one year, shall be certified to all appointing authorities
as in the case of original appointments. Whenever discontinued positions are
reestablished by an appointing authority and a request is made for
certification of eligible, former employees of the department in question who
have been laid off and whose names appear on the “layoff” list shall be first
to receive appointment in reverse order of their layoff.
9.4  Reinstatements.
   (A)   Any permanently appointed employee who has resigned without
delinquency may be reinstated, without requisition upon the Commission, by an
appointing authority at any time within one year from the date of such
separation provided there are no former employees of the department who have
been laid off and whose names appear on the eligible list for the class. A
notice of such reinstatement shall be sent to the Commission for its approval.
Any person holding an office or position under the classified service in a Fire
or Police Department who is separated there from due to injury or physical
disability incurred in the performance of duty shall be reinstated immediately,
or one suffering injury or physical disability incurred other than in the
performance of duty may be reinstated upon filing with the chief of the
department, a written application for reinstatement, to the office or position
he or she held at the time of such separation, after passing a physical
examination showing that he or she has recovered from the injury or other
physical disability and capable of performing the required duties. The physical
examination shall be made by a licensed physician designated by the Commission,
within two weeks after application has been made, provided that such
application for reinstatement is filed within five years from the date of
separation from said department, and further provided that such application
shall not be filed after the date of service eligibility retirement.
   (B)   Any person holding an office or position under the classified service
in a Police or Fire Department, who resigns therefrom, may be reinstated to the
rank of fireman or policeman, upon the filing of a written application for
reinstatement with the Commission and a copy thereof to the chief of said
department, and upon passing a physical examination disclosing that the person
is physically and or psychologically fit to perform the duties of the office
which he or she seeks reinstatement to. The application for reinstatement shall
be filed within one year from the date of resignation. Any person reinstated
pursuant to the authority of this division (B) shall not receive credit for
seniority earned prior to said resignation and reinstatement, and shall not be
entitled to reinstatement to a position above the rank of fireman or patrolman,
regardless of the position the person may have held at the time of his or her
resignation.
9.5  Sick Leave.
   (A)   Employees may use sick leave upon approval of the responsible
administrative officer of the employing unit, for absence due to personal
illness, pregnancy, injury, exposure to contagious disease that could be
communicated to other employees and illness, injury or death in the employee’s
immediate family.
(ORC 124.38)
   (B)   The appointing authority of each employing unit shall require an
employee to furnish a satisfactory written, signed statement to justify the use
of sick leave. If medical attention is required, a certificate stating the
nature of the illness from a licensed physician shall be required to justify
the use of sick leave. Falsification of either a written, signed statement or a
physician’s certificate shall be grounds for disciplinary action including
dismissal.
9.6  Leave of Absence.
   The appointing authority may grant a personal leave of absence to an
employee in the classified service for a period of not to exceed six months or
as otherwise provided by law. Upon expiration of such leave of absence, such
officer or employee shall be reinstated, provided, however, that if the officer
or employee is a provisional appointee, the leave of absence if granted, is
subject to the establishment of an eligible list and terminates automatically
in case an eligible list for said position is established at any time during
the period of leave of absence. All such leaves of absence granted by
appointing authorities shall be referred to the Commission promptly for
approval, in order that the civil service status of such absentees may be
protected.
9.7  Absence Without Leave.
   Absence from duty without leave for any time will be considered neglect of
duty and good cause for dismissal. Any employee in the classified service, who
absents himself or herself from duty habitually or for three or more
consecutive duty days without leave and without notice to his or her superior
officer of the reasons for such absence, may be subject to removal for neglect
of duty. The resignation shall be entered upon the records of the Commission;
provided, however, that is at any time within 30 days the person so absenting
himself or herself shall make an explanation in writing satisfactory to the
Commission of the cause of absence, he or she may be reinstated to his or her
position. Failure to report after a leave has expired or has been disapproved
or revoked and canceled by the Commission shall be considered neglect of duty
and cause for discharge provided, however, that if an officer or employee so
discharged shall show to the satisfaction of the Commission that such failure
to report was excusable, the Commission may then order his or her
reinstatement.
9.8  Physical, Medical and Mental Examinations.
   Whenever in the judgment of the Commission, physical, medical or mental
qualifications are of importance, the person transferring, being reinstated, or
returning from leave of absence, sickness, or layoff, shall be required to pass
such examination(s) and be certified as qualified in such respect before
assuming his duties.
SECTION X - REDUCTIONS, SUSPENSIONS AND REMOVAL
10.1  General Limitations.
   No person in the classified service shall be reduced in pay or position,
suspended, removed, or otherwise discriminated against for religious or
political reasons or affiliations, for reasons of sex, race creed or color, or
any other reason not connected with his value to the service.
10.2  Tenure of Service.
   The tenure of every officer or employee in the classified service of the
city shall be during good behavior and efficient service and no such officer or
employee shall be reduced in pay or position, suspended or removed except for
incompetence, inefficiency, dishonesty, drunkenness, immoral conduct,
insubordination, discourteous treatment of the public, neglect of duty,
violation of ORC, the ordinances or laws of the city, or the rules and
regulations of the Commission, or any other failure of good behavior, or any
other acts of misfeasance, malfeasance, or nonfeasance in office.
10.3  Procedure to Be Followed.
   The appointing authority shall be charged with taking appropriate action
against any non-probationary officer or employee violating such good behavior
and efficient service responsibilities. A written report of any such action,
the period thereof, and the reasons therefore, shall be filed immediately with
the Commission.
   (A)   An officer or employee may be suspended for a period of not to exceed
24 working hours for purposes of discipline without the right of appeal.
Provided, however, that successive suspensions shall not be allowed.
   (B)   In any case of reduction, suspension for more than 24 working hours,
or removal, the appointing authority shall furnish such officer or employee a
written order of such action, which shall contain one or more reasons for
grounds for the action, together with such specifications of facts as shall
place him or her fairly upon his or her defense. No such action shall become
effective until such notice is served on such officer or employee.
10.4  Appeal.
   Within ten days following the filing of an order of reduction, suspension
for more than 24-working hours, or removal, the non-probationary employee may
file an appeal in writing with the Commission. In the event such an appeal if
filed, the Commission shall forthwith notify the appointing authority, and
shall hear such appeal within 30 days from and after its filing with the
Commission and it may affirm, disaffirm or modify the judgment of the
appointing authority.
SECTION XI - INVESTIGATIONS AND HEARINGS
11.1  Hearing Rules of Evidence; Representation by Counsel.
   Hearings before the Commission shall be conducted in an orderly manner. The
object of the hearing shall be to ascertain the truth concerning the matter to
which such hearing relates. The production of evidence on the hearing of
appeals and the Commission’s decision thereof shall be governed in general by,
but need not strictly follow, the rules of evidence, proof, and burden of proof
applied by courts in civil cases. The appellant and applicant may be
represented by counsel.
11.2  Time of Hearing; Notifications.
   Upon receipt of a timely appeal, the Commission shall set a time and place
to hear such appeal and shall provide not less than five days written notice to
the City’s Director of Law and the appropriate parties as well as their
attorney(s), if known.
11.3  Amendments to Orders.
   Amendments to the orders of removal, reduction in pay or position or
suspension for more than three working days may be made by the appointing
authority at any time provided the employee and his or her attorney, if any,
receive copies of the amended order prior to ten calendar days before the time
set for the hearing as herein provided.
11.4  Confidentiality of Hearings.
   Hearings may be public except when the nature of the charge may be offensive
to public morality and decency, or upon the employee’s or applicants request in
which case the Commission may order the hearing closed to the general public.
11.5  Presence of Witnesses.
   Each party may call witnesses to testify in his or her behalf. The
Commission, on its own initiative, may call witnesses other than those called
by either party, if in its judgment the merits of the cases so require.
Subpoenas shall be issued by the Commission Administrator for witnesses when
requested by either party or by the Commission.
11.6  Hearing Procedure.
   All parties shall be permitted to introduce evidence at the appeal hearing.
Hearings shall commence with a statement as to the nature of the appeal,
complaint or protest with oral statements given under oath. In appeals received
from an employee or officer in the classified service of the city from an order
or removal, reduction in pay or position, or suspension for more than 24
working hours.
   (A)   Hearings shall commence with a reading of the written statement of
charges certified to the Commission. If the appellant has replied in writing to
the charges, such reply shall be next read. If the appellant has not made a
reply to the charges, he or she or his or her counsel may next make an oral
statement of his or her objections to the charges. The appointing authority
shall begin the introduction of evidence and shall have the final rebuttal.
Closing arguments will be permitted only with the permission of the Commission.
      (1)   After notice of appeal is filed with the Commission, no material
amendment may be made to the statement of the charges made at the time of
demotion, suspension or dismissal. If the appellant files with the appointing
authority a written reply to the charges, such reply may not be materially
amended. In all cases, the issues involved shall be confined to the truth or
falsity of the allegations in the statement of charges.
      (2)   In appeals from the order of the appointing authority demoting,
suspending, or removing any classified employee, the complete transcript of
testimony and other evidence taken at the hearing before the appointing
authority shall constitute the record. The record shall be filed with the
Commission. Upon oral hearing, the Commission shall consider the record and may
hear additional testimony and other evidence. In lieu of an oral hearing, an
appeal may be submitted on the record before the appointing authority.
   (B)   Upon the completion of all evidence introduced, the Commission may
render its decision immediately, or may take the matter under advisement and
render its decision within a reasonable time thereafter.
   (C)   A copy of the decision including conclusions of fact supporting the
decision, shall be transmitted to the appellant and, if appropriate, the
appointing authority.
   (D)   If the appellant shall fail to appear at the time fixed for the
hearing, the Commission may hear evidence and render judgment thereon. If, when
appropriate, the appointing authority or his or her authorized representative
fails to appear in support of his or her charges, the Commission may render
judgment as by default or may hear evidence offered by the appellant and render
judgment thereon.
   (E)   Appeals of the decision of the Commission to the Court of Common Pleas
shall be taken within 30 days from the date of notice of the finding of the
Commission
11.7  Resignation before Final Action.
   The acceptance by an appointing authority, of the resignation of a person
discharged, before the final action by the Commission, will be considered a
withdrawal of the charges. Notice of such resignation shall be submitted
immediately to the Commission. The separation of the employee thus resigning
shall be entered upon the records of the Commission and the proceedings
dismissed without judgment.
(Ord. 78-13, passed 6-3-2013; Ord. 34-2018, passed 10-15-2018; Ord. 05-2019,
passed 2-4-2019; Ord. 13-2019, passed 6-17-2019)
CHAPTER 275:  STORM WATER MANAGEMENT BOARD
Section
275.01   Establishment; purpose
275.02   Composition, appointment and term
275.03   Powers and duties
Cross-reference:
   Storm Water Management, see
Chapter 1041
   Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan, see
Chapter 1334
§ 275.01  ESTABLISHMENT; PURPOSE.
   There is hereby established a Storm Water Management Board for the purposes
of hearing appeals from any wetland or riparian setback determination made
pursuant to this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 83-04, passed 6-21-2004)
§ 275.02  COMPOSITION, APPOINTMENT AND TERM.
   (A)   The Board shall consist of three electors having knowledge of soil
erosion, sediment control, forestry and any other such subject relating to soil
erosion and wetlands.
   (B)   Members shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the
majority of Council. Disapproval of an appointee by Council shall be
accompanied by a public statement of the reasons for disapproval. No member
shall hold any other municipal office or appointment in the municipality.
   (C)   The term of each member shall be for four years. Any vacancy occurring
during the unexpired term of any member shall be filled as originally provided
for the remainder of the term.
   (D)   The committee shall elect its Chairperson from among its appointed
members.
   (E)   The City Engineer shall serve as the advisor to the Board.
(Ord. 83-04, passed 6-21-2004)
§ 275.03  POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Storm Water Management Board shall hear all appeals from any
wetland or riparian setback determination made pursuant to this Code of
Ordinances, and meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairperson when
deemed necessary. All meetings of the Board shall be public.
   (B)   All decisions made by the Board shall be presented to City Council for
approval.
(Ord. 83-04, passed 6-21-2004)
CHAPTER 276:  PARKS AND RECREATION ADVISORY BOARD
Cross-reference:
   Additional building permit fee for recreational purposes, see §
1448.04
   Park and Recreation Advisory Board, see
CHTR. Art. V, § 10(b)
   Parks and recreation areas, see
Chapter 1062
   Recreation Department, see
Chapter 256
Editor’s note:
   This chapter was previously titled “Board of Recreation and Activities.” The
title was changed as part of the 1999 updating and revision of this Code of
Ordinances to reflect the amendment of Article V, Section 10(b), of the City
Charter on November 3, 1998.
   There are no sections in Chapter 276. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross-references and any future legislation.
CHAPTER 278:  SUNDRY CLAIMS BOARD
Section
278.01   Establishment; membership
278.02   Chairperson
278.03   Function of Board
278.04   Approval of claims
278.05   Appropriations
278.06   Contracts with recipients of sundry claims for release and
indemnification of city
278.07   Statute of limitations
Cross-reference:
   Authority to establish additional boards, etc., see
CHTR. Art. VI
   Department of Finance, see
Chapter 236
§ 278.01  ESTABLISHMENT; MEMBERSHIP.
   (A)   There is hereby established a Sundry Claims Board. The Sundry Claims
Board shall consist of five regular members and one alternate member as
follows:
      (1)   Council President;
      (2)   The Director of Finance;
      (3)   Three members of the electorate of the city approved by the Mayor
and confirmed by Council for a term of two years. Said term shall coincide with
the elected term of the Council President, except that the term of the
additional member shall be for the balance of the term held by Council
President; and
      (4)   The alternate member shall be a member of the electorate of the
city approved by the Mayor and confirmed by Council for a term of two years.
Said term shall coincide with the elected term of the Council President, except
that the term of the initial alternate member shall be for the balance of the
term held by the Council President. The alternate member shall be in addition
to the regular members and may substitute for the regular members who are
unable to attend a meeting or hearing by the Board. The alternate member shall
only be entitled to vote when substituting for a regular member who is unable
to attend a meeting or hearing by the Board.
   (B)   A meeting of any three members shall constitute a quorum.
(Ord. 86-91, passed 11-18-1991; Ord. 23-04, passed 2-17-2004; Ord. 103-11,
passed 8-22-2011)
§ 278.02  CHAIRPERSON.
   The President of Council shall be the Chairperson of the Sundry Claims
Board.
(Ord. 34-63, passed 7-1-1963)
§ 278.03  FUNCTION OF BOARD.
   The Sundry Claims Board may receive original papers representing claims
filed against the city. Such claims shall be filed and properly designated
either by number, or short title, or both. All such claims shall be carefully
investigated by such Board. The Chairperson of the Board may administer oaths,
compel the attendance of witnesses and compel the production of books and
papers. He or she may punish for disobedience of subpoena, for refusal to be
sworn or to answer as a witness or for failure to produce books and papers, in
the same manner as officers authorized to take depositions. After such
investigation, the Board shall either approve, approve with conditions and
limitations or disapprove each such claim and append to the original papers
representing each claim a concise statement of facts brought out in such
investigation upon which its approval or disapproval is based. Such original
papers and appended statements shall be filed in the office of the Director of
Finance and delivered to the Chairperson of the Council Finance Committee at
the next regular meeting of Council. A copy of the appended statement shall be
kept on file in the office of the Director of Finance, together with the
original papers representing such claims and any other matters pertaining
thereto, for a period of ten years.
(Ord. 34-63, passed 7-1-1963)
§ 278.04  APPROVAL OF CLAIMS.
   (A)   When any claim filed with the Sundry Claims Board has been approved by
it in an amount of $1,000 or less, the Director of Finance, upon being
presented with an order for the payment thereof signed by the Chairperson and
the Secretary of the Board, shall, if money has been appropriated for the
payment thereof, pay such claim.
   (B)   The Finance Director shall have the authority to pay any claim up to
$250 which the Finance Director determines to be valid without having to
present the claim to the Board. If the Finance Director rejects a claim for
$250 or less, the individual may still request a hearing before the Board.
(Ord. 34-63, passed 7-1-1963; Ord. 103-11, passed 8-22-2011)
§ 278.05  APPROPRIATIONS.
   In January of each year, beginning in 1964, the Director of Finance shall
estimate the cost of paying all the claims in an amount of $1,000 or less to be
allowed by the Sundry Claims Board during the next succeeding year. He or she
shall submit the estimate to the Chairperson of the Council Finance Committee
to allow Council to appropriate funds for the payment of claims in an amount of
$1,000 or less which may be allowed by the Board during the next succeeding
year.
(Ord. 34-63, passed 7-1-1963)
§ 278.06  CONTRACTS WITH RECIPIENTS OF SUNDRY CLAIMS FOR RELEASE AND
INDEMNIFICATION OF CITY.
   The Mayor is hereby authorized and directed to enter into contracts with
various applicants from time to time for release and indemnification of the
city in each case in which the city awards payment of sundry claims funds, upon
the terms and conditions set forth in Exhibit “A” attached to original
Ordinance 12-91, passed February 18, 1991, and incorporated herein by
reference.
(Ord. 12-91, passed 2-18-1991)
§ 278.07  STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS.
   There shall be a two-year statute of limitations period from the date of
incident for all claims brought before the Sundry Claims Board. Any claim filed
beyond the two-year statute of limitations shall not be heard by the Board.
(Ord. 103-11, passed 8-22-2011)
CHAPTER 283:  STRATEGIC PLAN ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Section
283.01   Establishment
283.02   Co-Chairpersons; authority
283.03   Purpose
283.04   Membership
283.05   Subcommittees
Cross-reference:
   Master Plan, see
Chapter 1222
   Master Street Tree Plan, see §
288.06
   Planning Commission, see
Chapter 1220
§ 283.01  ESTABLISHMENT.
   There is hereby established in and for the city a Strategic Plan Advisory
Committee which shall be called Task Force 21.
(Ord. 27-95, passed 3-6-1995)
§ 283.02  CO-CHAIRPERSONS; AUTHORITY.
   The Strategic Plan Advisory Committee shall be co-chaired by the Mayor and
the President of Council, both of whom shall be empowered to take such steps as
shall be necessary to establish such Committee.
(Ord. 27-95, passed 3-6-1995)
§ 283.03  PURPOSE.
   The Strategic Plan Advisory Committee shall be coordinated with such other
committees as have been established by Charter and Council, so as to work
toward a strategic plan encompassing and addressing all matters necessary to
prepare a comprehensive plan for the city’s future.
(Ord. 27-95, passed 3-6-1995)
§ 283.04  MEMBERSHIP.
   The Strategic Plan Advisory Committee shall be comprised of up to ten
members jointly appointed by the Mayor and the President of Council, each of
whom shall serve for a one-year term.
(Ord. 27-95, passed 3-6-1995)
§ 283.05  SUBCOMMITTEES.
   (A)   Subcommittees of the Strategic Plan Advisory Committee shall be formed
for the purpose of addressing specific areas of concern, including: a Citizen’s
Master Plan Advisory Committee; a Citizen’s Architectural Standards Advisory
Committee; a City Facilities and Public Buildings Advisory Committee; an
Economic Development Advisory Committee; and such other subcommittees as the
Strategic Plan Advisory Committee shall deem necessary or appropriate.
   (B)   Members of such subcommittees shall serve at the pleasure of the Mayor
and the President of Council and shall report to the Strategic Plan Advisory
Committee on a monthly basis.
   (C)   Such subcommittees shall recommend to the Strategic Plan Advisory
Committee methods to accomplish the various goals set by the Strategic Plan
Advisory Committee.
(Ord. 27-95, passed 3-6-1995)
CHAPTER 288:  SHADE TREE COMMISSION
Section
288.01   Establishment; composition
288.02   Terms of office; vacancies
288.03   Compensation
288.04   Duties
288.05   Meetings and organization
288.06   Authorities
Cross-reference:
   Building permit required for tree planting, see §§
1448.03,
1449.07
   Commercial removal and sale of trees, see
Chapter 848
   Injuring vegetation, see §
642.06
   Street trees in subdivisions, see §
1248.09
   Tree Commission Fund, see §
236.21
   Trees generally, see
Chapter 1026
Statutory reference:
   Assessments for tree planting or maintenance, see Ohio R.C. 727.011
   Control and supervision on highways, see Ohio R.C. 5501.42, 5543.14
   Cutting down trees upon public or school lands, see Ohio R.C. 309.14
   Tree planting, see Ohio R.C. 5529.11, 5529.12
§ 288.01  ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION.
   There is hereby established in and for the city a Shade Tree Commission
which shall consist of five residents of the city who shall be appointed by the
Mayor with the approval of Council. The Director of Public Service and a member
of Council shall serve as ex-officio members and shall have no vote in the
deliberation of the Shade Tree Commission. In the exercise of the powers
granted in this chapter and in Chapter 1026, the Director of Public Service may
delegate all or part of his or her powers and duties, with respect to the
supervision and control of trees, to his or her subordinates and assistants in
the employ of the city, as he or she from time to time determines.
(Ord. 13-87, passed 3-16-1987; Ord. 104-95, passed 7-17-1995; Ord. 30-09,
passed 4-6-2009) 
§ 288.02  TERMS OF OFFICE; VACANCIES.
   The term of the three residents to be appointed by the Mayor shall be three
years, except that the term of two of the members appointed to the first Shade
Tree Commission shall be one year and two years,  respectively. If a vacancy
occurs during the term of any member, his or her successor shall be appointed
by the Mayor, with the approval of Council, for the unexpired portion of such
term.
(Ord. 13-87, passed 3-16-1987)
§ 288.03  COMPENSATION.
   Members of the Shade Tree Commission shall serve without compensation, but
shall be entitled to reimbursement for necessary expenditures in carrying out
the functions of the Commission, as approved by Council.
(Ord. 13-87, passed 3-16-1987)
§ 288.04  DUTIES.
   The duties of the Shade Tree Commission shall be as follows:
   (A)   To study the problems and determine the needs of the city in regard to
tree planting, maintenance, protection and removal;
   (B)   To recommend to the proper authority the type and kind of trees to be
planted upon city streets or parts thereof or in parks or other public lands;
   (C)   To assist the properly constituted officials of the city, as well as
Council and the residents of the city, in the dissemination of news and
information regarding the selection, planting and maintenance of trees in the
city, whether on private or public property, and to make such recommendations
from time to time to Council as to desirable legislation concerning the tree
program and activities for the municipality;
   (D)   To provide regular and special meetings at which the subject of trees,
insofar as it relates to the municipality, may be discussed by members of the
Commission, by officers and personnel of the city and its divisions and by
others interested in the tree program;
   (E)   To provide technical advice and assistance to developers, builders,
contractors and others in the selection and protection of naturally occurring
trees during the development of wooded areas; and
   (F)   When requested by Council, the Mayor or the Director of Public
Service, to consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any
special matter or question coming within the scope of its work.
(Ord. 13-87, passed 3-16-1987)
§ 288.05  MEETINGS AND ORGANIZATION.
   Within a reasonable time after the appointment of the Shade Tree Commission
and the approval of the members thereof, upon the call of Council, the
Commission shall meet and organize by the election of a Chairperson and the
appointment of a Secretary. The Commission shall then provide for the adoption
of rules and procedures and for the holding of regular and special meetings as
the Commission deems advisable and necessary in order to perform the duties set
forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 13-87, passed 3-16-1987)
§ 288.06  AUTHORITIES.
   (A)   Rules and Regulations; Enforcement. The Shade Tree Commission shall
have the authority to promulgate the rules and regulations of the
Arboricultural Specifications and Standards of Practice governing the planting,
maintenance, removal, fertilization, pruning and bracing of trees on streets or
other public sites in the city, and shall direct, regulate and control the
planting, maintenance and removal of all trees growing now or hereafter in any
public area of the city. The Commission shall cause this chapter and
Chapter 1026 to be enforced.
   (B)   Jurisdiction. The Commission shall have the authority and jurisdiction
to regulate the planting, maintenance and removal of trees on streets and other
publicly-owned property to ensure safety or preserve the aesthetics of such
public sites, in accordance with the permit system contained in
Chapter 1026.
   (C)   Supervision. The Commission shall have the authority and duty to
supervise or inspect all work done under a permit issued in accordance with
Chapter 1026.
   (D)   Conditions of Permit. The Commission shall have the authority to affix
reasonable conditions to the granting of a permit in accordance with
Chapter 1026.
   (E)   Master Street Tree Plan.
      (1)   The Commission shall have the authority to formulate a Master
Street Tree Plan. The Plan shall specify the species of tree to be planted on
each of the streets or other public sites of the municipality. From and after
the effective date of the Plan, or any amendment thereto, all planting shall
conform thereto.
      (2)   The Commission shall consider all existing and future utility and
environmental factors when recommending a specific species for each of the
streets and other public sites of the city.
      (3)   The Commission shall have the authority to amend or add to the Plan
at any time that circumstances make it advisable.
(Ord. 13-87, passed 3-16-1987)
CHAPTER 289:  RECORDS COMMISSION
Section
289.01   Establishment; composition
289.02   Secretary; archivist
289.03   Meetings
289.04   Functions
289.05   Disposal of records
Cross-reference:
   Authority to establish additional commissions etc., see
CHTR. Art. VI
   Tampering with records, see §
642.18
Statutory reference:
   Records commissions, see Ohio R.C.149.39 et seq.
§ 289.01  ESTABLISHMENT; COMPOSITION.
   There is hereby established in and for the city a Records Commission,
composed of the Mayor or his or her appointed representative, as Chairperson,
the Finance Director, the Law Director and a citizen appointed by the Mayor.
(Ord. 88-42, passed 4-4-1988)
§ 289.02  SECRETARY; ARCHIVIST.
   The Records Commission shall appoint a Secretary who may or may not be a
member of the Commission and who shall serve at the pleasure of the Commission.
The Commission may employ an archivist to serve under its direction.
(Ord. 88-42, passed 4-4-1988)
§ 289.03  MEETINGS.
   The Records Commission shall meet at least once every six months and upon
the call of the Chairperson.
(Ord. 88-42, passed 4-4-1988)
§ 289.04  FUNCTIONS.
   The functions of the Records Commission shall be to provide rules for the
retention and disposal of records of the city and to review applications for
one time records disposal and schedules of records retention and disposition
submitted by municipal offices. Records may be disposed of by the Commission
pursuant to  any procedure adopted. The Commission may, at any time, review any
schedule it has previously approved and, for good cause shown, may revise that
schedule.
(Ord. 88-42, passed 4-4-1988)
§ 289.05  DISPOSAL OF RECORDS.
   (A)   When municipal records have been approved for disposal, a list of such
records shall be sent to the auditor of the state. If he or she disapproves of
the action by the Records Commission, in whole or in part, he or she shall so
inform the Commission within a period of 60 days and these records shall not be
destroyed.
   (B)   Before public records are disposed of, the Ohio Historical Society
shall be informed and given the opportunity, for a period of 60 days, to select
for its custody such public records as it considers to be of continuing
historical value.
(Ord. 88-42, passed 4-4-1988)
TITLE TWELVE:  JUDICIAL
   
CHAP. 290.   MAYOR’S COURT
CHAPTER 290: MAYOR’S COURT
Section
290.01   Clerk
290.02   Contempt of court
290.03   Clerk of Courts Computerization Fund
290.04   Juvenile Diversion Program; staffing
290.05   Mayor’s Court Magistrate
Cross-reference:
   Judge may require inspection of motor vehicles, see §
404.09
   Suspension of driver’s license, see §§
404.99(C);
606.99
   Using sham legal process, see §
606.29
Editor’s note:
   Ohio R.C. 1905.01 provides that the Mayor of Broadview Heights has
jurisdiction to hear and determine any prosecution for the violation of a
Broadview Heights ordinance, and has jurisdiction in all criminal causes
involving moving traffic violations occurring on state highways located within
the corporate limits of Broadview Heights, subject to the limitations of Ohio
R.C. 2937.08 and 2938.04. In keeping his or her docket and file, the Mayor
shall be governed by the laws pertaining to county courts.
   Ohio R.C. 2937.08 provides that if the court in which a defendant is charged
with an offense is not a court of record (the Mayor’s Court), and the charge is
such that a right to a jury trial exists, such matter shall not be tried before
him or her unless the accused, by writing subscribed by him, waives a jury and
consents to be tried by the magistrate. If the defendant, in such event, does
not waive his or her right to a jury trial, then the magistrate shall require
the accused to enter into a recognizance to appear before a court of record in
Cuyahoga County (the Parma Municipal Court), and the magistrate shall thereupon
certify all papers filed, together with a transcript of proceedings and accrued
costs to date, and such recognizance, if given, to the court of record.
However, Rule 23(A) of the Ohio Rules of Criminal Procedure provides that in
petty offense cases, where there is a right to jury trial, the defendant shall
be tried by the court unless he or she demands a jury trial. But the
jurisdiction of a Mayor’s Court, in such cases, is further limited by Rule 9 of
the Ohio Traffic Rules, which provides that if a jury demand is not made
pursuant to Criminal Rule 23, and the defendant waives his or her right to jury
trial in writing, a mayor may try the case only if (1) his or her compensation
as a judge is not directly dependent upon criminal case convictions, or (2) he
or she is not the chief executive and administrative officer of the
municipality and as such responsible for the financial condition of the
municipality. Guilty and no contest pleas may be taken by any mayor.
   Ohio R.C. 1901.24 and 2938.04 provide that the right to trial by jury shall
be claimed by making demand in writing therefor and filing the same with the
clerk of the court of record not less than three days prior to the date set for
trial or on or before the day following receipt of notice of the date set for
trial, whichever is later. However, Rule 23(A) of the Ohio Rules of Criminal
Procedure, which presumptively supersedes Ohio R.C. 2938.04, provides that
right to trial by jury shall be claimed by making demand in writing therefor
and filing the same with the Clerk of Court not less than ten days prior to the
date set for trial, or on or before the third day following receipt of notice
of the date set for trial, whichever is later. Failure to claim a jury trial as
provided herein is a complete waiver of the right thereto. Ohio R.C. 2938.04
provides, further, that a jury trial may not be had in courts not of record,
but failure to waive a jury in writing where the right to a jury trial may be
asserted shall require the magistrate to certify such case to a court of record
as provided in Ohio R.C. 2937.08.
   Ohio R.C. 2945.17 provides that an accused has a right to be tried by a jury
at any trial in any court for the violation of any Ohio statute or of any
Broadview Heights ordinance, except in cases in which the penalty involved does
not exceed a fine of $100.
   The Supreme Court of Ohio, on December 4, 1967, promulgated “Rules of
Practice and Procedure in Traffic Cases For All Courts Inferior to Common
Pleas,” the adoption of which became mandatory prior to March 2, 1969. Amended
Rules, referred to as the Ohio Traffic Rules, became effective on January 1,
1975.
   Effective October 20, 1987, Mayors of Mayor’s Courts were authorized to
suspend the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privilege of any person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19 or § 434.01 of the Traffic Code (OVI), in
accordance with Ohio R.C. 4507.16(B).
Statutory reference:
   Bond for bailiff, see Ohio R.C. 1901.32(A)
   Bond for Court Clerk required, see Ohio R.C. 1901.31(D)
   Contempt of court, see Ohio R.C. 1905.28, 1907.18
   Detection and arrest, see Ohio R.C. Chapter 2935
   Juvenile Court jurisdiction; arrest of child, see Ohio R.C. 2151.01,
2151.23, 2151.03
   Mayor’s Court jurisdiction, see Ohio R.C. 1905.01
   Mayor’s powers and duties, see Ohio R.C. 1905.20 et seq.
   Notification to Director of liquor law convictions, see Ohio R.C. 4301.991
   Peace and search warrants, see Ohio R.C. Chapter 2933
   Power to establish schedule of fees and costs, see Ohio R.C. 1901.26
   Preliminary examination; bail, see Ohio R.C. Chapter 2937
   Record of traffic violations, see Ohio R.C. 4513.37
   Trial, see Ohio R.C. Chapter 2938
§ 290.01  CLERK.
   (A)   There is hereby established the position of Clerk of the Mayor’s Court
who shall be appointed by the Mayor.
   (B)   The Clerk of the Mayor’s Court shall keep and maintain records of
receipts and disbursements, receive all bonds, fines and waivers, maintain all
other records required by law and perform any other duties required by the
Mayor.
   (C)   The working hours of the Clerk of the Mayor’s Court shall be
determined by the Mayor.
   (D)   The bond of the Clerk of the Mayor’s Court is hereby established at
$10,000. The Mayor is hereby authorized and directed to obtain such bond and to
cause the same to be paid for out of the appropriate account of the city.
(Ord. 8-76, passed 1-19-1976; Res. 82-56, passed 11-15-1982)
§ 290.02  CONTEMPT OF COURT.
   (A)   A person guilty of any of the following acts may be punished for
contempt of court:
      (1)   Disobedience of, or resistance to, a lawful writ, process, order,
rule, judgment or command of a court or an officer;
      (2)   Misbehavior of an officer of the court in the performance of his or
her official duties, or in his or her official transactions;
      (3)   A failure to obey a subpoena duly served, or a refusal to be sworn
or to answer as a witness, when lawfully required;
      (4)   The rescue, or attempted rescue, of a person or of property in the
custody of an officer by virtue of an order or process of court held by him or
her;
      (5)   A failure upon the part of a person recognized to appear as a
witness in a court to appear in compliance with the terms of his or her
recognizance; or
      (6)   Misbehavior in the presence of or so near the court or judge as to
obstruct the administration of justice.
   (B)   The Mayor may punish contempts in any proceeding before the Mayor’s
Court pursuant to division (A) of this section and, in the case of a violation
of division (A)(5) of this section, may summarily punish such contempt. In so
acting, the Court shall follow such procedures for the punishment of contempt
as are provided in Ohio R.C. 2705.01 et seq.
(Ord. 88-165, passed 10-17-1988)
§ 290.03  CLERK OF COURTS COMPUTERIZATION FUND.
   (A)   There is hereby established a new special revenue fund to be known as
the Clerk of Courts Computerization Fund.
   (B)   The Director of Finance is hereby authorized and instructed to effect
the intent of this section.
(Ord. 12-98, passed 1-20-1998)
§ 290.04  JUVENILE DIVERSION PROGRAM; STAFFING.
   (A)   Full-Time Assistant Clerk of Courts.
      (1)   There is hereby established the position of full-time Assistant
Clerk of Courts in the city.
      (2)   Compensation and benefits for the position of full-time Assistant
Clerk of Courts shall be as otherwise provided by ordinance in the city.
      (3)   Upon expiration of the Juvenile Diversion Program, the position of
full-time Assistant Clerk of Courts shall revert to its original part-time
status.
   (B)   Part-Time Clerical Worker.
      (1)   There is hereby established the position of part-time Clerical
Worker in the city.
      (2)   The part-time Clerical Worker shall be compensated as otherwise
provided by ordinance. Said part-time Clerical Worker in the Clerk of Courts
Office is hereby authorized to work up to a maximum of 25 hours in any two-week
pay period. If at any time the Juvenile Diversion Program expires, this
position will cease to exist.
(Ord. 106-00, passed 6-26-2000; Ord. 115-00, passed 6-26-2000)
§ 290.05  MAYOR’S COURT MAGISTRATE.
   (A)   The position of Mayor’s Court Magistrate is hereby created within the
city.
   (B)   The position of Mayor’s Court Magistrate shall be a part-time position
appointed by the Mayor and confirmed by City Council.
(Ord. 50-05, passed 5-2-2005)
PART IV: TRAFFIC CODE
TITLE TWO - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
   
CHAP. 402.   DEFINITIONS
   
CHAP. 404.   ENFORCEMENT; IMPOUNDING; PENALTY
   
CHAP. 406.   TRAFFIC CONTROL
TITLE FOUR - PUBLIC WAYS AND TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
   
CHAP. 412.   OBSTRUCTION AND SPECIAL USES OF PUBLIC WAYS
   
CHAP. 414.   TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
   
CHAP. 416.   PEDESTRIANS
TITLE SIX - OPERATION AND VEHICLES
   
CHAP. 432.   OPERATION GENERALLY
   
CHAP. 434.   O.V.I.; RECKLESS OPERATION; SPEED
   
CHAP. 436.   LICENSING; ACCIDENTS
   
CHAP. 438.   SAFETY AND EQUIPMENT
   
CHAP. 440.   COMMERCIAL AND HEAVY VEHICLES
   
CHAP. 442.   DRIVERS OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
   
CHAP. 444.   OFFENSES RELATING TO THEFT AND FRAUD
   
CHAP. 446.   TRANSPORTATION OF RADIOACTIVE MATERIALS
TITLE EIGHT - PARKING
   
CHAP. 452.   PARKING GENERALLY
TITLE TEN - BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES AND SNOWMOBILES
   
CHAP. 474.   BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES GENERALLY
   
CHAP. 476.   SNOWMOBILES, OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLES AND ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLES
TITLE TWO:  ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES
   
CHAP. 402.  DEFINITIONS
   
CHAP. 404.  ENFORCEMENT; IMPOUNDING; PENALTY
   
CHAP. 406.  TRAFFIC CONTROL
CHAPTER 402:  DEFINITIONS
Section
402.01   Meaning of words and phrases
402.02   Agricultural tractor; multi-wheel agricultural tractor
402.03   Alley
402.04   Arterial street
402.045   Beacon
402.05   Bicycle
402.06   Bus
402.07   Business district
402.075   Chauffeured limousine
402.077   Child day-care center or Type A family day-care home
402.08   Commercial tractor
402.09   Controlled-access highway
402.10   Crosswalk
402.11   Driver or operator
402.115   Electric bicycle
402.12   Emergency vehicle
402.13   Explosives
402.14   Expressway
402.15   Flammable liquid
402.16   Freeway
402.165   Funeral escort vehicle
402.17   Gross weight
402.173   Highway maintenance vehicle
402.175   Highway traffic signal
402.177   Hybrid beacon
402.18   Intersection
402.19   Laned highway
402.195   Median
402.20   Motor vehicle
402.21   Motorcycle
402.22   Motorized bicycle or moped
402.225   Motorized wheelchair
402.227   Operate
402.23   Parking
402.24   Pedestrian
402.25   Person
402.26   Pole trailer
402.27   Police officer
402.275   Predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense
402.277   Private road open to public travel
402.28   Private road or driveway
402.29   Public safety vehicle
402.30   Railroad
402.31   Railroad sign or signal
402.32   Railroad train
402.33   Residence district
402.335   Ridesharing arrangement
402.34   Right-of-way
402.345   Road service vehicle
402.35   Roadway
402.355   Rural mail delivery vehicle
402.36   Safety zone
402.37   School bus
402.38   Semitrailer
402.385   Shared-use path
402.39   Sidewalk
402.40   State route
402.41   Stop
402.42   Stop intersection
402.43   Stopping and standing
402.44   Street or highway
402.45   Through street or highway
402.46   Thruway
402.47   Traffic
402.48   Traffic control device
402.49   Traffic control signal
402.50   Trailer
402.51   Truck
402.52   Urban district
402.53   Vehicle
402.54   Waste collection
Cross reference:
   Blind person defined, see §
416.02
   Commercial car defined, see §
442.01
   Funeral procession defined, see §
432.21
   Snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle and all-purpose vehicle defined, see §
476.01
   Street racing defined, see §
434.07
§ 402.01  MEANING OF WORDS AND PHRASES.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided, the definitions set forth in Ohio R.C.
4501.01 shall apply to this Traffic Code and the penal laws of the
municipality.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided, the following words and phrases, when
used in this Traffic Code, shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them in this chapter.
§ 402.02  AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR; MULTI-WHEEL AGRICULTURAL TRACTOR.
   (A)   “Agricultural tractor” means every self-propelled vehicle designed or
used for drawing other vehicles or wheeled machinery, but having no provision
for carrying loads independently of such other vehicles, and used principally
for agricultural purposes.
(ORC 4511.01(J))
   (B)    “Multi-wheel agricultural tractor” means a type of agricultural
tractor that has two or more wheels or tires on each side of one axle at the
rear of the tractor, is designed or used for drawing other vehicles or wheeled
machinery, has no provision for carrying loads independently of the drawn
vehicles or machinery, and is used principally for agricultural purposes.
(ORC 4511.01(GGG))
§ 402.03  ALLEY.
   “Alley” means a street or highway intended to provide access to the rear or
side of lots or buildings in urban districts, and not intended for the purpose
of through vehicular traffic, and any street or highway that has been declared
an “alley” by the Council.
(ORC 4511.01(XX))
§ 402.04  ARTERIAL STREET.
   “Arterial street” means any United States or state numbered route,
controlled-access highway, or other major radial or circumferential street or
highway designated by local authorities within their respective jurisdictions
as part of a major arterial system of streets or highways.
(ORC 4511.01(CCC))
§ 402.045  BEACON.
   “Beacon” means a highway traffic signal with one or more signal sections
that operate in a flashing mode.
(ORC 4511.01(KKK))
§ 402.05  BICYCLE.
   “Bicycle” means every device, other than a device that is designed solely
for use as a play vehicle by a child, that is propelled solely by human power
upon which a person may ride, and that has two or more wheels, any of which is
more than 14 inches in diameter.
(ORC 4511.01(G))
§ 402.06  BUS.
   “Bus” means every motor vehicle designed for carrying more than nine
passengers, and used for the transportation of persons other than in a
ridesharing arrangement, and every motor vehicle, automobile for hire, or
funeral car, other than a taxicab or motor vehicle used in a ridesharing
arrangement, designed and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation.
(ORC 4511.01(L))
§ 402.07  BUSINESS DISTRICT.
   “Business district” means the territory fronting upon a street or highway,
including the street or highway, between successive intersections within the
municipality, where 50% or more of the frontage between successive
intersections is occupied by buildings in use for business, or within or
outside the municipality where 50% or more of the frontage for a distance of
300 feet or more is occupied by buildings in use for business, and the
character of the territory is indicated by official traffic-control devices.
(ORC 4511.01(NN))
§ 402.075  CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINE.
   “Chauffeured limousine” means a motor vehicle that is designed to carry nine
or fewer passengers and is operated for hire pursuant to a prearranged contract
for the transportation of passengers on public roads and highways along a route
under the control of the person hiring the vehicle and not over a defined and
regular route. “Prearranged contract” means an agreement, made in advance of
boarding, to provide transportation from a specific location in a chauffeured
limousine. “Chauffeured limousine” does not include any vehicle that is used
exclusively in the business of funeral directing.
(ORC 4501.01(LL))
§ 402.077  CHILD DAY-CARE CENTER OR TYPE A FAMILY DAY-CARE HOME.
   “Child day-care center” and “Type A family day-care home” have the same
meanings as set forth in Ohio R.C. 5104.01.
(ORC 4511.01(FFF))
§ 402.08  COMMERCIAL TRACTOR.
   “Commercial tractor” means every motor vehicle having motive power designed
or used for drawing other vehicles, and not so constructed as to carry any load
thereon, or designed or used for drawing other vehicles while carrying a
portion of the other vehicles, or the load thereon, or both.
(ORC 4511.01(I))
§ 402.09  CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY.
   “Controlled-access highway” means every street or highway in respect to
which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal
right or access to or from the same except at certain points only and in a
manner as may be determined by the public authority having jurisdiction over
the street or highway.
(ORC 4511.01(CC))
§ 402.10  CROSSWALK.
   “Crosswalk” means:
   (A)   That part of a roadway at intersections ordinarily included within the
real or projected prolongation of property lines and curb lines or, in the
absence of curbs, the edges of the traversable roadway;
   (B)   Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or elsewhere, distinctly
indicated for pedestrian crossing by lines or other markings on the surface;
   (C)   Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this definition, there
shall not be a crosswalk where the Legislative Authority has placed signs
indicating no crossing.
(ORC 4511.01(LL))
§ 402.11  DRIVER OR OPERATOR.
   “Driver” or “operator” means every person who drives or is in actual
physical control of a vehicle.
(ORC 4511.01(Y))
§ 402.115  ELECTRIC BICYCLE.
   “Electric bicycle” means a “class 1 electric bicycle”, a “class 2 electric
bicycle”, or a “class 3 electric bicycle” as defined below.
   (A)   “Class 1 electric bicycle.” Means a bicycle that is equipped with
fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that
provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling and ceases to provide
assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 20 miles per hour.
(R.C. § 4511.01(SSS))
   (B)   “Class 2 electric bicycle.” Means a bicycle that is equipped with
fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that may
provide assistance regardless of whether the rider is pedaling and is not
capable of providing assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 20 miles
per hour.
(R.C. § 4511.01(TTT))
   (C)   “Class 3 electric bicycle.” Means a bicycle that is equipped with
fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less than 750 watts that
provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling and ceases to provide
assistance when the bicycle reaches the speed of 28 miles per hour.
(R.C. § 4511.01(UUU))
§ 402.12  EMERGENCY VEHICLE.
   “Emergency vehicle” means emergency vehicles of municipal, township or
county departments or public utility corporations, when identified as such as
required by law, the Director of Public Safety, or local authorities, and motor
vehicles when commandeered by a police officer.
(ORC 4511.01(D))
§ 402.13  EXPLOSIVES.
   “Explosives” means any chemical compound or mechanical mixture that is
intended for the purpose of producing an explosion that contains any oxidizing
and combustible units or other ingredients in such proportions, quantities, or
packing that an ignition by fire, by friction, by concussion, by percussion, or
by a detonator of any part of the compound or mixture may cause a sudden
generation of highly heated gases, such that the resultant gaseous pressures
are capable of producing destructive effects on contiguous objects, or of
destroying life or limb.  Manufactured articles shall not be held to be
explosives when the individual units contain explosives in limited quantities
of such nature or in such packing that it is impossible to procure a
simultaneous or a destructive explosion of the units, to the injury of life,
limb, or property by fire, friction, concussion, percussion, or by a detonator,
such as fixed ammunition for small arms, firecrackers, or safety fuse matches.
(ORC 4511.01(T))
§ 402.14  EXPRESSWAY.
   “Expressway” means a divided arterial highway for through traffic with full
or partial control of access with an excess of 50% of all crossroads separated
in grade.
(ORC 4511.01(ZZ))
§ 402.15  FLAMMABLE LIQUID.
   “Flammable liquid” means any liquid which has a flash point of 70°F or less,
as determined by a tagliabue or equivalent closed cup test device.
(ORC 4511.01(U))
§ 402.16  FREEWAY.
   “Freeway” means a divided multi-lane highway for through traffic with
crossroads separated in grade and with full control of access.
(ORC 4511.01(YY))
§ 402.165  FUNERAL ESCORT VEHICLE.
   “Funeral escort vehicle” means any motor vehicle, including a funeral
hearse, while used to facilitate the movement of a funeral procession.
(ORC 4511.01(WW))
§ 402.17  GROSS WEIGHT.
   “Gross weight” means the weight of a vehicle plus the weight of any load
thereon.
(ORC 4511.01(V))
§ 402.173  HIGHWAY MAINTENANCE VEHICLE.
   “Highway maintenance vehicle” means a vehicle used in snow and ice removal
or road surface maintenance, including a snow plow, traffic line striper, road
sweeper, mowing machine, asphalt distributing vehicle, or other such vehicle
designed for use in specific highway maintenance activities.
(ORC 4511.01(QQQ))
§ 402.175  HIGHWAY TRAFFIC SIGNAL.
   “Highway traffic signal” means a power-operated traffic control device by
which traffic is warned or directed to take some specific action. The term does
not include a power-operated sign, steadily illuminated pavement marker,
warning light, or steady burning electric lamp.
(ORC 4511.01(MMM))
§ 402.177  HYBRID BEACON.
   “Hybrid beacon” means a type of beacon that is intentionally placed in a
dark mode between periods of operation where no indications are displayed and,
when in operation, displays both steady and flashing traffic control signal
indications.
(ORC 4511.01(LLL))
§ 402.18  INTERSECTION.
   “Intersection” means:
   (A)   The area embraced within the prolongation or connection of the lateral
curb lines, or, if none, the lateral boundary lines of the roadways of two
highways that join one another at, or approximately at, right angles, or the
area within which vehicles traveling upon different highways that join at any
other angle might come into conflict. The junction of an alley or driveway with
a roadway or highway does not constitute an intersection unless the roadway or
highway at the junction is controlled by a traffic control device.
   (B)   If a highway includes two roadways that are 30 feet or more apart,
then every crossing of each roadway of such divided highway by an intersecting
highway constitutes a separate intersection. If both intersecting highways
include two roadways 30 feet or more apart, then every crossing of any two
roadways of such highways constitutes a separate intersection.
   (C)   At a location controlled by a traffic control signal, regardless of
the distance between the separate intersections as described in division (B) of
this definition:
      (1)   If a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk has not been designated on
the roadway within the median between the separate intersections, the two
intersections and the roadway and median constitute one intersection.
      (2)   Where a stop line, yield line, or crosswalk line is designated on
the roadway on the intersection approach, the area within the crosswalk and any
area beyond the designated stop line or yield line constitute part of the
intersection.
      (3)   Where a crosswalk is designated on a roadway on the departure from
the intersection, the intersection includes the area that extends to the far
side of the crosswalk.
(ORC 4511.01(KK))
§ 402.19  LANED HIGHWAY.
   “Laned highway” means a highway the roadway of which is divided into two or
more clearly marked lanes for vehicular traffic.
(ORC 4511.01(GG))
§ 402.195  MEDIAN.
   “Median” means the area between two roadways of a divided highway, measured
from edge of traveled way to edge of traveled way, but excluding turn lanes.
The width of a median may be different between intersections, between
interchanges, and at opposite approaches of the same intersection.
(ORC 4511.01(NNN))
§ 402.20  MOTOR VEHICLE.
   “Motor vehicle” means every vehicle propelled or drawn by power other than
muscular power or power collected from overhead electric trolley wires, except
motorized bicycles, electric bicycles, road rollers, traction engines, power
shovels, power cranes and other equipment used in construction work, and not
designed for or employed in general highway transportation, hole-digging
machinery, well-drilling machinery, ditch-digging machinery, farm machinery and
trailers designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of
storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a
street or highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25
miles per hour or less.
(ORC 4511.01(B))
§ 402.21  MOTORCYCLE.
   “Motorcycle” means every motor vehicle, other than a tractor, having a seat
or saddle for the use of the operator and designed to travel on not more than
three wheels in contact with the ground, including, but not limited to, motor
vehicles known as “motor-driven cycle,” “motor scooter,” “autocycle,” “cab-
enclosed motorcycle”, or “motorcycle” without regard to weight or brake
horsepower.
(ORC 4511.01(C))
§ 402.22  MOTORIZED BICYCLE OR MOPED.
   “Motorized bicycle” means any vehicle having either two tandem wheels or one
wheel in the front and two wheels in the rear, that may be capable of being
pedaled, and that is equipped with a helper motor of not more than 50 cubic
centimeters piston displacement that produces no more than one brake
horsepower, and is capable of propelling the vehicle at a speed of not greater
than 20 miles per hour on a level surface.  The terms do not include an
electric bicycle.
(ORC 4511.01(H))
§ 402.225  MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR.
   “Motorized wheelchair” means any self-propelled vehicle designed for, and
used by, a person with a disability and that is incapable of a speed in excess
of eight miles per hour.
(ORC 4511.01(EEE))
§ 402.227  OPERATE.
   “Operate” means to cause or have caused movement of a vehicle.
(ORC 4511.01(HHH))
§ 402.23  PARKING.
   “Parking,” when prohibited, means the standing of a vehicle, whether
occupied or not, otherwise than temporarily for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in loading or unloading merchandise or passengers.
§ 402.24  PEDESTRIAN.
   “Pedestrian” means any natural person afoot. The term includes a personal
delivery device as defined in R.C. § 4511.513 unless the context clearly
suggests otherwise.
(ORC 4511.01(X))
§ 402.25  PERSON.
   “Person” means every natural person, firm, partnership, association or
corporation.
(ORC 4511.01(W))
§ 402.26  POLE TRAILER.
   “Pole trailer” means every trailer or semitrailer attached to the towing
vehicle by means of a reach, pole, or by being boomed or otherwise secured to
the towing vehicle, and ordinarily used for transporting long or irregular
shaped loads such as poles, pipes, or structural members capable, generally, of
sustaining themselves as beams between the supporting connections.
(ORC 4511.01(O))
§ 402.27  POLICE OFFICER.
   “Police officer” means every officer authorized to direct or regulate
traffic, or to make arrests for violations of traffic regulations.
(ORC 4511.01(Z))
§ 402.275  PREDICATE MOTOR VEHICLE OR TRAFFIC OFFENSE.
   “Predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense” means any of the following:
   (A)   A violation of Ohio R.C.  4511.03, 4511.051, 4511.12, 4511.132,
4511.16, 4511.20, 4511.201, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.213,  4511.22, 4511.23,
4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32,
4511.33, 4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40,
4511.41, 4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.451,
4511.452, 4511.46, 4511.47, 4511.48, 4511.481, 4511.49, 4511.50, 4511.511,
4511.53, 4511.54, 4511.55, 4511.56, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59, 4511.60,
4511.61, 4511.64, 4511.66, 4511.661, 4511.68, 4511.70, 4511.701, 4511.71,
4511.711, 4511.712, 4511.713, 4511.72, 4511.73, 4511.763, 4511.771, 4511.78, or
4511.84;
   (B)   A violation of Ohio  R.C. 4511.17(A)(2), 4511.51(A) to (D), or 4511.74
(A);
   (C)   A violation of any provision of Ohio R.C. 4511.01 to 4511.76 for which
no penalty otherwise is provided in the section that contains the provision
violated;
   (D)   A violation of R.C. § 4511.214;
   (E)   A violation of a municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent
to any section or provision set forth or described in division (A), (B), (C),
or (D) of this definition.
(ORC  4511.01(III))
§ 402.277  PRIVATE ROAD OPEN TO PUBLIC TRAVEL.
   “Private road open to public travel” means a private toll road or road,
including any adjacent sidewalks that generally run parallel to the road,
within a shopping center, airport, sports arena, or other similar business or
recreation facility that is privately owned but where the public is allowed to
travel without access restrictions. The term includes a gated toll road but
does not include a road within a private gated property where access is
restricted at all times, a parking area, a driving aisle within a parking area,
or a private grade crossing.
(ORC  4511.01(OOO))
§ 402.28  PRIVATE ROAD OR DRIVEWAY.
   “Private road or driveway” means every way or place in private ownership
used for vehicular travel by the owner, and those having express or implied
permission from the owner, but not by other persons.
(ORC 4511.01(DD))
§ 402.29  PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE.
   “Public safety vehicle” means any of the following:
   (A)   Ambulances, including private ambulance companies under contract to a
municipality, township, or county, and private ambulances and nontransport
vehicles bearing license plates issued under Ohio R.C. 4503.49;
   (B)   Motor vehicles used by public law enforcement officers or other
persons sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state;
   (C)   Any motor vehicle when properly identified as required by the Director
of Public Safety, when used in response to fire emergency calls or to provide
emergency medical service to ill or injured persons, and when operated by a
duly qualified person who is a member of a volunteer rescue service or a
volunteer fire department, and who is on duty pursuant to the rules or
directives of that service.  The State Fire Marshal shall be designated by the
Director of Public Safety as the certifying agency for all public safety
vehicles described herein;
   (D)   Vehicles used by fire departments, including motor vehicles when used
by volunteer firefighters responding to emergency calls in the fire department
service when identified as required by the Director of Public Safety;
   (E)   Any vehicle used to transport or provide emergency medical service to
an ill or injured person, when certified as a “public safety vehicle,” shall be
considered such a vehicle when transporting an ill or injured person to a
hospital, regardless of whether such vehicle has already passed a hospital;
   (F)   Vehicles used by the Motor Carrier for the enforcement of orders and
rules of the Public Utilities Commission as specified in Ohio R.C. 5503.34.
(ORC 4511.01(E))
§ 402.30  RAILROAD.
   “Railroad” means a carrier of persons or property operating upon rails
placed principally on a private right-of-way.
(ORC 4511.01(P))
§ 402.31  RAILROAD SIGN OR SIGNAL.
   “Railroad sign or signal” means any sign, signal, or device erected by
authority of a public body or official or by a railroad, and intended to give
notice of the presence of railroad tracks or the approach of a railroad train.
(ORC 4511.01(SS))
§ 402.32  RAILROAD TRAIN.
   “Railroad train” means a steam engine or an electric or other motor, with or
without cars coupled thereto, operated by a railroad.
(ORC 4511.01(Q))
§ 402.33 RESIDENCE DISTRICT.
   “Residence district” means the territory, not comprising a business
district, fronting on a street or highway, including the street or highway,
where, for a distance of 300 feet or more, the frontage is improved with
residences or residences and buildings in use for business.
(ORC 4511.01(OO))
§ 402.335  RIDESHARING ARRANGEMENT.
   “Ridesharing arrangement” includes the transportation of persons in a motor
vehicle where the transportation is incidental to another purpose of a
volunteer driver, and includes ridesharing arrangements known as carpools,
vanpools, and buspools.
(ORC 4511.01(DDD))
§ 402.34  RIGHT-OF-WAY.
   “Right-of-way” means either of the following, as the context requires:
   (A)   The right of a vehicle or pedestrian to proceed uninterruptedly in a
lawful manner in the direction in which it, he or she is moving, in preference
to another vehicle or pedestrian approaching from a different direction into
its, his or her path;
   (B)   A general term denoting land, property, or the interest therein,
usually in the configuration of a strip, acquired for or devoted to
transportation purposes.  When used in this context, “right-of-way” includes
the roadway, shoulders or berm, ditch, and slopes extending to the right-of-way
limits under the control of the state or local authority.
(ORC 4511.01(UU))
§ 402.345  ROAD SERVICE VEHICLE.
   “Road service vehicle” means wreckers, utility repair vehicles, and state,
county, and municipal service vehicles equipped with visual signals by means of
flashing, rotating, or oscillating lights.
(ORC 4511.01(JJJ))
§ 402.35  ROADWAY.
   “Roadway” means that portion of a highway improved, designed, or ordinarily
used for vehicular travel, except the berm or shoulder.  If a highway includes
two or more separate roadways, the term “roadway” means any roadway separately,
but not all the roadways collectively.
(ORC 4511.01(EE))
§ 402.355  RURAL MAIL DELIVERY VEHICLE.
   “Rural mail delivery vehicle” means every vehicle used to deliver United
States mail on a rural mail delivery route.
(ORC 4511.01(VV))
§ 402.36  SAFETY ZONE.
   “Safety zone” means the area or space officially set apart within a roadway
for the exclusive use of pedestrians, and protected or marked or indicated by
adequate signs so as to be plainly visible at all times.
(ORC 4511.01(MM))
§ 402.37  SCHOOL BUS.
   “School bus” means every bus designed for carrying more than nine passengers
which is owned by a public, private, or governmental agency or institution of
learning, and operated for the transportation of children to or from a school
session or a school function, or owned by a private person and operated for
compensation for the transportation of children to or from a school session or
a school function; provided “school bus” does not include a bus operated by a
municipally owned transportation system, a mass transit company operating
exclusively within the territorial limits of a municipality, or within such
limits and the territorial limits of municipalities immediately contiguous to
the municipality, nor a common passenger carrier certified by the Public
Utilities Commission unless the bus is devoted exclusively to the
transportation of children to and from a school session or a school function,
and “school bus” does not include a van or bus used by a licensed child day-
care center or Type A family day-care home to transport children from the child
day-care center or Type A family day-care home to a school if the van or bus
does not have more than 15 children in the van or bus at any time.
(ORC 4511.01(F))
§ 402.38  SEMITRAILER.
   “Semitrailer” means every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or
property with another and separate motor vehicle so that in operation a part of
its own weight or that of its load, or both, rests upon and is carried by
another vehicle.
(ORC 4511.01(N))
§ 402.385  SHARED-USE PATH.
   “Shared-use path” means a bikeway outside the traveled way and physically
separated from motorized vehicular traffic by an open space or barrier and
either within the highway right-of-way or within an independent alignment. A
shared-use path also may be used by pedestrians, including skaters, joggers,
users of manual and motorized wheelchairs, and other authorized motorized and
non-motorized users.  A shared-use path does not include any trail that is
intended to be used primarily for mountain biking, hiking, equestrian use, or
other similar uses, or any other single track or natural surface trial that has
historically been reserved for non-motorized use.
(ORC 4511.01(PPP))
§ 402.39  SIDEWALK.
   “Sidewalk” means that portion of a street between the curb lines, or the
lateral line of a roadway, and the adjacent property lines, intended for the
use of pedestrians.
(ORC 4511.01(FF))
§ 402.40  STATE ROUTE.
   “State route” means every highway which is designated with an official state
route number and so marked.
(ORC 4511.01(JJ))
§ 402.41  STOP.
   “Stop,” when required, means a complete cessation of movement.
§ 402.42  STOP INTERSECTION.
   “Stop intersection” means any intersection at one or more entrances of which
stop signs are erected.
(ORC 4511.01(BBB))
§ 402.43  STOPPING AND STANDING.
   “Stopping” and “standing,” when prohibited, mean any halting of a vehicle,
even momentarily, whether occupied or not, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a police
officer or traffic control device.
§ 402.44  STREET OR HIGHWAY.
   “Street” or “highway” means the entire width between the boundary lines of
every way open to the use of the public as a thoroughfare for purposes of
vehicular travel.
(ORC 4511.01(BB))
§ 402.45  THROUGH STREET OR HIGHWAY.
   “Through street or highway” means every street or highway as provided in
Ohio R.C. 4511.65, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(ORC 4511.01(HH))
§ 402.46  THRUWAY.
   “Thruway” means a through street or highway whose entire roadway is reserved
for through traffic and on which roadway parking is prohibited.
(ORC 4511.01(AAA))
§ 402.47  TRAFFIC.
   “Traffic” means pedestrians, ridden or herded animals, vehicles, streetcars,
and other devices, either singly or together, while using for purposes of
travel any highway or private road open to public travel.
(ORC 4511.01(TT))
§ 402.48  TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICE.
   “Traffic control device” means a flagger, sign, signal, marking, or other
device used to regulate, warn, or guide traffic, placed on, over, or adjacent
to a street, highway, private road open to public travel, pedestrian facility,
or shared-use path by authority of a public agency or official having
jurisdiction, or, in the case of a private road open to public travel, by
authority of the private owner or private official having jurisdiction.
(ORC 4511.01(QQ))
§ 402.49  TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL.
   “Traffic control signal” means any highway traffic signal by which traffic
is alternately directed to stop and permitted to proceed.
(ORC 4511.01(RR))
§ 402.50  TRAILER.
   “Trailer” means every vehicle designed or used for carrying persons or
property wholly on its own structure, and for being drawn by a motor vehicle,
including any vehicle when formed by or operated as a combination of a
semitrailer and a vehicle of the dolly type, such as that commonly known as a
trailer dolly, a vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural
production materials between a local place of storage or supply and the farm
when drawn or towed on a street or highway at a speed greater than 25 miles per
hour and a vehicle designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a
place of storage and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed
on a street or highway for a distance of more than ten miles or at a speed of
more than 25 miles per hour.
(ORC 4511.01(M))
§ 402.51  TRUCK.
   “Truck” means every motor vehicle, except trailers and semitrailers,
designed and used to carry property.
(ORC 4511.01(K))
§ 402.52  URBAN DISTRICT.
   “Urban district” means the territory contiguous to and including any street
or highway which is built up with structures devoted to business, industry, or
dwelling houses situated at intervals of less than 100 feet for a distance of
one-quarter of a mile or more, and the character of the territory is indicated
by official traffic-control devices.
(ORC 4511.01(PP))
§ 402.53  VEHICLE.
   “Vehicle” means every device, including a motorized bicycle and an electric
bicycle, in, upon, or by which any person or property may be transported or
drawn upon a highway, except that “vehicle” does not include any motorized
wheelchair, any electric personal assistive mobility device, any personal
delivery device as defined in R.C. § 4511.513, any device that is  moved by
power collected from overhead electric trolley wire, or that is used
exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks, or any device, other than a
bicycle, that is moved by human power.
(ORC 4511.01(A))
§ 402.54  WASTE COLLECTION.
   “Waste collection vehicle means a vehicle used in the collection of garbage,
refuse, trash, or recyclable materials.
(ORC 4511.01)
CHAPTER 404:  ENFORCEMENT; IMPOUNDING; PENALTY
Section
404.01   Compliance with lawful order of police officer; fleeing
404.02   Resisting an enforcing official
404.03   Road workers, motor vehicles and equipment excepted
404.035   Emergency, public safety and coroners’ vehicles excepted
404.04   Application to persons riding, driving animals upon roadway
404.05   Impounding of vehicles; redemption
404.06   Traffic direction in emergencies; obedience to school guards
404.07   Application to drivers of government vehicles
404.08   Authority of property owners
404.09   Judge may require inspection of motor vehicles
404.10   Furnishing false information incident to traffic citation
404.99   General Code penalty; suspension of driver’s license
Cross-reference:
   Dereliction of duty, see §
606.19
   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by Police Department,
see §
606.24
   Exceptions for emergency or public safety vehicles, see §§
432.18,
434.06
   Failure to aid a law enforcement officer, see §
606.13
   Limitation on criminal prosecutions, see §
606.06
   Obstructing justice, see §
606.15
   Obstructing official business, see §
606.14
   Parking violations waiver, see §
452.19
   Resisting arrest, see §
606.16
   Soliciting or receiving improper compensation, see §
606.18
   Suspension of riding privileges; impounding of bicycles, see §
474.10
Statutory reference:
   Arrest without warrant for misdemeanor, see Ohio R.C. 2935.03
   Authority of arresting officer when radar, electrical or mechanical timing
device used, see Ohio R.C. 4511.091
   Burden of proof, see Ohio R.C. 2901.05
   Discharge for delay in trial, see Ohio R.C. 2945.73
   Disposition of unclaimed vehicles, see Ohio R.C. 737.32, 4513.61 et seq.
   Distinctive uniform required for traffic officers, see Ohio R.C. 4549.15
   Extension of time for hearing or trial, see Ohio R.C. 2945.72
   Marking motor vehicles used by traffic officers, see Ohio R.C. 4549.13
   Power of trial court of record to suspend license for certain violations,
see Ohio R.C. 4510.05, 4510.15
   Right of trial by jury, see Ohio R.C. 2945.17
   State point system suspension, see Ohio R.C. 4507.021
   Time within which hearing or trial must be held, see Ohio R.C. 2945.71
   Uniform application of Ohio Traffic Law, see Ohio R.C. 4511.06
   Use of private property for vehicular travel, see Ohio R.C. 4511.08
§ 404.01  COMPLIANCE WITH LAWFUL ORDER OF POLICE OFFICER;  FLEEING. 
(RECODIFIED)
Editor’s note:
   Section 404.01 was recodified as part of the 1990 updating and revision of
these Codified Ordinances. See §
606.165 of the General Offenses Code.
§ 404.02  RESISTING AN ENFORCING OFFICIAL.
   (A)   No person shall resist, hinder, obstruct, or abuse any sheriff,
constable, or other official while that official is attempting to arrest
offenders under any provision of this Traffic Code.  No person shall interfere
with any person charged under any provision of this Traffic Code with the
enforcement of the law relative to public highways.
(ORC 4513.36)
   (B)   It is a defense to prosecution under this section that the hindrance,
obstruction, resistance, or interference alleged consisted of constitutionally
protected speech only.
§ 404.03  ROAD WORKERS, MOTOR VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT EXCEPTED.
   (A)   The provisions of this Traffic Code, except for §
434.01, do not apply to persons, teams, motor vehicles, and other equipment
while actually engaged in work upon the surface of a highway within an area
designated by traffic-control devices, but apply to those persons and vehicles
when traveling to or from such work.
   (B)   The driver of a highway maintenance vehicle owned by this state or any
political subdivision of this state, while the driver is engaged in the
performance of official duties upon a street or highway, provided the highway
maintenance vehicle is equipped with flashing lights and such other markings as
are required by law and such lights are in operation when the driver and
vehicle are so engaged, shall be exempt from criminal prosecution for
violations of Ohio R.C. 4511.22, 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.30,
4511.31, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.66, 4513.02, and 5577.01 to 5577.09, and any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (C)   (1)   This section does not exempt a driver of a highway maintenance
vehicle from civil liability arising from a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.22,
4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.33, 4511.35,
4511.66, or 4513.02 or Ohio R.C. 5577.01 to 5577.09, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   This section does not exempt a driver of a vehicle who is not a
state employee and who is engaged in the transport of highway maintenance
equipment from criminal liability for a violation of R.C. §§ 5577.01 through
5577.09, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (D)   As used in this section, “engaged in the performance of official
duties” includes driving a highway maintenance vehicle to and from the
manufacturer or vehicle maintenance provider and transporting a highway
maintenance vehicle, equipment, or materials to and from a work location.
(ORC 4511.04)
§ 404.035  EMERGENCY, PUBLIC SAFETY AND CORONERS’ VEHICLES EXCEPTED.
   (A)   The provisions of Ohio R.C. 4511.12, 4511.13, 4511.131, 4511.132,
4511.14, 4511.202, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25, 4511.26,
4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.34,
4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41, 4511.42,
4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.432, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59,
4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.62, 4511.66, 4511.68, 4511.681, and 4511.69, and any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, do not apply to the driver of an
emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle if the emergency vehicle or public
safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is equipped with and
displaying at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the
vehicle and if the driver of the vehicles is giving an audible signal by siren,
exhaust whistle, or bell.  This section does not relieve the driver of an
emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
(ORC 4511.041)
   (B)   The provisions of Ohio R.C. 4511.25, 4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28,
4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37,
4511.38, and 4511.66, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, do
not apply to a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator operating a
motor vehicle in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4513.171 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.  This division does not relieve a coroner,
deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator operating a motor vehicle from the
duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and property upon
the highway.
(ORC 4511.042)
§ 404.04  APPLICATION TO PERSONS RIDING, DRIVING ANIMALS UPON ROADWAY.
   Every person riding, driving, or leading an animal upon a roadway is subject
to the provisions of this Traffic Code, applicable to the driver of a vehicle,
except those provisions of this Traffic Code which by their nature are
inapplicable.
(ORC 4511.05)
§ 404.05  IMPOUNDING OF VEHICLES; REDEMPTION.
   (A)   Police officers are authorized to provide for the removal and
impounding of a vehicle under the following circumstances:
      (1)   When any vehicle is left unattended upon any street, bridge or
causeway and is so illegally parked so as to constitute a hazard or obstruction
to the normal movement of traffic, or so as to unreasonably interfere with
street cleaning or snow removal operations;
      (2)   When any motor vehicle, including an abandoned junk motor vehicle,
as defined in Ohio R.C. 4513.63, is left on private residential property, as
defined in Ohio R.C. 4513.60, or on private agricultural property, for at least
four consecutive hours without the permission of the person having the right to
the possession of the property, or on a public street or other property open to
the public for purposes of vehicular travel, or upon or within the right-of-way
of any road or highway, for 48 consecutive hours or longer, without
notification to the Police Chief of the reasons for leaving such vehicle in
such place, except that when such a motor vehicle constitutes an obstruction to
traffic, it may be ordered into storage immediately;
      (3)   When any vehicle has been stolen or operated without the consent of
the owner;
      (4)   When any vehicle displays illegal license plates or fails to
display the current lawfully required license plates;
      (5)   When any vehicle has been used in or connected with the commission
of a felony;
      (6)   When any vehicle has been damaged or wrecked so as to be inoperable
or violates equipment provisions of this Traffic Code whereby its continued
operation would constitute a condition hazardous to life, limb or property;
      (7)   When any vehicle is left unattended due to the removal of an ill,
injured or arrested operator;
      (8)   When any vehicle has been operated by any person who has failed to
stop in case of an accident or collision;
      (9)   When any vehicle has been operated by any person who is driving
without a lawful license or while his or her license has been suspended or
revoked;
      (10)   When any vehicle is found for which two or more citation tags for
violations of this Traffic Code have been issued and the owner or operator
thereof has failed to respond to such citation tags as lawfully required.
   (B)   Any vehicle removed under authority of division (A)(2) of this section
shall be ordered into storage and/or disposed of as provided under Ohio  R.C.
4513.60 et seq.  Any other vehicle removed under authority of this section
shall be ordered into storage and the Police Department shall forthwith notify
the registered vehicle owner of the fact of such removal and impounding,
reasons therefor and the place of storage. Any person desiring to redeem an
impounded vehicle shall appear at the Police Department to furnish satisfactory
evidence of identity and ownership or right to possession. Prior to issuance of
a release form, the claimant, owner or operator shall either pay the amount due
for any fines for violations on account of which such vehicle was impounded or,
as the court may require, post a bond in an amount set by the court, to appear
to answer to such violations. The pound operator shall release such vehicle
upon the receipt of the release form and payment of all towage and storage
charges.
   (C)   No owner or operator shall remove an impounded vehicle from the place
of storage without complying with the above procedure. Possession of a vehicle
which has been impounded and unlawfully taken from the place of storage, by the
owner or operator, shall constitute prima facie evidence that it was so removed
by the owner or operator.
§ 404.06  TRAFFIC DIRECTION IN EMERGENCIES; OBEDIENCE TO SCHOOL GUARDS.
   (A)   Police officers shall direct or regulate traffic in accordance with
the provisions of this Traffic Code, provided that in the event of fire or
other emergency or to expedite traffic or safeguard pedestrians, they are
authorized to direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the
provisions of this Traffic Code.  Firefighters, when at the scene of a fire,
may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the
immediate vicinity.  The direction of traffic may be by word or audible signal,
by gesture or visible signal or by any combination thereof.  No person shall
fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of any police officer or
firefighter issued pursuant to this section.
   (B)   No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of
any school crossing guard invested with authority to direct, control or
regulate traffic in the vicinity of the school to which such guard may be
assigned.
§ 404.07  APPLICATION TO DRIVERS OF GOVERNMENT VEHICLES.
   The provisions of this Traffic Code applicable to the drivers of vehicles
shall apply to the drivers of all vehicles owned or operated by the United
States, any state or any political subdivision thereof, including this
municipality, except as may be otherwise provided by law and subject to such
specific exceptions as are set forth with reference to authorized emergency and
public safety vehicles.
§ 404.08  AUTHORITY OF PROPERTY OWNERS.
   Nothing in this Traffic Code shall be construed to prevent the owner of real
property, used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel by permission of
the owner and not as a matter of right, from prohibiting such use or from
requiring additional conditions to those specified in this Traffic Code or
otherwise regulating such use as may seem best to such owner. 
(ORC 4511.08)
§ 404.09  JUDGE MAY REQUIRE INSPECTION OF MOTOR VEHICLES.
   In addition to or independent of all other penalties provided for a
violation of any of the provisions of this Traffic Code, the court may require
inspection by the Police Department of the city of any vehicle involved in a
violation of any section for which a penalty is prescribed, provided that if
the vehicle is involved in an accident and damaged, the court may prohibit the
use of such vehicle upon the streets of the city until the same has been
submitted to examination by the Police Department and approved by such
Department as safe for operation upon the streets of the city.
§ 404.10  FURNISHING FALSE INFORMATION INCIDENT TO TRAFFIC CITATION.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly present, display, or orally communicate a
false name, social security number, or date of birth to a law enforcement
officer who is in the process of issuing to the person a traffic ticket or
complaint.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 4513.361)
§ 404.99  GENERAL CODE PENALTY; SUSPENSION OF DRIVER’S LICENSE.
   (A)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
Traffic Code, for which no penalty is otherwise provided, shall be subject to
the penalty provided in §
202.99 of the Administration Code, except as provided in division (B) of this
section.
   (B)   (1)   Notwithstanding division (A) of this section, whoever violates
any provision of this Traffic Code for which no penalty otherwise is provided
in the section violated is guilty of one of the following:
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(3) or (4) of this
section, a minor misdemeanor;
      (3)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, a misdemeanor of  the fourth degree;
      (4)   If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more predicate motor vehicle or
traffic offenses, a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.99)
   (C)   Violations committed while distracted.
      (1)   As used in this section and each section referenced in division (C)
(2) of this section, all of the following apply:
         (a)   “Distracted” means doing either of the following while operating
a vehicle:
            1.   Using a handheld electronic wireless communications device, as
defined in R.C. § 4511.204, except when utilizing any of the following:
               a.   The device’s speakerphone function;
               b.   A wireless technology standard for exchanging data over
short distances;
               c.   A “voice-operated or hands-free” device that allows the
person to use the electronic wireless communications device without the use of
either hand except to activate, deactivate, or initiate a feature or function;
               d.   Any device that is physically or electronically integrated
into the motor vehicle.
            2.   Engaging in any activity that is not necessary to the
operation of a vehicle and impairs, or reasonably would be expected to impair,
the ability of the operator to drive the vehicle safely.
         (b)   “Distracted” does not include operating a motor vehicle while
wearing an earphone or earplug over or in both ears at the same time. A person
who so wears earphones or earplugs may be charged with a violation of R.C. §
4511.84, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
         (c)   “Distracted” does not include conducting any activity while
operating a utility service vehicle or a vehicle for or on behalf of a utility,
provided that the driver of the vehicle is acting in response to an emergency,
power outage, or a circumstance affecting the health or safety of individuals.
As used in this division (b)(1)C.:
            1.   “Utility” means an entity specified in R.C. § 4905.03(A), (C),
(D), (E), or (G).
            2.   “Utility service vehicle” means a vehicle owned or operated by
a utility.
      (2)   If an offender violates R.C. §§ 4511.03, 4511.051, 4511.12,
4511.121, 4511.132, 4511.21, 4511.211, 4511.213, 4511.22, 4511.23, 4511.25,
4511.26, 4511.27, 4511.28, 4511.29, 4511.30, 4511.31, 4511.32, 4511.33,
4511.34, 4511.35, 4511.36, 4511.37, 4511.38, 4511.39, 4511.40, 4511.41,
4511.42, 4511.43, 4511.431, 4511.44, 4511.441, 4511.451, 4511.46, 4511.47,
4511.54, 4511.55, 4511.57, 4511.58, 4511.59, 4511.60, 4511.61, 4511.64,
4511.71, 4511.711, 4511.712, 4511.713, 4511.72, or 4511.73, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the
violation, the offender is subject to the applicable penalty for the violation
and, notwithstanding R.C. § 2929.28, is subject to an additional fine of not
more than $100 as follows:
         (a)   1.   Subject to Traffic Rule 13, if a law enforcement officer
issues an offender a ticket, citation, or summons for a violation of any of the
aforementioned sections of the Ohio Revised Code, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that indicates that the offender was distracted
while committing the violation and that the distracting activity was a
contributing factor to the commission of the violation, the offender may enter
a written plea of guilty and waive the offender’s right to contest the ticket,
citation, or summons in a trial provided that the offender pays the total
amount of the fine established for the violation and pays the additional fine
of $100.
            2.   In lieu of payment of the additional fine of $100, the
offender instead may elect to attend a distracted driving safety course, the
duration and contents of which shall be established by the Ohio Director of
Public Safety. If the offender attends and successfully completes the course,
the offender shall be issued written evidence that the offender successfully
completed the course. The offender shall be required to pay the total amount of
the fine established for the violation, but shall not be required to pay the
additional fine of $100, so long as the offender submits to the court both the
offender’s payment in full and such written evidence.
         (b)   1.   If the offender appears in person to contest the ticket,
citation, or summons in a trial and the offender pleads guilty to or is
convicted of the violation, the court, in addition to all other penalties
provided by law, may impose the applicable penalty for the violation and may
impose the additional fine of not more than $100.
            2.   If the court imposes upon the offender the applicable penalty
for the violation and an additional fine of not more than $100, the court shall
inform the offender that, in lieu of payment of the additional fine of not more
than $100, the offender instead may elect to attend the distracted driving
safety course described in division (B)(2)(a) of this section. If the offender
elects the course option and attends and successfully completes the course, the
offender shall be issued written evidence that the offender successfully
completed the course. The offender shall be required to pay the total amount of
the fine established for the violation, but shall not be required to pay the
additional fine of not more than $100, so long as the offender submits to the
court the offender’s payment and such written evidence.
(ORC 4511.991)
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in Ohio R.C. 4510.07 or in any other
provision of the Revised Code, whenever an offender is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a violation of any provision of this Traffic Code that is
substantially equivalent to a provision of the Revised Code, and a court is
permitted or required to suspend a person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or permit for a violation of that provision, a court, in addition to
any other penalties authorized by law, may suspend the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege for
the period of time the court determines appropriate, but the period of
suspension imposed for the violation of the provision of this Traffic Code
shall not exceed the period of suspension that is permitted or required to be
imposed for the violation of the provision of the Revised Code to which the
provision of this Traffic Code is substantially equivalent.
(ORC 4510.05)
CHAPTER 406:  TRAFFIC CONTROL
Section
406.01   Division of Traffic Engineering and Safety created
406.02   Authority and considerations for placement of devices
406.03   Conformity with State Manual
406.04   Powers of Safety Director
406.05   Posting of signs and signals required
406.06   Safety Director’s powers not limited
406.07   Records of Safety Director
406.08   Reservation of power to Council
406.09   Violations subject to general Code penalty
Cross-reference:
   Authority of Mayor to post parking signs at city limits, see §
452.20
   Designation of through streets and erection of stop or yield signs, see §
414.02
   Traffic control devices defined, see §
402.48
Statutory reference:
   Alteration of prima facie speed limits, see Ohio R.C. 4511.21, 4511.22,
4511.23
   Placing and maintaining local traffic control devices, see Ohio R.C.
4511.10, 4511.11
   Power to designate highway as a freeway, expressway or thruway, see Ohio
R.C. 4511.011
   Power to erect stop signs at grade crossings, see Ohio R.C. 4511.61
   Uniform system of traffic control devices, see Ohio R.C. 4511.09,  4511.11
§ 406.01  DIVISION OF TRAFFIC ENGINEERING AND SAFETY CREATED.
   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 737.021 and 737.022, a Division of Traffic Engineering
and Safety is hereby created, and the Director of Public Safety shall be the
executive head of such division.
§ 406.02  AUTHORITY AND CONSIDERATIONS FOR PLACEMENT OF DEVICES.
   Council may designate a person to place and maintain traffic control devices
upon any street or highway under municipal jurisdiction as are necessary to
effectuate the provisions of this Traffic Code, or to regulate, warn or guide
traffic, and such other traffic control devices as such person shall deem
necessary for the proper control of traffic. Such designated person shall
determine the location, timing and coordination of such traffic control devices
upon the basis of an applicable engineering or traffic investigation and shall
consider the following:
   (A)   The maximum safety and protection of vehicular and pedestrian traffic
from physical injury or property damage;
   (B)   The existing and potential traffic movement, volume and conditions;
   (C)   The location and frequency of accidents, including studies of remedial
measures;
   (D)   The recommendations of the Chief of Police and Fire Chief;
   (E)   The acceleration of transportation of persons and property by vehicles
so as to expedite travel and promote public safety;
   (F)   The convenience and welfare of the general public in parking,
standing, loading and unloading, and the use of the streets as affecting
business concerns and places of assembly; and
   (G)   Economy in the expenditure of money.
§ 406.03  CONFORMITY WITH STATE MANUAL.
   All traffic control devices placed pursuant to the provisions of this
Traffic Code shall conform to the Ohio Manual and Specifications for a Uniform
System of Traffic-Control Devices, as set forth in Ohio R.C. 4511.09.
§ 406.04  POWERS OF SAFETY DIRECTOR.
   The Director of Public Safety  is hereby authorized to:
   (A)   Designate any street or highway as a through street or highway and
require that all vehicles stop or yield the right-of-way as may be required
before entering the same;
   (B)   Designate any intersection as a stop intersection and require all
vehicles to stop at one or more entrances to such intersection;
   (C)   Designate any intersection as a yield intersection and require all
vehicles to yield the right-of-way as required;
   (D)   Designate any street as a one-way street and require that all vehicles
thereon be moved in one specific direction;
   (E)   Designate and mark lanes to be used by traffic moving in a particular
direction regardless of the centerline of the roadway;
   (F)   Erect signs directing slow-moving traffic to use a designated lane or
allocating specified lanes to traffic moving in the same direction;
   (G)   Designate those portions of any street, where overtaking and passing
other traffic or driving to the left of the center or centerline of the roadway
would be especially hazardous, by appropriate signs or markings on the street
to indicate the beginning and end of such zones.  Such zones may be marked by
an auxiliary yellow line placed parallel and to the right of the normal
centerline or offset marked lane line;
   (H)   Place markers, buttons or signs within or adjacent to intersections
and require that a specific course of direction be traveled by vehicles
proceeding in lanes by either permitting, prohibiting or requiring turns at
such intersections;
   (I)   Install traffic control devices, signals and signs at any location to
regulate traffic;
   (J)   Establish safety zones, crosswalks, zones of quiet and play streets;
   (K)   Close any street or portion thereof to vehicular traffic which is in
the process of construction, reconstruction or repair;
   (L)   Determine the location of any necessary bus stops and taxicab stands;
   (M)   Determine the location and limiting hours of truck loading zones;
   (N)   Designate dangerous railroad crossings and erect stop signs thereat;
   (O)   Erect “No U Turn” signs at any location to prohibit a vehicle from
being turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction;
   (P)   Regulate or prohibit the stopping, standing and parking of vehicles on
streets, alleys or public property by erecting signs plainly indicating the
prohibitions, restrictions or limitations;
   (Q)   Designate individual parking spaces by markings, which may either be
parallel or at a prescribed angle to the curb or edge of the roadway.
   (R)   Make regulations necessary to enforce this traffic code and make
temporary regulations to cover emergencies and special conditions.
(Ord. 86-87, passed 8-31-1987)
§ 406.05  POSTING OF SIGNS AND SIGNALS REQUIRED.
   No provision of this chapter shall be effective until signs, signals,
markings or other devices giving notice of such local traffic regulations are
posted upon or at the entrance to the street or part thereof affected, as may
be most appropriate, so that in a proper position they are sufficiently legible
to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.
§ 406.06  SAFETY DIRECTOR’S POWERS NOT LIMITED.
   The powers of the Director of Public Safety shall not be limited by the
specific enumeration of subjects contained in this chapter.
§ 406.07  RECORDS OF SAFETY DIRECTOR.
   The Director of Public Safety shall keep a record of all rules, regulations
and proceedings promulgated in connection with this chapter.
§ 406.08  RESERVATION OF POWER TO COUNCIL.
   Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, Council may override any
decision of the Director of Public Safety and may assume any of the powers
delegated to such Director, by a resolution adopted by a vote of a majority of
the members duly elected thereto. Upon the adoption of any such resolution, the
same may be changed only by an amending or repealing resolution adopted by
Council.
§ 406.09  VIOLATIONS SUBJECT TO GENERAL CODE PENALTY.
   Any person violating the rules and regulations promulgated in connection
with this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction
thereof shall be subject to the penalties provided in §
404.99.
TITLE FOUR:  PUBLIC WAYS AND TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
   
CHAP. 412.  OBSTRUCTION AND SPECIAL USES OF PUBLIC WAYS
   
CHAP. 414.  TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
   
CHAP. 416.  PEDESTRIANS
CHAPTER 412:  OBSTRUCTION AND SPECIAL USES OF PUBLIC WAYS
Section
412.01   Placing injurious material or obstruction in street
412.02   Zones of quiet
412.03   Play streets
412.04   Toy vehicles on roadway
412.05   Freeway use prohibited by pedestrians, bicycles and animals
412.06   Parades and assemblages
412.07   Danger zones
412.08   Playing games on streets
412.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Loads dropping or leaking; tracking mud; removal required, see §
440.06
   Parking in alleys or narrow streets; exceptions, see §
452.11
   Selling, washing or repairing vehicle upon roadway, see §
452.08
   Sidewalk obstructions; damage or injury, see §
660.10
Statutory reference:
   Power to regulate processions or assemblages, see Ohio R.C. 4511.07
§ 412.01  PLACING INJURIOUS MATERIAL OR OBSTRUCTION IN STREET.
   (A)   No person shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a highway,
lane, road, street, or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails, or other
articles which may damage or injure any person, vehicle, or animal traveling
along or upon the highway, except such substances that may be placed upon the
roadway by proper authority for the repair or construction thereof.
   (B)   Any person who drops or permits to be dropped or thrown upon any
highway any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the
same.
   (C)   Any person authorized to remove a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a
highway shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the
highway from such vehicle.
   (D)   No person shall place any obstruction in or upon a highway without
proper authority.
   (E)   No person, with intent to cause physical harm to a person or a
vehicle, shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a highway, lane, road,
street, or alley any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails, or other articles
which may damage or injure any person, vehicle, or animal traveling along or
upon such highway, except such substances that may be placed upon the roadway
by proper authority for the repair or construction thereof.
(ORC 4511.74)
§ 412.02  ZONES OF QUIET.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating a zone of quiet, no person
operating a vehicle within any such zone shall sound the horn or other warning
device of such vehicle except in an emergency.
§ 412.03  PLAY STREETS.
   Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof
as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such a street or
portion thereof unless necessary to the service or convenience of persons
residing on such street or unless the person resides thereon.
§ 412.04  TOY VEHICLES ON ROADWAY.
   No person upon roller skates or riding on or by means of any coaster, toy
vehicle or similar device shall go upon any roadway except while crossing a
street at a crosswalk and except upon streets set aside as play streets when
and as authorized as such.
§ 412.05  FREEWAY USE PROHIBITED BY PEDESTRIANS, BICYCLES AND ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, shall, as a
pedestrian, occupy any space within the limits of the right-of-way of a
freeway, except:  in a rest area; on a facility that is separated from the
roadway and shoulders of the freeway and is designed and appropriately marked
for pedestrian use; in the performance of public works or official duties; as a
result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown of a motor vehicle;
or to obtain assistance.
   (B)   No person, unless otherwise directed by a police officer, shall occupy
any space within the limits of the right-of-way of a freeway, with an animal-
drawn vehicle, a ridden or led animal, herded animals, a pushcart, a bicycle,
except on a facility that is separated from the roadway and shoulders of the
freeway and is designed and appropriately marked for bicycle use, a bicycle
with motor attached, a motor-driven cycle with a motor which produces not to
exceed five brake horsepower, an agricultural tractor, or farm machinery,
except in the performance of public works or official duties.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.051)
§ 412.06  PARADES AND ASSEMBLAGES.
   (A)   No person, group of persons or organization shall conduct or
participate in any parade, procession or assemblage upon any street or highway,
or block off any street or highway area, without first obtaining a permit from
the office of the Mayor.
   (B)   Applications for such permits shall be made on such forms as may be
prescribed and shall contain such information as is reasonably necessary to a
fair determination of whether a permit should be issued. Applications shall be
filed not less than 15 days before the time intended for such parade,
procession or assemblage.
   (C)   The permit may be refused or canceled if the resultant conditions
would unreasonably hinder the movement of traffic or would require the
diversion of such number of police officers or firemen as to deprive the
municipality of normal police and fire protection, or would be reasonably
likely to provoke disorderly conduct, create a disturbance or threaten the
safety of residents.
   (D)   The permit or any order accompanying it may limit or prescribe
reasonable conditions, including the hours, the places of assembly and of
dispersal, the route of march or travel and the streets, highways or portions
thereof which may be used or occupied.
   (E)   The fee for such permit shall be $25.
§ 412.07  DANGER ZONES.
   No person shall enter upon, or operate any vehicle in or upon, any area that
has been roped off, fenced or barricaded and designated a danger zone.
§ 412.08  PLAYING GAMES ON STREETS.
   No person shall fly a kite or play any game of ball or other game on any
street unless the same has been set aside for playground purposes.
§ 412.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
404.99 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 414:  TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES
Section
414.01   Obedience to traffic control devices
414.02   Through streets; stop and yield right-of-way signs
414.03   Traffic control signal terms and lights
414.035   Siren-activated traffic signal
414.04   Signal to control lane direction of travel
414.05   Pedestrian control signals
414.07   Unauthorized signs and signals, hiding from view, advertising
414.08   Alteration, injury, removal of traffic control devices
414.085   Unauthorized possession or sale of devices
414.10   Signal preemption devices; prohibitions
414.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Authority and considerations for placing of devices, see §
406.01
   Criminal mischief (tampering), see §
642.11
   Intersections at which traffic control signals fail or malfunction, see §
432.155
   Posting of signs and signals required, see §
406.04
   Traffic control devices defined, see §
402.48
   Uniform system of traffic control devices, see §
406.02
Statutory reference:
   Designation of through streets or stop intersections, see Ohio R.C. 4511.07,
4511.65
   Placing and maintaining local traffic control devices, see Ohio R.C.
4511.10, 4511.11
   Traffic law photo-monitoring devices, state regulations, see Ohio R.C.
4511.092 et seq.
   Uniform system of traffic control devices, see Ohio R.C. 4511.09, 4511.11
§ 414.01  OBEDIENCE TO TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   (1)   No pedestrian or driver of a vehicle shall disobey the
instructions of any traffic-control device placed in accordance with the
provisions of this Traffic Code, unless at the time otherwise directed by a
police officer.
      (2)   No provision of this Traffic Code for which signs are required
shall be enforced against an alleged violator if, at the time and place of the
alleged violation, an official sign is not in proper position and sufficiently
legible to be seen by an ordinarily observant person.  Whenever a particular
section of this Traffic Code does not state that signs are required, that
section shall be effective even though no signs are erected or in place.
(ORC 4511.12(A))
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (C) of this section, any operator
of a commercial motor vehicle, upon approaching a scale location established
for the purpose of determining the weight of the vehicle and its load, shall
comply with any traffic control device or the order of a peace officer
directing the vehicle to proceed to be weighed or otherwise inspected.
      (2)   Any operator of a commercial motor vehicle, upon bypassing a scale
location in accordance with division (C) of this section, shall comply with an
order of a peace officer to stop the vehicle to verify the use and operation of
an electronic clearance device.
   (C)   Any operator of a commercial motor vehicle that is equipped with an
electronic clearance device authorized by the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol under Ohio R.C. 4549.081 may bypass a scale location, regardless
of the instruction of a traffic control device to enter the scale facility, if
either of the following apply:
      (1)   The in-cab transponder displays a green light or other affirmative
visual signal and also sounds an affirmative audible signal;
      (2)   Any other criterion established by the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol is met.
   (D)   Any peace officer may order the operator of a commercial motor vehicle
that bypasses a scale location to stop the vehicle to verify the use and
operation of an electronic clearance device.
   (E)   As used in this section, “commercial motor vehicle” means any
combination of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight rating or an actual gross
vehicle weight of more than 10,000 pounds if the vehicle is used in interstate
or intrastate commerce to transport property and also means any vehicle that is
transporting hazardous materials for which placarding is required pursuant to
49 C.F.R. Parts 100 to 180.
(ORC 4511.121(A)-(C), (E))
   (F)   No person shall use an electronic clearance device if the device or
its use is not in compliance with rules of the Superintendent of the State
Highway Patrol.
(ORC 4549.081(B))
   (G)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.12(B), 4511.121(D))
§ 414.02  THROUGH STREETS; STOP AND YIELD RIGHT-OF-WAY SIGNS.
   (A)   All state routes are hereby designated as through highways, provided
that stop signs, yield signs, or traffic-control signals shall be erected at
all intersections with such through highways by the Department of
Transportation as to highways under its jurisdiction and by local authorities
as to highways under their jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this
section.  Where two or more state routes that are through highways intersect,
and no traffic-control signal is in operation, stop signs or yield signs shall
be erected at one or more entrances thereto by the Department or by local
authorities having jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this section. 
Whenever the Director of Transportation determines on the basis of an
engineering and traffic investigation that stop signs are necessary to stop
traffic on a through highway for safe and efficient operation, nothing in this
section shall be construed to prevent such installations.  When circumstances
warrant, the Director also may omit stop signs on roadways intersecting through
highways under his or her jurisdiction.  Before the Director either installs or
removes a stop sign under this division, he or she shall give notice, in
writing, of that proposed action to the affected local authority at least 30
days before installing or removing the stop sign.
   (B)   Other streets or highways, or portions thereof, are hereby designated
as through highways if they are within the municipality, if they have a
continuous length of more than one mile between the limits of the street or
highway or portion thereof, and if they have stop or yield signs or traffic-
control signals at the entrances of the majority of intersecting streets or
highways.  For purposes of this section, the limits of the street or highway,
or portion thereof, shall be the municipal corporation line, the physical
terminus of the street or highway, or any point on the streets or highway at
which vehicular traffic thereon is required by regulatory signs to stop or
yield to traffic on the intersecting street, provided, that in residence
districts, the municipality may by ordinance designate such street or highway,
or portion thereof, not to be a through highway and thereafter the affected
residence district shall be indicated by official traffic-control devices. 
Where two or more through highways designated under this division intersect and
no traffic-control signal is in operation, stop signs or yield signs shall be
erected at one or more entrances thereto by the Department or by local
authorities having jurisdiction, except as otherwise provided in this section.
   (C)   The Department or local authorities having jurisdiction need not erect
stop signs at intersections they find to be so constructed as to permit traffic
to safely enter a through highway without coming to a stop.  Signs shall be
erected at such intersections indicating that the operator of a vehicle shall
yield the right-of-way to or merge with all traffic proceeding on the through
highway.
   (D)   Local authorities, with reference to highways under their
jurisdiction, may designate additional through highways, and shall erect stop
signs, yield signs, or traffic-control signals at all streets and highways
intersecting such through highways, or may designate any intersection as a stop
or yield intersection, and shall erect like signs at one or more entrances to
the intersection.
(ORC 4511.65)
§ 414.03  TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNAL TERMS AND LIGHTS.
   Highway traffic signal indications for vehicles and pedestrians shall have
the following meanings:
   (A)   Steady Green Signal Indication.
      (1)   (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a circular green signal indication
are permitted to proceed straight through or turn right or left or make a u-
turn movement except as such movement is modified by a lane-use sign, turn
prohibition sign, lane marking, roadway design, separate turn signal
indication, or other traffic control device. Such vehicular traffic, including
vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn movement, shall yield the
right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         (b)   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn
movement to the left shall yield the right-of-way to other vehicles approaching
from the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard
during the time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the
intersection.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a green arrow signal indication, displayed
alone or in combination with another signal indication, are permitted to
cautiously enter the intersection only to make the movement indicated by such
arrow, or such other movement as is permitted by other indications displayed at
the same time. Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left
or making a u-turn movement, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the
following:
         (a)   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
         (b)   Other traffic lawfully using the intersection.
      (3)   (a)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication,
as provided in R.C. § 4511.14, pedestrians facing a circular green signal
indication are permitted to proceed across the roadway within any marked or
unmarked associated crosswalk. The pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles lawfully within the intersection or so close as to create an immediate
hazard at the time that the green signal indication is first displayed.
         (b)   Pedestrians facing a green arrow signal indication, unless
otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or other traffic control
device, shall not cross the roadway.
   (B)   Steady Yellow Signal Indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular yellow signal indication
are thereby warned that the related green movement or the related flashing
arrow movement is being terminated or that a steady red signal indication will
be exhibited immediately thereafter when vehicular traffic shall not enter the
intersection. The provisions governing vehicular operation under the movement
being terminated shall continue to apply while the steady circular yellow
signal indication is displayed.
      (2)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady yellow arrow signal indication is
thereby warned that the related green arrow movement or the related flashing
arrow movement is being terminated. The provisions governing vehicular
operation under the movement being terminated shall continue to apply while the
steady yellow arrow signal indication is displayed.
      (3)   Pedestrians facing a steady circular yellow or yellow arrow signal
indication, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as
provided in R.C. § 4511.14 or other traffic control device, shall not start to
cross the roadway.
   (C)   Steady Red Signal Indication.
      (1)   (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady circular red signal
indication, unless entering the intersection to make another movement permitted
by another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if
there is no stop line, traffic shall stop before entering the crosswalk on the
near side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then before
entering the intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal indication
to proceed is displayed except as provided in divisions (C)(1), (C)(2), and (C)
(3) of this section.
         (b)   Except when a traffic control device is in place prohibiting a
turn on red or a steady red arrow signal indication is displayed, vehicular
traffic facing a steady circular red signal indication is permitted, after
stopping, to enter the intersection to turn right, or to turn left from a one-
way street into a one-way street. The right to proceed with the turn shall be
subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a stop
sign.
      (2)   (a)   Vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow signal indication
shall not enter the intersection to make the movement indicated by the arrow
and, unless entering the intersection to make another movement permitted by
another signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line; but if
there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, then before entering the
intersection; and shall remain stopped until a signal indication or other
traffic control device permitting the movement indicated by such red arrow is
displayed.
         (b)   When a traffic control device is in place permitting a turn on a
steady red arrow signal indication, vehicular traffic facing a steady red arrow
indication is permitted, after stopping, to enter the intersection to turn
right, or to turn left from a one-way street into a one-way street. The right
to proceed with the turn shall be limited to the direction indicated by the
arrow and shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a
stop at a stop sign.
      (3)   Unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication as
provided in R.C. § 4511.14 or other traffic control device, pedestrians facing
a steady circular red or steady red arrow signal indication shall not enter the
roadway.
      (4)   Local authorities by ordinance, or the Director of Transportation
on state highways, may prohibit a right or a left turn against a steady red
signal at any intersection, which shall be effective when signs giving notice
thereof are posted at the intersection.
   (D)   Flashing Green Signal Indication.  A flashing green signal indication
has no meaning and shall not be used.
   (E)   Flashing Yellow Signal Indication.
      (1)   (a)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing
a flashing circular yellow signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter
the intersection to proceed straight through or turn right or left or make a u-
turn movement except as such movement is modified by lane-use signs, turn
prohibition signs, lane markings, roadway design, separate turn signal
indications, or other traffic control devices. Such vehicular traffic,
including vehicles turning right or left or making a u-turn movement, shall
yield the right- of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         (b)   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn
to the left shall yield the right- of-way to other vehicles approaching from
the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during
the time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection.
      (2)   (a)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing
a flashing yellow arrow signal indication, displayed alone or in combination
with another signal indication, is permitted to cautiously enter the
intersection only to make the movement indicated by such arrow, or other such
movement as is permitted by other signal indications displayed at the same
time. Such vehicular traffic, including vehicles turning right or left or
making a u-turn, shall yield the right-of-way to both of the following:
            1.   Pedestrians lawfully within an associated crosswalk;
            2.   Other vehicles lawfully within the intersection.
         (b)   In addition, vehicular traffic turning left or making a u-turn
to the left shall yield the right- of-way to other vehicles approaching from
the opposite direction so closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during
the time when such turning vehicle is moving across or within the intersection.
      (3)   Pedestrians facing any flashing yellow signal indication at an
intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or
other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the
right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the
flashing yellow signal indication is first displayed.
      (4)   When a flashing circular yellow signal indication is displayed as a
beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road users are notified
that there is a need to pay additional attention to the message contained
thereon or that the regulatory or warning requirements of the other traffic
control device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently
applicable.
   (F)   Flashing Red Signal Indication.
      (1)   Vehicular traffic, on an approach to an intersection, facing a
flashing circular red signal indication, shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line; but if there is no stop line, before entering the crosswalk on the near
side of the intersection; or if there is no crosswalk, at the point nearest the
intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the
intersecting roadway before entering the intersection. The right to proceed
shall be subject to the provisions that are applicable after making a stop at a
stop sign.
      (2)   Pedestrians facing any flashing red signal indication at an
intersection, unless otherwise directed by a pedestrian signal indication or
other traffic control device, are permitted to proceed across the roadway
within any marked or unmarked associated crosswalk. Pedestrians shall yield the
right-of-way to vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the
flashing red signal indication is first displayed.
      (3)   When a flashing circular red signal indication is displayed as a
beacon to supplement another traffic control device, road users are notified
that there is a need to pay additional attention to the message contained
thereon or that the regulatory requirements of the other traffic control
device, which might not be applicable at all times, are currently applicable.
Use of this signal indication shall be limited to supplementing
stop, do not enter, or wrong way signs, and to applications where compliance
with the supplemented traffic control device requires a stop at a designated
point.
   (G)   In the event an official traffic-control signal is erected and
maintained at a place other than an intersection, the provisions of this
section shall be applicable except as to those provisions which by their nature
can have no application. Any stop required shall be made at a sign or marking
on the pavement indicating where the stop shall be made, but in the absence of
any such sign or marking the stop shall be made at the signal.
   (H)   This section does not apply at railroad grade crossings. Conduct of
drivers of vehicles approaching railroad grade crossings shall be governed by
R.C. §§ 4511.61 and 4511.62.
(ORC 4511.13)
§ 414.035  SIREN-ACTIVATED TRAFFIC SIGNAL.
   A siren-activated traffic signal emergency preemption system and a quick/
disconnect shall be installed with each updated or new traffic light installed
anywhere in the City of Broadview Heights.
(Ord. 145-03, passed 10-6-2003)
§ 414.04  SIGNAL TO CONTROL LANE DIRECTION OF TRAVEL.
   The meanings of lane-use control signal indications are as follows:
   (A)   A Steady Downward Green Arrow.  A road user is permitted to drive in
the lane over which the arrow signal indication is located.
   (B)   A Steady Yellow “X”. A road user is to prepare to vacate the lane over
which the signal indication is located because a lane control change is being
made to a steady red “X” signal indication.
   (C)   A Steady White Two-Way Left-Turn Arrow.  A road user is permitted to
use a lane over which the signal indication is located for a left turn, but not
for through travel, with the understanding that common use of the lane by
oncoming road users for left turns also is permitted.
   (D)   A Steady White One-Way Left-Turn Arrow. A road user is permitted to
use a lane over which the signal indication is located for a left turn, without
opposing turns in the same lane, but not for through travel.
   (E)   A Steady Red “X”. A road user is not permitted to use the lane over
which the signal indication is located and that this signal indication shall
modify accordingly the meaning of other traffic controls present.
(ORC 4511.131)
§ 414.05  PEDESTRIAN CONTROL SIGNALS.
   Whenever special pedestrian-control signals exhibiting the words “walk” or
“don’t walk,” or the symbol of a walking person or an upraised palm are in
place, these signals shall indicate the following instructions:
   (A)   A steady walking person signal indication, which symbolizes “walk”,
means that a pedestrian facing the signal indication is permitted to start to
cross the roadway in the direction of the signal indication, possibly in
conflict with turning vehicles. The pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to
vehicles lawfully within the intersection at the time that the walking person
signal indication is first shown.
   (B)   A flashing upraised hand signal indication, which symbolizes “don't
walk”, means that a pedestrian shall not start to cross the roadway in the
direction of the signal indication, but that any pedestrian who has already
started to cross on a steady walking person signal indication shall proceed to
the far side of the traveled way of the street or highway, unless otherwise
directed by a traffic control device to proceed only to the median of a divided
highway or only to some other island or pedestrian refuge area.
   (C)   A steady upraised hand signal indication means that a pedestrian shall
not enter the roadway in the direction of the signal indication.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the continued
use of pedestrian control signals utilizing the word “wait” if those signals
were installed prior to March 28, 1985.
   (E)   A flashing walking person signal indication has no meaning and shall
not be used.
(ORC 4511.14)
§ 414.07  UNAUTHORIZED SIGNS AND SIGNALS, HIDING FROM VIEW, ADVERTISING.
   (A)   No person shall place, maintain, or display upon or in view of any
highway any unauthorized sign, signal, marking, or device which purports to be,
is an imitation of, or resembles a traffic-control device or railroad sign or
signal, or which attempts to direct the movement of traffic, or hides from view
or interferes with the effectiveness of any traffic-control device or any
railroad sign or signal, and no person shall place or maintain, nor shall any
public authority permit, upon any highway any traffic sign or signal bearing
thereon any commercial advertising.  This section does not prohibit either the
erection upon private property adjacent to highways of signs giving useful
directional information and of a type that cannot be mistaken for traffic-
control devices, or the erection upon private property of traffic-control
devices by the owner of real property in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4511.211 and
4511.432.
   (B)   Every prohibited sign, signal, marking, or device is a public
nuisance, and the authority having jurisdiction over the highway may remove the
same or cause it to be removed.
(ORC 4511.16)
§ 414.08  ALTERATION, INJURY, REMOVAL OF TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES.
   (A)   No person without lawful authority shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly move, deface, damage, destroy, or otherwise improperly
tamper with any traffic- control device, any railroad sign or signal, or any
inscription, shield, or insignia on the device, sign, or signal, or any part of
the device, sign, or signal;
      (2)   Knowingly drive upon or over any freshly applied pavement marking
material on the surface of a roadway while the marking material is in an
undried condition, and is marked by flags, markers, signs, or other devices
intended to protect it;
      (3)   Knowingly move, damage, destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper
with a manhole cover.
(ORC 4511.17)
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates any
provision of this section shall be subject to the penalty set forth in§
404.99.  A violation of divisions (A)(1) or (A)(3) of this section that causes
serious physical harm to property that is owned, leased, or controlled by a
state or local authority is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
§ 414.085  UNAUTHORIZED POSSESSION OR SALE OF DEVICES.
   (A)   As used in this section, “traffic control device” means any sign,
traffic control signal or other device conforming to and placed or erected in
accordance with the manual adopted under Ohio R.C. 4511.09 by authority of a
public body or official having jurisdiction, for the purpose of regulating,
warning or guiding traffic, including signs denoting the names of streets and
highways, but does not mean any pavement marking.
   (B)   No individual shall buy or otherwise possess, or sell, a traffic
control device, except when one of the following applies:
      (1)   In the course of the individual’s employment by the state or a
local authority for the express or implied purpose of manufacturing, providing,
erecting, moving or removing such a traffic control device;
      (2)   In the course of the individual’s employment by any manufacturer of
traffic control devices other than a state or local authority;
      (3)   For the purpose of demonstrating the design and function of a
traffic control device to state or local officials;
      (4)   When the traffic control device has been purchased from the state
or a local authority at a sale of property that is no longer needed or is unfit
for use; or
      (5)   When the traffic control device has been properly purchased from a
manufacturer for use on private property and the person possessing the device
has a sales receipt for the device or other acknowledgment of sale issued by
the manufacturer.
   (C)   This section does not preclude, and shall not be construed as
precluding, prosecution for theft in violation of Ohio R.C. 2913.02, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or for receiving stolen property
in violation of Ohio R.C. 2913.51, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
(ORC 4511.18)
§ 414.10  SIGNAL PREEMPTION DEVICES; PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall possess a portable signal preemption device.
      (2)   No person shall use a portable signal preemption device to affect
the operation of a traffic- control device.
   (B)   Division (A)(1) of this section does not apply to any of the following
persons and division (A)(2) of this section does not apply to any of the
following persons when responding to an emergency call:
      (1)   A peace officer, as defined in Ohio R.C. 109.17(A)(1), (A)(12), (A)
(14), or (A)(19);
      (2)   A state highway patrol officer;
      (3)   A person while occupying a public safety vehicle as defined in Ohio
R.C. 4511.01(E)(1), (E)(3), or (E)(4).
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Whoever violates division (A)(2) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (D)   As used in this section, “portable signal preemption device” means a
device that, if activated by a person, is capable of changing a traffic-control
signal to green out of sequence.
(ORC 4511.031)
§ 414.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
404.99 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 416:  PEDESTRIANS
Section
416.01   Duties of pedestrians and drivers at crosswalks
416.02   Right-of-way of blind person
416.03   Right-of-way yielded by pedestrian; crossing roadways
416.04   Moving in crosswalks
416.05   Walking on sidewalks and streets
416.06   Soliciting rides or business; riding on outside of vehicle or in cargo
storage area
416.07   Passing through bridge signals or railroad barriers
416.08   Right-of-way of public safety vehicles
416.09   Right-of-way on sidewalks
416.10   Intoxication
416.11   Motorized wheelchair operators
416.12   Operation of electric personal assistive mobility devices
416.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Obedience to traffic control devices, see §
414.01
   Opening doors on side available to traffic, see §
452.07
   Pedestrian control signals, see §
414.05
   Pedestrians prohibited on freeways, see §
412.05
§ 416.01  DUTIES OF PEDESTRIANS AND DRIVERS AT CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   When traffic-control signals are not in place, not in operation, or
are not clearly assigning the right- of-way, the driver of a vehicle shall
yield the right-of-way, slowing down or stopping if need be to so yield, or if
required by Ohio R.C. 4511.132 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, to a pedestrian crossing the roadway within a crosswalk when the
pedestrian is upon the half of the roadway upon which the vehicle is traveling,
or when the pedestrian is approaching so closely from the opposite half of the
roadway as to be in danger.
   (B)   No pedestrian shall suddenly leave a curb or other place of safety and
walk or run into the path of a vehicle which is so close as to constitute an
immediate hazard.
   (C)   Division (A) of this section does not apply under the conditions
stated in Ohio R.C. 4511.48(B), or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (D)   Whenever any vehicle is stopped at a marked crosswalk or at any
unmarked crosswalk at an intersection to permit a pedestrian to cross the
roadway, the driver of any other vehicle approaching from the rear shall not
overtake and pass the stopped vehicle.
   (E)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.46)
§ 416.02  RIGHT-OF-WAY OF BLIND PERSON.
   (A)   As used in this section “blind person” or “blind pedestrian” means a
person having not more than 20/200 visual acuity in the better eye with
correcting lenses, or visual acuity greater than 20/200, but with a limitation
in the fields of vision such that the widest diameter of the visual field
subtends an angle no greater than 20°.
   (B)   The driver of every vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to every
blind pedestrian guided by a guide dog, or carrying a cane which is
predominantly white or metallic in color, with or without a red tip.
   (C)   No person, other than a blind person, while on any public highway,
street, alley, or other public thoroughfare, shall carry a white or metallic
cane, with or without a red tip.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.47)
§ 416.03  RIGHT-OF-WAY YIELDED BY PEDESTRIAN; CROSSING ROADWAYS.
   (A)   Every pedestrian crossing a roadway at any point other than within a
marked crosswalk or within an unmarked crosswalk at an intersection shall yield
the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
   (B)   Any pedestrian crossing a roadway at a point where a pedestrian tunnel
or overhead pedestrian crossing has been provided shall yield the right-of-way
to all traffic upon the roadway.
   (C)   Between adjacent intersections at which traffic-control signals are in
operation, pedestrians shall not cross at any place except in a marked
crosswalk.
   (D)   No pedestrian shall cross a roadway intersection diagonally unless
authorized by official traffic- control devices; and when authorized to cross
diagonally, pedestrians shall cross only in accordance with the official
traffic-control devices pertaining to such crossing movements.
   (E)   This section does not relieve the operator of a vehicle from
exercising due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian upon any roadway.
(ORC 4511.48)
§ 416.04  MOVING IN CROSSWALKS.
   Pedestrians shall move, whenever practicable, upon the right half of
crosswalks.
(ORC 4511.49)
§ 416.05  WALKING ON SIDEWALKS AND STREETS.
   (A)   Where a sidewalk is provided and its use is practicable, it shall be
unlawful for any pedestrian to walk along and upon an adjacent roadway.
   (B)   Where a sidewalk is not available, any pedestrian walking along and
upon a highway shall walk only on a shoulder, as far as practicable from the
edge of the roadway.
   (C)   Where neither a sidewalk nor a shoulder is available, any pedestrian
walking along and upon a highway shall walk as near as practicable to an
outside edge of the roadway, and, if on a two-way roadway, shall walk only on
the left side of the roadway.
   (D)   Except as otherwise provided in Ohio R.C. 4511.13 and 4511.46, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, any pedestrian upon a roadway
shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles upon the roadway.
(ORC 4511.50)
§ 416.06  SOLICITING RIDES OR BUSINESS; RIDING ON OUTSIDE OF VEHICLE OR IN
CARGO STORAGE AREA.
   (A)   No person while on a roadway outside a safety zone shall solicit a
ride from the driver of any vehicle.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, no person
shall stand on a highway for the purpose of soliciting employment, business, or
contributions from the occupant of any vehicle.
      (2)   The Council, by ordinance, may authorize the issuance of a permit
to a charitable organization to allow a person acting on behalf of the
organization to solicit charitable contributions from the occupant of a vehicle
by standing on a highway, other than a freeway as provided in Ohio R.C.
4511.051(A), that is under the jurisdiction of the municipality.  The permit
shall be valid for only one period of time, which shall be specified in the
permit, in any calendar year.  The Council also may specify the locations where
contributions may be solicited and may impose any other restrictions on or
requirements regarding the manner in which the solicitations are to be
conducted that the Council considers advisable.
      (3)   As used in divisions (B)(2) of this section, “charitable
organization” means an organization that has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a currently valid ruling or determination letter recognizing the tax-
exempt status of the organization pursuant to Internal Revenue Code 501(c)(3).
   (C)   No person shall hang onto or ride on the outside of any motor vehicle
while it is moving upon a roadway, except mechanics or test engineers making
repairs or adjustments, or workers performing specialized highway or street
maintenance or construction under authority of a public agency.
   (D)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person to hang onto or ride on
the outside of any motor vehicle while it is moving upon a roadway, except
mechanics or test engineers making repairs or adjustments, or workers
performing specialized highway or street maintenance or construction under
authority of a public agency.
   (E)   No driver of a truck, trailer, or semitrailer shall knowingly permit
any person who has not attained the age of 16 years to ride in the unenclosed
or unroofed cargo storage area of the driver’s vehicle if the vehicle is
traveling faster than 25 miles per hour, unless either of the following
applies:
      (1)   The cargo storage area of the vehicle is equipped with a properly
secured seat to which is attached a seat safety belt that is in compliance with
federal standards for an occupant restraining device as defined in Ohio R.C.
4513.263(A)(2), the seat and seat safety belt were installed at the time the
vehicle was originally assembled, and the person riding in the cargo storage
area is in the seat and is wearing the seat safety belt; or
      (2)   An emergency exists that threatens the life of the driver or the
person being transported in the cargo storage area of the truck, trailer, or
semitrailer.
   (F)   No driver of a truck, trailer, or semitrailer shall permit any person,
except for those workers performing specialized highway or street maintenance
or construction under authority of a public agency, to ride in the cargo
storage area or on a tailgate of the driver’s vehicle while the tailgate is
unlatched.
(ORC 4511.51)
§ 416.07  PASSING THROUGH BRIDGE SIGNALS OR RAILROAD BARRIERS.
   (A)   No pedestrian shall enter or remain upon any bridge or approach
thereto beyond the bridge signal, gate, or barrier after a bridge operation
signal indication has been given.
   (B)   No pedestrian shall pass through, around, over, or under any crossing
gate or barrier at a railroad grade crossing or bridge while the gate or
barrier is closed or is being opened or closed.
§ 416.08  RIGHT-OF-WAY OF PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLES.
   (A)   Upon the immediate approach of a public safety vehicle, as stated in
Ohio R.C. 4511.45 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, every
pedestrian shall yield the right-of-way to the public safety vehicle.
   (B)   This section shall not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle
from the duty to exercise due care to avoid colliding with any pedestrian.
§ 416.09  RIGHT-OF-WAY ON SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle shall yield the right-of-way to any pedestrian
on a sidewalk.
   (B)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.441)
§ 416.10  INTOXICATION.
   A pedestrian who is under the influence of alcohol, any drug of abuse, or
any combination of them, to a degree that renders the pedestrian a hazard shall
not walk or be upon a highway.
(ORC 4511.481)
§ 416.11  MOTORIZED WHEELCHAIR OPERATORS.
   Every person operating a motorized wheelchair shall have all of the rights
and duties applicable to a pedestrian that are contained in this chapter,
except those provisions which by their nature can have no application.
(ORC 4511.491)
§ 416.12  OPERATION OF ELECTRIC PERSONAL ASSISTIVE MOBILITY DEVICES.
   (A)   (1)   Electric personal assistive mobility devices may be operated on
the public streets, highways, sidewalks, and paths and portions of roadways set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles in accordance with this section.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, those sections of
this Traffic Code that by their nature are applicable to an electric personal
assistive mobility device apply to the device and the person operating it
whenever it is operated upon any public street, highway, sidewalk, or path or
upon any portion of a roadway set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
      (3)   The municipality may regulate or prohibit the operation of electric
personal assistive mobility devices on public streets, highways, sidewalks, and
paths, or portions of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles,
under its jurisdiction.
   (B)   No operator of an electric personal assistive mobility device shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to yield the right-of-way to all pedestrians and human-powered
vehicles at all times;
      (2)   Fail to give an audible signal before overtaking and passing a
pedestrian;
      (3)   Operate the device at night unless the device or its operator is
equipped with or wearing both of the following:
         (a)   A lamp pointing to the front that emits a white light visible
from a distance of not less than 500 feet;
         (b)   A red reflector facing the rear that is visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet when directly in front of lawful lower
beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle;
      (4)   Operate the device on any portion of a street or highway that has
an established speed limit of 55 miles per hour or more;
      (5)   Operate the device upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of
pedestrians or other specialized use when an appropriate sign giving notice of
the specialized use is posted on the path;
      (6)   If under 18 years of age, operate the device unless wearing a
protective helmet on the person’s head with the chin strap properly fastened;
      (7)   If under 16 years of age, operate the device unless, during the
operation, the person is under the direct visual and audible supervision of
another person who is 18 years of age or older and is responsible for the
immediate care of the person under 16 years of age.
   (C)   No person who is under 14 years of age shall operate an electric
personal assistive mobility device.
   (D)   No person shall distribute or sell an electric personal assistive
mobility device unless the device is accompanied by a written statement that is
substantially equivalent to the following: “WARNING: TO REDUCE THE RISK OF
SERIOUS INJURY, USE ONLY WHILE WEARING FULL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT – HELMET,
WRIST GUARDS, ELBOW PADS, AND KNEE PADS.”
   (E)   Nothing in this section affects or shall be construed to affect any
rule of the Director of Natural Resources or a board of park district
commissioners governing the operation of vehicles on lands under the control of
the Director or board, as applicable.
   (F)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (B) or (C) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor and shall be punished as follows:
         (a)   The offender shall be fined $10;
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (B) or (C) of this section, or any
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, the court, in
addition to imposing the fine required under division (F)(1)(a) of this
section, shall do one of the following:
            1.   Order the impoundment for not less than one day but no more
than 30 days of the electric personal assistive mobility device that was
involved in the current violation of that division.  The court shall order the
device to be impounded at a safe indoor location designated by the court and
may assess storage fees of not more than $5 per day; provided the total
storage, processing, and release fees assessed against the offender or the
device in connection with the device’s impoundment or subsequent release shall
not exceed $50.
            2.   If the court does not issue an impoundment order pursuant to
division (F)(1)(b)1. of this section, issue an order prohibiting the offender
from operating any electric personal assistive mobility device on the public
streets, highways, sidewalks, and paths and portions of roadways set aside for
the exclusive use of bicycles for not less than one day but not more than 30
days.
      (2)   Whoever  violates division (D) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(ORC 4511.512)
   (G)   As used in this Code, “electric personal assistive mobility device”
means a self-balancing two non- tandem wheeled device that is designed to
transport only one person, has an electric propulsion system of an average of
750 watts, and when ridden on a paved level surface by an operator who weighs
170 pounds has a maximum speed of less than 20 miles per hour.
(ORC 4501.01(TT))
§ 416.13  OPERATION OF PERSONAL DELIVERY DEVICE ON SIDEWALKS AND CROSSWALKS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      “Eligible entity.” Means a corporation, partnership, association, firm,
sole proprietorship, or other entity engaged in business.
      “Personal delivery device.” Means an electrically powered device to which
all of the following apply:
         (a)   The device is intended primarily to transport property on
sidewalks and crosswalks;
         (b)   The device weighs less than 90 pounds excluding any property
being carried in the device;
         (c)   The device has a maximum speed of ten miles per hour; and
         (d)   The device is equipped with technology that enables the
operation of the device with active control or monitoring by a person, without
active control or monitoring by a person, or both with or without active
control or monitoring by a person.
      “Personal delivery device operator.” Means an agent of an eligible entity
who exercises direct physical control over, or monitoring of, the navigation
and operation of a personal delivery device. The phrase does not include, with
respect to a delivery or other service rendered by a personal delivery device,
the person who requests the delivery or service. The phrase also does not
include a person who only arranges for and dispatches a personal delivery
device for a delivery or other service.
   (B)   An eligible entity may operate a personal delivery device on sidewalks
and crosswalks so long as all of the following requirements are met:
      (1)   The personal delivery device is operated in accordance with all
regulations, if any, established by each local authority within which the
personal delivery device is operated;
      (2)   A personal delivery device operator is actively controlling or
monitoring the navigation and operation of the personal delivery device;
      (3)   The eligible entity maintains an insurance policy that includes
general liability coverage of not less than $100,000 for damages arising from
the operation of the personal delivery device by the eligible entity and any
agent of the eligible entity; and
      (4)   The device is equipped with all of the following:
         (a)   A marker that clearly identifies the name and contact
information of the eligible entity operating the personal delivery device and a
unique identification number;
         (b)   A braking system that enables the personal delivery device to
come to a controlled stop; and
         (c)   If the personal delivery device is being operated between sunset
and sunrise, a light on both the front and rear of the personal delivery device
that is visible in clear weather from a distance of at least 500 feet to the
front and rear of the personal delivery device when directly in front of low
beams of headlights on a motor vehicle.
   (C)   No personal delivery device operator shall allow a personal delivery
device to do any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to comply with traffic or pedestrian control devices and
signals;
      (2)   Unreasonably interfere with pedestrians or traffic;
      (3)   Transport any hazardous material that would require a permit issued
by the Public Utilities Commission; and/or
      (4)   Operate on a street or highway, except when crossing the street or
highway within a crosswalk.
   (D)   A personal delivery device has all of the rights and obligations
applicable to a pedestrian under the same circumstances, except that a personal
delivery device shall yield the right-of-way to human pedestrians on sidewalks
and crosswalks.
   (E)   (1)   No person shall operate a personal delivery device unless the
person is authorized to do so under this section and complies with the
requirements of this section.
      (2)   An eligible entity is responsible for both of the following:
         (a)   Any violation of this section that is committed by a personal
delivery device operator; and
         (b)   Any other circumstance, including a technological malfunction,
in which a personal delivery device operates in a manner prohibited by
divisions (C)(1) to (C)(4) of this section.
(ORC 4511.513)
§ 416.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
404.99 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
TITLE SIX:  OPERATION AND VEHICLES
   
CHAP. 432.  OPERATION GENERALLY
   
CHAP. 434.  O.V.I.; RECKLESS OPERATION; SPEED
   
CHAP. 436.  LICENSING; ACCIDENTS
   
CHAP. 438.  SAFETY AND EQUIPMENT
   
CHAP. 440.  COMMERCIAL AND HEAVY VEHICLES
   
CHAP. 442.  DRIVERS OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
   
CHAP. 444.  OFFENSES RELATING TO THEFT AND FRAUD
   
CHAP. 446.  TRANSPORTATION OF RADIOACTIVE MATERIALS
CHAPTER 432:  OPERATION GENERALLY
Section
432.01   Driving upon right side of roadway; exceptions
432.02   Passing to right when proceeding in opposite directions
432.03   Overtaking, passing to left; driver’s duties
432.04   Overtaking, passing to right of vehicle
432.05   Overtaking, passing to left of centerline
432.06   Driving upon left side of roadway
432.07   Hazardous or no passing zones
432.08   Driving within lanes or continuous lines of traffic
432.09   Following too closely
432.10   Turning at intersections
432.11   “U” turns restricted
432.12   Starting and backing vehicles
432.13   Signals before changing course, turning or stopping
432.14   Hand and arm signals
432.15   Right-of-way at intersections
432.155   Intersections at which traffic control signals fail or malfunction
432.16   Right-of-way when turning left
432.17   Operation of vehicle at stop and yield signs
432.18   Emergency or public safety vehicles at stop signals or signs
432.19   Right-of-way of public safety or coroner’s vehicle
432.195   Driving while approaching stationary public safety vehicle and
certain other vehicles with caution
432.20   Right-of-way at private driveway, alley or building
432.205   Stop signs on private roads and driveways
432.21   Right-of-way of funeral procession
432.22   Driving upon sidewalks, tree lawns or curbs
432.23   Driver’s view and control to be unobstructed by load or persons
432.24   Driving upon street posted as closed for repair
432.25   Following and parking near emergency or safety vehicles
432.26   Driving over fire hose
432.27   Driving through safety zone
432.28   One-way streets and rotary traffic islands
432.29   Driving upon divided roadways
432.30   Stopping for school bus; actuating visual signals; discharging
children
432.31   Driving across grade crossings
432.32   Stopping at grade crossings
432.33   Slow-moving vehicles or equipment at grade crossings
432.34   Obstructing intersections, crosswalks or grade crossings
432.35   “Peeling”; cracking exhaust noises
432.36   Shortcutting across private property
432.37   Entering and exiting controlled-access highway
432.38   Weaving; full time and attention
432.39   Operation on school grounds
432.40   Operation on paths set aside for bicycles
432.41   Littering from motor vehicles
432.42   Use of earphones while driving
432.43   Texting while driving prohibited
432.44   Use of electronic wireless communication devices by minors or
probationary drivers while driving prohibited
432.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Obedience to traffic control devices, see §
414.01
   Operation of bicycles and motorcycles generally, see §§
474.01 et seq.
   Operation of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles and all-purpose vehicles,
see §§
476.03,
476.04
   Yielding right-of-way to pedestrians on sidewalks, see §
416.09
§ 432.01  DRIVING UPON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   Upon all roadways of sufficient width, a vehicle shall be driven upon
the right half of the roadway, except as follows:
      (1)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the same
direction, or when making a left turn under the rules governing such movements;
      (2)   When an obstruction exists making it necessary to drive to the left
of the center of the highway; provided, any person so doing shall yield the
right-of-way to all vehicles traveling in the proper direction upon the
unobstructed portion of the highway within such distance as to constitute an
immediate hazard;
      (3)   When driving upon a roadway divided into three or more marked lanes
for traffic under the rules applicable thereon;
      (4)   When driving upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for
one-way traffic;
      (5)   When otherwise directed by a police officer or traffic-control
device.
   (B)   (1)   Upon all roadways any vehicle proceeding at less than the
prevailing and lawful speed of traffic at the time and place and under the
conditions then existing shall be driven in the right-hand lane then available
for traffic, and far enough to the right to allow passing by faster vehicles if
such passing is safe and reasonable, except under any of the following
circumstances:
         (a)   When overtaking and passing another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction;
         (b)   When preparing for a left turn;
         (c)   When the driver must necessarily drive in a lane other than the
right-hand lane to continue on the driver’s intended route.
      (2)   Nothing in division (B)(1) of this section requires a driver of a
slower vehicle to compromise the driver’s safety to allow overtaking by a
faster vehicle.
   (C)   Upon any roadway having four or more lanes for moving traffic and
providing for two-way movement of traffic, no vehicle shall be driven to the
left of the center line of the roadway, except when authorized by official
traffic-control devices designating certain lanes to the left of the center of
the roadway for use by traffic not otherwise permitted to use the lanes, or
except as permitted under division (A)(2) of this section.
   (D)   Division (C) of this section shall not be construed as prohibiting the
crossing of the center line in making a left turn into or from an alley,
private road, or driveway.
   (E)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.25)
§ 432.02  PASSING TO RIGHT WHEN PROCEEDING IN OPPOSITE DIRECTIONS.
   (A)   Operators of vehicles proceeding in opposite directions shall pass
each other to the right, and upon roadways having width for not more than one
line of traffic in each direction, each operator shall give to the other one-
half of the main traveled portion of the roadway or as nearly one-half as is
reasonably possible.
   (B)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.26)
§ 432.03  OVERTAKING, PASSING TO LEFT; DRIVER’S DUTIES.
   The following rules govern the overtaking and passing of vehicles proceeding
in the same direction.
   (A)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking another vehicle proceeding in the
same direction shall, except as provided in division (C) of this section,
signal to the vehicle to be overtaken, shall pass to the left thereof at a safe
distance, and shall not again drive to the right side of the roadway until
safely clear of the overtaken vehicle. When a motor vehicle overtakes and
passes a bicycle or electric bicycle, three feet or greater is considered a
safe passing distance.
   (B)   Except when overtaking and passing on the right is permitted, the
operator of an overtaken vehicle shall give way to the right in favor of the
overtaking vehicle at the latter’s audible signal, and the operator shall not
increase the speed of the operator’s vehicle until completely passed by the
overtaking vehicle.
   (C)   The operator of a vehicle overtaking and passing another vehicle
proceeding in the same direction on a divided highway as defined in Ohio R.C.
4511.35, a limited access highway as defined in Ohio R.C. 5511.02, or a highway
with four or more traffic lanes is not required to signal audibly to the
vehicle being overtaken and passed.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.27)
§ 432.04  OVERTAKING, PASSING TO RIGHT OF VEHICLE.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass on the right of another
vehicle only under the following conditions:
      (1)   When the vehicle overtaken is making or about to make a left turn;
or
      (2)   Upon a roadway with unobstructed pavement of sufficient width for
two or more lines of vehicles moving lawfully in the direction being traveled
by the overtaking vehicle.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle may overtake and pass another vehicle only
under conditions permitting the movement in safety.  The movement shall not be
made by driving off the roadway.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.28)
§ 432.05  OVERTAKING, PASSING TO LEFT OF CENTERLINE.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven to the left of the center of the roadway in
overtaking and passing traffic proceeding in the same direction, unless the
left side is clearly visible and is free of oncoming traffic for a sufficient
distance ahead to permit the overtaking and passing to be completely made
without interfering with  the safe operation of any traffic approaching from
the opposite direction or any traffic overtaken.  In every event, the
overtaking vehicle must return to an authorized lane of travel as soon as
practicable, and in the event the passing movement involves the use of a lane
authorized for the traffic approaching from the opposite direction, before
coming within 200 feet of any approaching vehicle.
   (B)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.29)
§ 432.06  DRIVING UPON LEFT SIDE OF ROADWAY.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven upon the left side of the roadway under the
following conditions:
      (1)   When approaching the crest of a grade or upon a curve in the
highway, where the operator’s view is obstructed within such a distance as to
create a hazard in the event traffic might approach from the opposite
direction;
      (2)   When the view is obstructed upon approaching within 100 feet of any
bridge, viaduct, or tunnel; or
      (3)   When approaching within 100 feet of or traversing any intersection
or railroad grade crossing.
   (B)   This section does not apply to vehicles upon a one-way roadway, upon a
roadway where traffic is lawfully directed to be driven to the left side, or
under the conditions described in Ohio R.C. 4511.25(A)(2) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.30)
§ 432.07  HAZARDOUS OR NO PASSING ZONES.
   (A)   The Department of Transportation may determine those portions of any
state highway where overtaking and passing other traffic or driving to the left
of the center or center line of the roadway would be especially hazardous, and
may, by appropriate signs or markings on the highway, indicate the beginning
and end of such zones.  When signs or markings are in place and clearly
visible, every operator of a vehicle shall obey the directions of the signs or
markings, notwithstanding the distances set out in Ohio R.C. 4511.30.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply when all of the following
apply:
      (1)   The slower vehicle is proceeding at less than half the speed of the
speed limit applicable to that location.
      (2)   The faster vehicle is capable of overtaking and passing the slower
vehicle without exceeding the speed limit.
      (3)   There is sufficient clear sight distance to the left of the center
or center line of the roadway to meet the overtaking and passing provisions of
Ohio R.C. 4511.29, considering the speed of the slower vehicle.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.31)
§ 432.08  DRIVING WITHIN LANES OR CONTINUOUS LINES OF TRAFFIC.
   Whenever any roadway has been divided into two or more clearly marked lanes
for traffic, or wherever within the municipality traffic is lawfully moving in
two or more substantially continuous lines in the same direction, the following
rules apply:
   (A)   A vehicle shall be driven, as nearly as is practicable, entirely
within a single lane or line of traffic and shall not be moved from the lane or
line until the driver has first ascertained that the movement can be made with
safety.
   (B)   Upon a roadway which is divided into three lanes and provides for the
two-way movement of traffic, a vehicle shall not be driven in the center lane,
except when overtaking and passing another vehicle where the roadway is clearly
visible and the center lane is clear of traffic within a safe distance, or when
preparing for a left turn, or where the center lane is at the time allocated
exclusively to traffic moving in the direction the vehicle is proceeding, and
is posted with signs to give notice of such allocation.
   (C)   Official signs may be erected directing specified traffic to use a
designated lane or designating those lanes to be used by traffic moving in a
particular direction, regardless of the center of the roadway, or restricting
the use of a particular lane to only buses during certain hours or during all
hours, and drivers of vehicles shall obey the directions of such signs.
   (D)   Official traffic-control devices may be installed prohibiting the
changing of lanes on sections of roadway, and drivers of vehicles shall obey
the directions of every such device.
   (E)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.33)
§ 432.09  FOLLOWING TOO CLOSELY.
   (A)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall not follow another vehicle more
closely than is reasonable and prudent, having due regard for the speed of the
vehicle and the traffic upon and the condition of the highway.
   (B)   The driver of any truck, or motor vehicle drawing another vehicle,
when traveling upon a roadway outside a business or residence district, shall
maintain a sufficient space, whenever conditions permit, between the vehicle
and another vehicle ahead so an overtaking motor vehicle may enter and occupy
the space without danger.  This division (B) does not prevent overtaking and
passing nor does it apply to any lane specially designated for use by trucks.
   (C)   Motor vehicles being driven upon any roadway outside of a business or
residence district in a caravan or motorcade shall maintain a sufficient space
between the vehicles so an overtaking vehicle may enter and occupy the space
without danger.  This division (C) shall not apply to funeral processions.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.34)
§ 432.10  TURNING AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn at an intersection shall be
governed by the following rules:
      (1)   Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
      (2)   At any intersection where traffic is permitted to move in both
directions on each roadway entering the intersection, an approach for a left
turn shall be made in that portion of the right half of the roadway nearest the
center line thereof and by passing to the right of the center line where it
enters the intersection, and, after entering the intersection, the left turn
shall be made so as to leave the intersection to the right of the center line
of the roadway being entered.  Whenever practicable, the left turn shall be
made in that portion of the intersection to the left of the center of the
intersection.
      (3)   At any intersection where traffic is restricted to one direction on
one or more of the roadways, the driver of a vehicle intending to turn left at
any such intersection shall approach the intersection in the extreme left-hand
lane lawfully available to traffic moving in the direction of travel of the
vehicle, and, after entering the intersection, the left turn shall be made so
as to leave the intersection, as nearly as practicable, in the left hand lane
of the roadway being entered lawfully available to traffic moving in that lane.
   (B)   The Department of Transportation and local authorities may cause
markers, buttons, or signs to be placed within or adjacent to intersections,
and thereby require and direct that a different course from that specified in
this section be traveled by vehicles turning at an intersection, and when
markers, buttons, or signs are so placed, no operator of a vehicle shall turn
the vehicle at an intersection other than as directed and required by the
markers, buttons, or signs.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.36)
§ 432.11  “U” TURNS RESTRICTED.
   (A)   Except as provided in R.C. § 4511.13 and division (B) of this section,
no vehicle shall be turned so as to proceed in the opposite direction upon any
curve, or upon the approach to or near the crest of a grade, if such vehicle
cannot be seen within 500 feet by the driver of any other vehicle approaching
from either direction.
   (B)   The driver of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call, may turn the vehicle so as to proceed in the
opposite direction.  This division applies only when the emergency vehicle or
public safety vehicle is responding to an emergency call, is equipped with and
displaying at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating light visible under
normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of the
vehicle, and when the driver of the vehicle is giving an audible signal by
siren, exhaust whistle, or bell.  This division does not relieve the driver of
an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with due
regard for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.37)
§ 432.12  STARTING AND BACKING VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person shall start a vehicle which is stopped, standing, or parked
until the movement can be made with reasonable safety.
   (B)   Before backing, operators of vehicles shall give ample warning, and
while backing they shall exercise vigilance not to injure person or property on
the street or highway.
   (C)   No person shall back a motor vehicle on a freeway, except:
      (1)   In a rest area;
      (2)   In the performance of public works or official duties;
      (3)   As a result of an emergency caused by an accident or breakdown of a
motor vehicle.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.38)
§ 432.13  SIGNALS BEFORE CHANGING COURSE, TURNING OR STOPPING.
   (A)   No person shall turn a vehicle or move right or left upon a highway
unless and until the person has exercised due care to ascertain that the
movement can be made with reasonable safety, nor without giving an appropriate
signal in the manner hereinafter provided.
   (B)   When required, a signal of intention to turn or move right or left
shall be given continuously during not less than the last 100 feet traveled by
the vehicle before turning, except that in the case of a person operating a
bicycle or electric bicycle, the signal shall be made not less than one time
but is not required to be continuous. A bicycle or electric bicycle operator is
not required to make a signal if the bicycle is in a designated turn lane, and
a signal shall not be given when the operator’s hands are needed for the safe
operation of the bicycle or electric bicycle.
   (C)   No person shall stop or suddenly decrease the speed of a vehicle
without first giving an appropriate signal in the manner provided herein to the
driver of any vehicle immediately to the rear, when there is opportunity to
give a signal.
   (D)   Any stop or turn signal required by this section shall be given either
by means of the hand and arm, or by signal lights that clearly indicate to both
approaching and following traffic the intention to turn or move right or left,
except that any motor vehicle in use on a highway shall be equipped with, and
the required signal shall be given by, signal lights when the distance from the
center of the top of the steering post to the left outside limit of the body,
cab or load of such motor vehicle exceeds 24 inches, or when the distance from
the center of the top of the steering post to the rear limit of the body or
load thereof exceeds 14 feet, whether a single vehicle or a combination of
vehicles.
   (E)   The signal lights required by this section shall not be flashed on one
side only on a disabled vehicle, flashed as a courtesy or “do pass” signal to
operators of other vehicles approaching from the rear, nor be flashed on one
side only of a parked vehicle except as may be necessary for compliance with
this section.
   (F)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.39)
§ 432.14  HAND AND ARM SIGNALS.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, all signals
required by the provisions of this Traffic Code, when given by hand and arm,
shall be given from the left side of the vehicle in the following manner, and
the signals shall indicate as follows:
      (1)   Left turn, hand and arm extended horizontally;
      (2)   Right turn, hand and arm extended upward;
      (3)   Stop or decrease speed, hand and arm extended downward.
   (B)   As an alternative to division (A)(2) of this section, a person
operating a bicycle or electric bicycle may give a right turn signal by
extending the right hand and arm horizontally and to the right side of the
bicycle or electric bicycle.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.40)
§ 432.15  RIGHT-OF-WAY AT INTERSECTIONS.
   (A)   When two vehicles approach or enter an intersection from different
streets or highways at approximately the same time, the driver of the vehicle
on the left shall yield the right-of-way to the vehicle on the right.
   (B)   The right-of-way rule declared in division (A) of this section is
modified at through highways and otherwise as stated in this Traffic Code or
Ohio R.C. Chapter 4511.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.41)
§ 432.155  INTERSECTIONS AT WHICH TRAFFIC CONTROL SIGNALS FAIL OR MALFUNCTION.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle who approaches an intersection where traffic
is controlled by traffic control signals shall do all of the following if the
signal facing the driver exhibits no colored lights or colored lighted arrows,
exhibits a combination of such lights or arrows that fails to clearly indicate
the assignment of right-of-way, or, if the vehicle is a bicycle or an electric
bicycle, the signals are otherwise malfunctioning due to the failure of a
vehicle detector to detect the presence of the bicycle or electric bicycle:
      (1)   Stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, stop before
entering the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or, if none, stop
before entering the intersection;
      (2)   Yield the right-of-way to all vehicles in the intersection or
approaching on an intersecting road, if the vehicles will constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection or junction of roadways;
      (3)   Exercise ordinary care while proceeding through the intersection.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.132)
§ 432.16  RIGHT-OF-WAY WHEN TURNING LEFT.
   (A)   The operator of a vehicle intending to turn to the left within an
intersection or into an alley, private road, or driveway shall yield the right-
of-way to any vehicle approaching from the opposite direction which is within
the intersection or so close thereto as to constitute an immediate hazard.
   (B)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.42)
§ 432.17  OPERATION OF VEHICLE AT STOP AND YIELD SIGNS.
   (A)   Except when directed to proceed by a law enforcement officer, every
driver of a vehicle approaching a stop sign shall stop at a clearly marked stop
line, but if none, before entering the crosswalk on the near side of the
intersection, or, if none, then at the point nearest the intersecting roadway
where the driver has a view of approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway
before entering it.  After having stopped, the driver shall yield the right-of-
way to any vehicle in the intersection or approaching on another roadway so
closely as to constitute an immediate hazard during the time the driver is
moving across or within the intersection or junction of roadways.
   (B)   The driver of a vehicle approaching a yield sign shall slow down to a
speed reasonable for the existing conditions, and if required for safety to
stop, shall stop at a clearly marked stop line, but if none, before entering
the crosswalk on the near side of the intersection, or if none, then at the
point nearest the intersecting roadway where the driver has a view of
approaching traffic on the intersecting roadway before entering it.  After
slowing, the driver shall yield the right-of-way to any vehicle in the
intersection or approaching on another roadway so closely as to constitute an
immediate hazard during the time the driver is moving across or within the
intersection or junction of roadways.  Whenever a driver is involved in a
collision with a vehicle in the intersection or junction of roadways, after
driving past a yield sign without stopping, the collision shall be prima facie
evidence of the driver’s failure to yield the right-of-way.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.43)
§ 432.18  EMERGENCY OR PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLES AT STOP SIGNALS OR SIGNS.
   (A)   The driver of any emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle, when
responding to an emergency call, upon approaching a red or stop signal or any
stop sign, shall slow down as necessary for safety to traffic, but may proceed
cautiously past the red or stop sign or signal with due regard for the safety
of all persons using the street or highway.
   (B)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.03)
§ 432.19  RIGHT-OF-WAY OF PUBLIC SAFETY OR CORONER’S VEHICLE.
   (A)   Upon the approach of a public safety vehicle or coroner’s vehicle,
equipped with at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating light visible
under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet to the front of
the vehicle, and the driver is giving an audible signal by siren, exhaust
whistle, or bell, no driver of any other vehicle shall fail to yield the right-
of-way, immediately drive, if practical, to a position parallel to, and as
close as possible to, the right edge or curb of the highway clear of any
intersection, and stop and remain in that position until the public safety
vehicle or coroner’s vehicle has passed, except when otherwise directed by a
police officer.
   (B)   This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle or
coroner’s vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all
persons and property upon the highway.
   (C)   This section applies to a coroner’s vehicle only when the vehicle is
operated in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4513.171, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.  As used in this section, “coroner’s vehicle” means a
vehicle used by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator that is
equipped with a flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and a
siren, exhaust whistle or bell capable of giving an audible signal.
(ORC 4511.45)
   (D)   (1)   When the failure of a motor vehicle operator to yield the right-
of-way to a public safety vehicle as required by division (A) of this section
impedes the ability of the public safety vehicle to respond to an emergency,
any emergency personnel in the public safety vehicle may report the license
plate number and a general description of the vehicle and the operator of the
vehicle to the law enforcement agency exercising jurisdiction over the area
where the alleged violation occurred.
      (2)   (a)   Upon receipt of a report under division (D)(1) of this
section, the law enforcement agency may conduct an investigation to attempt to
determine or confirm the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation.
         (b)   If the identity of the operator at the time of an alleged
violation of division (A) of this section is established, the law enforcement
agency has probable cause to issue either a written warning or a citation for
that violation, and the agency shall issue a written warning or a citation to
the operator.
         (c)   If the identity of the operator of the vehicle at the time of
the alleged violation cannot be established, the law enforcement agency may
issue a written warning to the person who owned the vehicle at the time of the
alleged violation. However, in the case of a leased or rented vehicle, the law
enforcement agency shall issue the written warning to the person who leased or
rented the vehicle at the time of the alleged violation.
      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section based on a
report filed under division (D)(1) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor and shall be fined $150.
         (b)   If a person who is issued a citation for a violation of division
(A) of this section based on a report filed under division (D)(1) of this
section does not enter a written plea of guilty and does not waive the person’s
right to contest the citation but instead appears in person in the proper court
to answer the charge, the trier of fact cannot find beyond a reasonable doubt
that the person committed that violation unless the emergency personnel who
filed the report appears in person in the court and testifies.
      (4)   As used in this division (D):
         (a)   “License plate” includes any temporary license placard issued
under Ohio R.C. 4503.182 or similar law of another jurisdiction.
         (b)   “Public safety vehicle” does not include an unmarked public
safety vehicle or a vehicle used by a public law enforcement officer or other
person sworn to enforce the criminal and traffic laws of the state or a vehicle
used by the motor carrier enforcement unit for the enforcement of orders and
rules of the public utilities commission.
(ORC 4511.454)
§ 432.195  DRIVING WHILE APPROACHING STATIONARY PUBLIC SAFETY VEHICLE AND
CERTAIN OTHER VEHICLES WITH CAUTION.
   (A)   The driver of a motor vehicle, upon approaching a stationary public
safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, waste collection
vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor
vehicle inspections in accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and 4923.06, or a
highway maintenance vehicle that is displaying the appropriate visual signals
by means of flashing, oscillating, or rotating lights, as prescribed in Ohio
R.C. 4513.17, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   If the driver of the motor vehicle is traveling on a highway that
consists of at least two lanes that carry traffic in the same direction of
travel as that of the driver’s motor vehicle, the driver shall proceed with due
caution and, if possible and with due regard to the road, weather, and traffic
conditions, shall change lanes into a lane this is not adjacent to that of the
stationary public safety vehicle, emergency vehicle, road service vehicle,
waste collection vehicle, vehicle used by the Public Utilities Commission to
conduct motor vehicle inspections in accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and
4923.06, or a highway maintenance vehicle.
      (2)   If the driver is not traveling on a highway of a type described in
division (A)(1) of this section, or if the driver is traveling on a highway of
that type but it is not possible to change lanes or if to do so would be
unsafe, the driver shall proceed with due caution, reduce the speed of the
motor vehicle, and maintain a safe speed for the road, weather, and traffic
conditions.
   (B)   This section does not relieve the driver of a public safety vehicle,
emergency vehicle, road service vehicle, waste collection vehicle, vehicle used
by the Public Utilities Commission to conduct motor vehicle inspections in
accordance with R.C. §§ 4923.04 and 4923.06, or a highway maintenance vehicle
from the duty to drive with due regard for the safety of all persons and
property upon the highway.
   (C)   No person shall fail to drive a motor vehicle in compliance with
divisions (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section when so required by division (A) of
this section.
   (D)   The offense established under this section is a strict liability
offense and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of this offense as a
strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other
offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict
liability offense.
(ORC 4511.213)
§ 432.20  RIGHT-OF-WAY AT PRIVATE DRIVEWAY, ALLEY OR BUILDING.
   (A)   (1)   The operator of a vehicle about to enter or cross a highway from
any place other than another roadway shall yield the right-of-way to all
traffic approaching on the roadway to be entered or crossed.
      (2)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.44)
   (B)   (1)   The driver of a vehicle emerging from an alley, building,
private road, or driveway within a business or residence district shall stop
the vehicle immediately prior to driving onto a sidewalk or onto the sidewalk
area extending across the alley, building entrance, road, or driveway, or in
the event there is no sidewalk area, shall stop at the point nearest the street
to be entered where the driver has a view of approaching traffic thereon.
      (2)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.431)
   (C)   The driver of a vehicle intending to turn into a private road or
driveway, alley or building from a public street or highway shall be governed
by the following rules:
      (1)   Approach for a right turn and a right turn shall be made as close
as practicable to the right-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
      (2)   Upon a roadway where traffic is proceeding in opposite directions,
approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made from that portion of the
right half of the roadway nearest the centerline thereof.
      (3)   Upon a roadway where traffic is restricted to one direction,
approach for a left turn and a left turn shall be made as close as practicable
to the left-hand curb or edge of the roadway.
   (D)   It shall be the duty of the driver of any vehicle entering a private
road or driveway, alley or building to yield the right-of-way to pedestrians
lawfully using the sidewalk or sidewalk area extending across the private road
or driveway, alley or building.
§ 432.205  STOP SIGNS ON PRIVATE ROADS AND DRIVEWAYS.
   (A)   The owner of a private road or driveway located in a private
residential area containing 20 or more dwelling units may erect stop signs at
places where the road or driveway intersects with another private road or
driveway in the residential area, in compliance with all of the following
requirements:
      (1)   The stop sign is sufficiently legible to be seen by an ordinarily
observant person and meets the specifications of and is placed in accordance
with the manual adopted by the Department of Transportation pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 4511.09.
      (2)   The owner has posted a sign at the entrance of the private road or
driveway that is in plain view and clearly informs persons entering the road or
driveway that they are entering private property, stop signs have been posted
and must be obeyed, and the signs are enforceable by law enforcement officers
under state law.  The sign required by this division, where appropriate, may be
incorporated with the sign required by Ohio R.C. 4511.211(A)(2), or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (B)   Ohio R.C. 4511.43(A) and Ohio R.C. 4511.46, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, shall be deemed to apply to the driver of a
vehicle on a private road or driveway where a stop sign is placed in accordance
with division (A) of this section and to a pedestrian crossing such a road or
driveway at an intersection where a stop sign is in place.
   (C)   When a stop sign is placed in accordance with division (A) of this
section, any law enforcement officer may apprehend a person found violating the
stop sign and may stop and charge the person with violating the stop sign.
   (D)   As used in this section, and for the purpose of applying Ohio R.C.
4511.43(A) and Ohio R.C. 4511.46, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, to conduct under this section:
      (1)   “Intersection” means:
         (a)   The area embraced within the  prolongation or connection of the
lateral curb lines, or, if none, then the lateral boundary lines of the
roadways of two private roads or driveways which join one another at, or
approximately at, right angles, or the area within which vehicles traveling
upon different private roads or driveways joining at any other angle may come
in conflict.
         (b)   Where a private road or driveway includes two roadways 30 feet
or more apart, then every crossing of two roadways of such private roads or
driveways shall be regarded as a separate intersection.
      (2)   “Roadway” means that portion of a private road or driveway
improved, designed or ordinarily used for vehicular travel, except the berm or
shoulder.  If a private road or driveway includes two or more separate
roadways, the term “roadway” means any such roadway separately but not all such
roadways collectively.
      (3)   “Owner” and “private residential area containing 20 or more
dwelling units” have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4511.211.
(ORC 4511.432(A) - (C), (E))
§ 432.21  RIGHT-OF-WAY OF FUNERAL PROCESSION.
   (A)   As used in this section, “funeral procession” means two or more
vehicles accompanying the cremated remains or the body of a deceased person in
the daytime when each of such vehicles has its headlights lighted and is
displaying a purple and white or an orange and white pennant attached to each
vehicle in such a manner as to be clearly visible to traffic approaching from
any direction.
   (B)   Excepting public safety vehicles proceeding in accordance with Ohio
R.C. 4511.45 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or when
directed otherwise by a police officer, pedestrians and the operators of all
vehicles shall yield the right-of-way to each vehicle which is a part of a
funeral procession.  Whenever the lead vehicle in a funeral procession lawfully
enters an intersection, the remainder of the vehicles in the procession may
continue to follow the lead vehicle through the intersection, notwithstanding
any traffic-control devices or right-of-way provisions of the Ohio Revised
Code, provided the operator of each vehicle exercises due care to avoid
colliding with any other vehicle or pedestrian upon the roadway.
   (C)   No person shall operate any vehicle as a part of a funeral procession
without having the headlights of the vehicle lighted and without displaying a
purple and white or an orange and white pennant in such a manner as to be
clearly visible to traffic approaching from any direction.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.451)
§ 432.22  DRIVING UPON SIDEWALKS, TREE LAWNS OR CURBS.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall drive any vehicle, other than a bicycle or an
electric bicycle if the motor is not engaged, upon a sidewalk or sidewalk area,
except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway.
      (2)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting local
authorities from regulating the operation of bicycles or electric bicycles,
except that no local authority may require that bicycles or electric bicycles
be operated on sidewalks.
(ORC 4511.711(A))
   (B)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
   (C)   No person shall drive a vehicle on a tree lawn area or the curb of a
street, except upon a permanent or duly authorized temporary driveway or when
otherwise lawfully authorized.
§ 432.23  DRIVER’S VIEW AND CONTROL TO BE UNOBSTRUCTED BY LOAD OR PERSONS.
   (A)   No person shall drive a vehicle when it is so loaded, or when there
are in the front seat such number of persons, as to obstruct the view of the
driver to the front or sides of the vehicle, or to interfere with the driver’s
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (B)   No passenger in a vehicle shall ride in a position as to interfere
with the driver’s view ahead or to the sides, or to interfere with the driver’s
control over the driving mechanism of the vehicle.
   (C)   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to
moving traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done
without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person
leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a
period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
(ORC 4511.70)
§ 432.24  DRIVING UPON STREET POSTED AS CLOSED FOR REPAIR.
   (A)   No person shall drive upon, along, or across a street or highway, or
any part of a street or highway that has been closed in the process of its
construction, reconstruction, or repair, and posted with appropriate signs by
the authority having jurisdiction to close the highway.
(ORC 4511.71(A))
   (B)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle on or onto a public street or
highway that is temporarily covered by a rise in water level, including
groundwater or an overflow of water, and that is clearly marked by a sign that
specifies that the road is closed due to the rise in water level and that any
person who uses the closed portion of the road may be fined up to $2,000.
      (2)   A person who is issued a citation for a violation of division (B)
(1) of this section is not permitted to enter a written plea of guilty and
waive the person’s right to contest the citation in court, but instead must
appear in person in the proper court to answer the charge.
(ORC 4511.714(A), (B))
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.71(B))
   (D)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Emergency medical service organization” has the same meanings as
in Ohio R.C. 9.60.
      (2)   “Firefighting agency” has the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 9.60.
      (3)   “Private fire company” has the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 9.60.
      (4)   “Rescuer” means a state agency, political subdivision, firefighting
agency, private fire company, or emergency medical service organization.
(ORC 4511.714(D))
§ 432.25  FOLLOWING AND PARKING NEAR EMERGENCY OR SAFETY VEHICLES.
   (A)   The driver of any vehicle, other than an emergency vehicle or public
safety vehicle on official business, shall not follow any emergency vehicle or
public safety vehicle traveling in response to an alarm closer than 500 feet,
or drive into or park the vehicle within the block where the fire apparatus has
stopped in answer to a fire alarm, unless directed to do so by a police officer
or a firefighter.
   (B)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.72(A))
§ 432.26  DRIVING OVER FIRE HOSE.
   (A)   No vehicle shall, without the consent of the fire department official
in command, be driven over any unprotected hose of a fire department, that is
laid down on any street or private driveway to be used at any fire or alarm of
fire.
   (B)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.73)
§ 432.27  DRIVING THROUGH SAFETY ZONE.
   (A)   No vehicle shall at any time be driven through or within a safety
zone.
   (B)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.60)
§ 432.28  ONE-WAY STREETS AND ROTARY TRAFFIC ISLANDS.
   (A)   Upon a roadway designated and posted with signs for one-way traffic, a
vehicle shall be driven only in the direction designated.
   (B)   A vehicle passing around a rotary traffic island shall be driven only
to the right of the rotary traffic island.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.32)
§ 432.29  DRIVING UPON DIVIDED ROADWAYS.
   (A)   Whenever any highway has been divided into two roadways by an
intervening space, or by a physical barrier, or a clearly indicated dividing
section so constructed as to impede vehicular traffic, every vehicle shall be
driven only upon the right-hand roadway, and no vehicle shall be driven over,
across, or within any dividing space, barrier, or section, except through an
opening, crossover, or intersection established by public authority.  This
section does not prohibit the occupancy of the dividing space, barrier, or
section for the purpose of an emergency stop, or in compliance with an order of
a police officer.
   (B)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.35)
§ 432.30  STOPPING FOR SCHOOL BUS; ACTUATING VISUAL SIGNALS; DISCHARGING
CHILDREN.
   (A)   The driver of a vehicle, upon meeting or overtaking from either
direction any school bus stopped for the purpose of receiving or discharging
any school child, person attending programs offered by community boards of
mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or child
attending a program offered by a head start agency, shall stop at least ten
feet from the front or rear of the school bus and shall not proceed until such
school bus resumes motion, or until signaled by the school bus driver to
proceed.  It is no defense to a charge under this division that the school bus
involved failed to display or be equipped with an automatically extended stop
warning sign as required by division (B) of this section.
   (B)   Every school bus shall be equipped with amber and red visual signals
meeting the requirements of Ohio R.C. 4511.771 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and an automatically extended stop warning sign of a type
approved by the State Board of Education, which shall be actuated by the driver
of the bus whenever but only whenever the bus is stopped or stopping on the
roadway for the purpose of receiving or discharging school children, persons
attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and county
boards of developmental disabilities, or children attending programs offered by
head start agencies.  A school bus driver shall not actuate the visual signals
or the stop warning sign in designated school bus loading areas where the bus
is entirely off the roadway or at school buildings when children or persons
attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and county
boards of developmental disabilities are loading or unloading at curbside or at
buildings when children attending programs offered by head start agencies are
loading or unloading at curbside.  The visual signals and stop warning sign
shall be synchronized or otherwise operated as required by rule of the Board.
   (C)   Where a highway has been divided into four or more traffic lanes, a
driver of a vehicle need not stop for a school bus approaching from the
opposite direction which has stopped for the purpose of receiving or
discharging any school child, persons attending programs offered by community
boards of mental health and county boards of developmental disabilities, or
children attending programs offered by head start agencies.  The driver of any
vehicle overtaking the school bus shall comply with division (A) above.
   (D)   School buses operating on divided highways or on highways with four or
more traffic lanes shall receive and discharge all school children, persons
attending programs offered by community boards of mental health and county
boards of mental retardation and developmental disabilities, and children
attending programs offered by head start agencies on their residence side of
the highway.
   (E)   No school bus driver shall start the driver’s bus until after any
child, person attending programs offered by community boards of mental health
and county boards of developmental disabilities, or child attending a program
offered by a head start agency who may have alighted therefrom has reached a
place of safety on the child’s or person’s residence side of the road.
   (F)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Head start agency” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3301.32.
      (2)   “School bus” as used in relation to children who attend a program
offered by a head start agency, means a bus that is owned and operated by a
head start agency, is equipped with an automatically extended stop warning sign
of a type approved by the State Board of Education, is painted the color and
displays the markings described in Ohio R.C. 4511.77, and is equipped with
amber and red visual signals meeting the requirements of Ohio R.C. 4511.77,
irrespective of whether or not the bus has 15 or more children aboard at any
time. The term does not include a van owned and operated by a head start
agency, irrespective of its color, lights or markings.
(ORC 4511.75)
   (G)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section may be fined an amount
not to exceed $1,000 in addition to the license suspension provided by R.C. §
4507.165.  A person who is issued a citation for a violation of division (A) of
this section is not permitted to enter a written plea of guilty and waive the
person’s appearance but instead must appear in person in the proper court to
answer the charge. (Ord. 14-2020, passed 3-23-2020)
§ 432.31  DRIVING ACROSS GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (A)   (1)   Whenever any person driving a vehicle approaches a railroad
grade crossing, the person shall stop within 50 feet but not less than 15 feet
from the nearest rail of the railroad if any of the following circumstances
exist at the crossing:
         (a)   A clearly visible electric or mechanical signal device gives
warning of the immediate approach of a train.
         (b)   A crossing gate is lowered.
         (c)   A flagperson gives or continues to give a signal of the approach
or passage of a train.
         (d)   There is insufficient space on the other side of the railroad
grade crossing to accommodate the vehicle the person is operating without
obstructing the passage of other vehicles, pedestrians or railroad trains,
notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed.
         (e)   An approaching train is emitting an audible signal or is plainly
visible, and is in hazardous proximity to the crossing.
         (f)   There is insufficient undercarriage clearance to safely
negotiate the crossing.
      (2)   A person who is driving a vehicle and who approaches a railroad
grade crossing shall not proceed as long as any of the circumstances described
in divisions (A)(1)(a) through (A)(1)(f) of this section exist at the crossing.
   (B)   No person shall drive any vehicle through, around, or under any
crossing gate or barrier at a railroad crossing while the gate or barrier is
closed, or is being opened or closed unless the person is signaled by a law
enforcement officer or flagperson that it is permissible to do so.
(ORC 4511.62)
§ 432.32  STOPPING AT GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(2) of this section, the
operator of any bus, any school vehicle, or any vehicle transporting material
required to be placarded under 49 C.F.R. Parts 100 to 185, before crossing at
grade any track of a railroad, shall stop the vehicle, and while so stopped,
shall listen through an open door or open window, and look in both directions
along the track for any approaching train and for signals indicating the
approach of a train, and shall proceed only upon exercising due care after
stopping, looking and listening as required by this section. Upon proceeding,
the operator of such a vehicle shall cross only in a gear that will ensure
there will be no necessity for changing gears while traversing the crossing,
and shall not shift gears while crossing the tracks.
      (2)   Division (A) of this section does not apply at grade crossings when
any local authority has filed an application with the Public Utilities
Commission requesting the approval of an exempt crossing, and the Public
Utilities Commission has authorized and approved an exempt crossing as provided
in R.C. § 4511.63(B).
      (3)   As used in division (A) of this section, the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         (a)   “Bus.” Any vehicle originally designed by its manufacturer to
transport 16 or more passengers, including the driver, or carries 16 or more
passengers, including the driver.
         (b)   “Exempt crossing.” A highway rail grade crossing authorized and
approved by the Public Utilities Commission under R.C. § 4511.63(B) at which
vehicles may cross without making the stop otherwise required by this section.
         (c)   “School vehicle.” Any vehicle used for the transportation of
pupils to and from a school or school-related function if the vehicle is owned
or operated by, or operated under contract with, a public or nonpublic school.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (a) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one or more violations of
division (a) of this section or R.C. § 4511.63, 4511.76, 4511.761, 4511.762,
4511.764, 4511.77 or 4511.79, or a municipal ordinance that is substantially
equivalent to any of those sections, whoever violates division (a) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(ORC 4511.63)
   (B)   (1)   As used in this section, “active grade crossing warning device”
means signs, signals, gates, or other protective devices erected or installed
at a public highway-railway crossing at common grade and activated by an
electrical circuit.
      (2)   The Department of Transportation and local authorities, with the
approval of the Department, may designate dangerous highway crossings over
railroad tracks and erect stop signs thereat.
      (3)   (a)   The Department and local authorities shall erect stop signs
at a railroad highway grade crossing in either of the following circumstances:
            1.   New warning devices that are not active grade crossing warning
devices are being installed at the grade crossing, and railroad crossbucks were
the only warning devices at the grade crossing prior to the installation of the
new warning devices.
            2.   The grade crossing is constructed after July 1, 2013, and only
warning devices that are not active grade crossing warning devices are
installed at the grade crossing.
         (b)   Division (B)(3)(a) of this section does not apply to a railroad
highway grade crossing that the Director of Transportation has exempted from
that division because of traffic flow or other considerations or factors.
      (4)   When stop signs are erected pursuant to division (B)(2) or (B)(3)
of this section, the operator of any vehicle shall stop within 50, but not less
than 15, feet from the nearest rail of the railroad tracks and shall exercise
due care before proceeding across such grade crossing.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (B)(4) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within
one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If,
within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of
two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (6)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.61)
§ 432.33  SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES OR EQUIPMENT AT GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (A)   No person shall operate or move any crawler-type tractor, steam
shovel, derrick, roller, or any equipment or structure having a normal
operating speed of six or less miles per hour or a vertical body or load
clearance of less than nine inches above the level surface of a roadway, upon
or across any tracks at a railroad grade crossing without first complying with
divisions (A)(1) and (2) of this section.
      (1)   Before making any such crossing, the person operating or moving any
such vehicle or equipment shall first stop the same, and while stopped, the
person shall listen and look in both directions along the track for any
approaching train and for signals indicating the approach of a train, and shall
proceed only upon exercising due care.
      (2)   No such crossing shall be made when warning is given by automatic
signal, crossing gates, or a flagperson, or otherwise of the immediate approach
of a railroad train or car.
   (B)   If the normal sustained speed of the vehicle, equipment, or structure
is not more than three miles per hour, the person owning, operating, or moving
the same shall also give notice of the intended crossing to a station agent or
superintendent of the railroad, and a reasonable time shall be given to the
railroad to provide proper protection for the crossing.  Where the vehicles or
equipment are being used in constructing or repairing a section of highway
lying on both sides of a railroad grade crossing, and in this construction or
repair it is necessary to repeatedly move the vehicles or equipment over the
crossing, one daily notice specifying when the work will start and stating the
hours during which it will be prosecuted is sufficient.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.64)
§ 432.34  OBSTRUCTING INTERSECTIONS, CROSSWALKS OR GRADE CROSSINGS.
   (A)   No driver shall enter an intersection or marked crosswalk, or drive
onto any railroad grade crossing, unless there is sufficient space on the other
side of the intersection, crosswalk, or grade crossing to accommodate the
vehicle the driver is operating without obstructing the passage of other
vehicles, pedestrians, or railroad trains, notwithstanding any traffic-control
signal indication to proceed.
   (B)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.712)
§ 432.35  “PEELING”; CRACKING EXHAUST NOISES.
   No person shall operate any motor vehicle, except when necessary for safe
operation, or in compliance with law, in such a manner that the vehicle is so
rapidly accelerated or started from a stopped position, or in the shifting of
gears while in motion, that the exhaust system emits a loud, cracking or
chattering noise unusual to its normal operation, or that the rubber tires of
such vehicle squeal or leave tire marks on the roadway, commonly known as
“peeling”.
§ 432.36  SHORTCUTTING ACROSS PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   No operator of a motor vehicle or motorcycle shall, within 500 feet of
an intersection at which a traffic control signal or device has been installed,
drive across or through property not open for use as a public street and
thereby transfer the operation of the motor vehicle or motorcycle from the
street which was originally traveled to another street.
   (B)   This section shall have no application where the operation prohibited
in division (A) of this section has been directed by a police officer, or by
appropriate traffic control signals or devices, or if the person operating the
motor vehicle or motorcycle has stopped the same and shut off the engine on
such property not devoted to use as a public street.
(Ord. 46-74, passed 4-15-1974)
§ 432.37  ENTERING AND EXITING CONTROLLED-ACCESS HIGHWAY.
   No person shall drive a vehicle onto or from any controlled-access highway
except at such entrances and exits as are established by public authority.
§ 432.38  WEAVING; FULL TIME AND ATTENTION.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle upon any street
or highway in a weaving or zigzag course unless such irregular course is
necessary for safe operation or in compliance with law.
   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle or motorcycle without giving
his or her full time and attention to the operation of such vehicle.
(Ord. 46-69, passed 7-21-1969)
§ 432.39  OPERATION ON SCHOOL GROUNDS.
   (A)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle without due regard for the
safety and rights of pedestrians, drivers and occupants of all other vehicles,
and so as to endanger the life, limb or property of any person while such
person is in the lawful use of any public school facility or grounds in the
municipality.
   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle in and upon school drives,
grounds or parking areas at a speed greater or less than is reasonable or
proper, having due regard to the traffic, surface and width of any driveway or
parking area, and of any other condition then existing, and no person shall
drive any motor vehicle in and upon any school drive, grounds or parking place
at a greater speed than will permit stopping within the assured clear distance
ahead.
   (C)   No person shall move a motor vehicle which is stopped, standing or
parked on the grounds, parking areas or drives of any public school unless such
movement can be made with reasonable safety.
   (D)   Before backing, operators of motor vehicles shall give ample warning,
and while backing shall exercise vigilance not to injure any person or property
on school grounds, parking areas or drives.
   (E)   No person shall park or drive any motor vehicle anywhere on the
grounds of a public school in the municipality, without written permission of
an official or employee of such school, between the hours of 12:00 midnight and
7:00 a.m.
§ 432.40  OPERATION ON PATHS SET ASIDE FOR BICYCLES.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, snowmobile, or all-purpose
vehicle upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, when an
appropriate sign giving notice of such use is posted on the path.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to affect any rule of the
Director of Natural Resources governing the operation of motor vehicles,
snowmobiles, all-purpose vehicles, and bicycles on lands under the Director’s
jurisdiction.
   (C)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.713)
§ 432.41  LITTERING FROM MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   No operator or occupant of a motor vehicle shall, regardless of
intent, throw, drop, discard, or deposit litter from any motor vehicle in
operation upon any street, road, or highway, except into a litter receptacle in
a manner that prevents its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
   (B)   No operator of a motor vehicle in operation upon any street, road, or
highway shall allow litter to be thrown, dropped, discarded, or deposited from
the motor vehicle, except into a litter receptacle in a manner that prevents
its being carried away or deposited by the elements.
   (C)   As used in this section, “litter” means garbage, trash, waste,
rubbish, ashes, cans, bottles, wire, paper, cartons, boxes, automobile parts,
furniture, glass, or anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature.
(ORC 4511.82(A), (B), (D))
§ 432.42  USE OF EARPHONES WHILE DRIVING.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle while wearing earphones over,
or earplugs in, both ears.  As used in this section, “earphones” means any
headset, radio, tape player, or other similar device that provides the listener
with radio programs, music, or other recorded information through a device
attached to the head and that covers all or a portion of both ears. 
“Earphones” does not include speakers or other listening devices that are built
into protective headgear.
   (B)   This section does not apply to:
      (1)   Any person wearing a hearing aid;
      (2)   Law enforcement personnel while on duty;
      (3)   Fire Department personnel and emergency medical service personnel
while on duty;
      (4)   Any person engaged in the operation of equipment for use in the
maintenance or repair of any highway;
      (5)   Any person engaged in the operation of refuse collection equipment.
(ORC 4511.84)  (Ord. 89-156, passed 12-18-1989)
§ 432.43  TEXTING WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall drive a motor vehicle on any street, highway, or
property open to the public for vehicular traffic while using a handheld
electronic wireless communications device to write, send, or read a text-based
communication.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   A person using a handheld electronic wireless communications device
in that manner for emergency purposes, including an emergency contact with a
law enforcement agency, hospital or health care provider, fire department, or
other similar emergency agency or entity;
      (2)   A person driving a public safety vehicle who uses a handheld
electronic wireless communications device in that manner in the course of the
person's duties;
      (3)   A person using a handheld electronic wireless communications device
in that manner whose motor vehicle is in a stationary position and who is
outside a lane of travel;
      (4)   A person reading, selecting, or entering a name or telephone number
in a handheld electronic wireless communications device for the purpose of
making or receiving a telephone call;
      (5)   A person receiving wireless messages on a device regarding the
operation or navigation of a motor vehicle; safety-related information,
including emergency, traffic, or weather alerts; or data used primarily by the
motor vehicle;
      (6)   A person receiving wireless messages via radio waves;
      (7)   A person using a device for navigation purposes;
      (8)   A person conducting wireless interpersonal communication with a
device that does not require manually entering letters, numbers, or symbols or
reading text messages, except to activate, deactivate, or initiate the device
or a feature or function of the device;
      (9)   A person operating a commercial truck while using a mobile data
terminal that transmits and receives data;
      (10)   A person using a handheld electronic wireless communications
device in conjunction with a voice-operated or hands-free device feature or
function of the vehicle.
   (C)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause an operator of an automobile being operated on
any street or highway to stop the automobile for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of division (A) of this section has been or is
being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of that nature or causing the arrest of or commencing a
prosecution of a person for a violation of that nature, and no law enforcement
officer shall view the interior or visually inspect any automobile being
operated on any street or highway for the sole purpose of determining whether a
violation of that nature has been or is being committed.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
   (E)   A prosecution for a violation of this section does not preclude a
prosecution for a violation of R.C. § 4511.204 based on the same conduct.
However, if an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this
section and is also convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of R.C. §
4511.204 based on the same conduct, the two offenses are allied offenses of
similar import under R.C. § 2941.25.
   (F)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Electronic wireless communications device.”  Includes any of the
following:
         (a)   A wireless telephone;
         (b)   A text-messaging device;
         (c)   A personal digital assistant;
         (d)   A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer tablet;
         (e)   Any other substantially similar wireless device that is designed
or used to communicate text.
      (2)   “Voice-operated or hands-free device.”  A device that allows the
user to vocally compose or send, or to listen to a text-based communication
without the use of either hand except to activate or deactivate a feature or
function.
      (3)   “Write, send, or read a text-based communication.”  To manually
write or send, or read a text- based communication using an electronic wireless
communications device, including manually writing or sending, or reading
communications referred to as text messages, instant messages, or electronic
mail.
(ORC 4511.204)
Statutory reference:
   No preemption for local regulations imposing greater penalties, see R.C. §
4511.204(E)
§ 432.44  USE OF ELECTRONIC WIRELESS COMMUNICATION DEVICES BY MINORS OR
PROBATIONARY DRIVERS WHILE DRIVING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit who has not attained the
age of 18 years and no holder of a probationary driver's license shall drive a
motor vehicle on any street, highway, or property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular traffic or parking while using in any manner an
electronic wireless communications device.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to either of the
following:
      (1)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device for
emergency purposes, including an emergency contact with a law enforcement
agency, hospital or health care provider, fire department, or other similar
emergency agency or entity;
      (2)   A person using an electronic wireless communications device whose
motor vehicle is in a stationary position and the motor vehicle is outside a
lane of travel;
      (3)   A person using a navigation device in a voice-operated or hands-
free manner who does not manipulate the device while driving.
   (C)   (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this section, whoever
violates division (A) of this section shall be fined $150.  In addition, the
court shall impose a class seven suspension of the offender's driver's license
or permit for a definite period of 60 days.
      (2)   If the person previously has been adjudicated a delinquent child or
a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of this section, whoever violates
this section shall be fined $300. In addition, the court shall impose a class
seven suspension of the person’s driver’s license or permit for a definite
period of one year.
   (D)   The filing of a sworn complaint against a person for a violation of
this section does not preclude the filing of a sworn complaint for a violation
of R.C. § 4511.205 for the same conduct. However, if a person is adjudicated a
delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for a violation of this section
and is also adjudicated a delinquent child or a juvenile traffic offender for a
violation of R.C. § 4511.205 for the same conduct, the two offenses are allied
offenses of similar import under R.C. § 2941.25.
   (E)   As used in this section, “electronic wireless communications device”
includes any of the following:
      (1)   A wireless telephone;
      (2)   A personal digital assistant;
      (3)   A computer, including a laptop computer and a computer tablet;
      (4)   A text-messaging device;
      (5)   Any other substantially similar electronic wireless device that is
designed or used to communicate via voice, image, or written word.
(ORC 4511.205)
§ 432.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
404.99 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 434:  O.V.I.; RECKLESS OPERATION; SPEED
Section
434.01   Driving or physical control of vehicle while under the influence of
alcohol or drugs
434.011   Immobilizing or disabling device violation
434.02   Reckless operation on streets, public or private property
434.025   Careless operation on streets, public or private property
434.026   Reasonable control
434.03   Maximum speed limits; assured clear distance ahead
434.035   Speed limits on private roads and driveways
434.04   Slow speed; posted minimum speeds
434.05   Speed limitations over bridges
434.06   Speed exceptions for emergency or safety vehicles
434.07   Street racing prohibited
434.08   Vehicular homicide; vehicular manslaughter; vehicular assault
434.09   Operation restricted for mini-trucks and low-speed, under-speed, or
utility vehicles
434.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Criminal offenses by drivers of commercial vehicles, see §§
442.05,
442.08
   Driving upon sidewalks, tree lawns or curbs, see §
432.22
   Intoxicated pedestrians, see §
416.10
   Liquor consumption in motor vehicle, see §
612.04
   “Peeling”, see §
432.35
   Weaving; full time and attention, see §
432.38
Statutory reference:
   Alcohol defined, see Ohio R.C. § 4301.01
   Alteration of prima facie speed limits, see Ohio R.C. §§ 4511.21, 4511.22,
4511.23
   Drug of abuse defined, see Ohio R.C. § 3719.011
§ 434.01  DRIVING OR PHYSICAL CONTROL OF VEHICLE WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF
ALCOHOL OR DRUGS.
   (A)   Driving Under the Influence. 
      (1)   No person shall operate any vehicle within this municipality, if,
at the time of the operation,  any of the following apply:
         (a)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse,
or a combination of them.
         (b)   The person has a concentration of 0.08% or more but less than
0.17% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood.
         (c)   The person has a concentration of 0.096% or more but less than
0.204% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or
plasma.
         (d)   The person has a concentration of 0.08 grams or more but less
than 0.17 grams by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath.
         (e)   The person has a concentration of 0.11 grams or more but less
than 0.238 grams by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s
urine.
         (f)   The person has a concentration of 0.17% or more by weight per
unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood.
         (g)   The person has a concentration of 0.204% or more by weight per
unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or plasma.
         (h)   The person has a concentration of 0.17 grams or more by weight
of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath.
         (i)   The person has a concentration of 0.238 grams or more by weight
of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s urine.
         (j)   Except as provided in Ohio R.C. 4511.19(J), the person has a
concentration of any of the following controlled substances or metabolites of a
controlled substance in the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, or
urine that equals or exceeds any of the following:
            1.   The person has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s
urine of at least 500 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of amphetamine in the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of amphetamine per milliliter
of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            2.   The person has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s
urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person’s urine
or has a concentration of cocaine in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma of at least 50 nanograms of cocaine per milliliter of the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma.
            3.   The person has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person’s urine of at least 150 nanograms of cocaine metabolite per milliliter
of the person’s urine or has a concentration of cocaine metabolite in the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of
cocaine metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.
            4.   The person has a concentration of heroin in the person’s urine
of at least 2,000 nanograms of heroin per milliliter of the person’s urine or
has a concentration of heroin in the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms of heroin per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            5.   The person has a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-
monoacetyl morphine) in the person’s urine of at least 10 nanograms of heroin
metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s urine or has
a concentration of heroin metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 10 nanograms of heroin
metabolite (6-monoacetyl morphine) per milliliter of the person’s whole blood
or blood serum or plasma.
            6.   The person has a concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s urine
of at least 25 nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s urine or a
concentration of L.S.D. in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of
at least 10 nanograms of L.S.D. per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or
blood serum or plasma.
            7.   The person has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s
urine of at least 10 nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the person’s
urine or has a concentration of marihuana in the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma of at least 2 nanograms of marihuana per milliliter of the
person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            8.   Either of the following applies:
               a.   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of
abuse, or a combination of them, and, the person has a concentration of
marihuana metabolite in the person’s urine of at least 15 nanograms of
marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s urine or has a
concentration of marihuana metabolite in the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma of at least 5 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per milliliter
of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
               b.   The person has a concentration of marihuana metabolite in
the person’s urine of at least 35 nanograms of marihuana metabolite per
milliliter of the person’s urine or has a concentration of marihuana metabolite
in the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 50 nanograms
of marihuana metabolite per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood
serum or plasma.
            9.   The person has a concentration of methamphetamine in the
person’s urine of at least 500 nanograms of methamphetamine per milliliter of
the person’s urine or has a concentration of methamphetamine in the person’s
whole blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 100 nanograms of
methamphetamine per milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or
plasma.
            10.   The person has a concentration of phencyclidine in the
person’s urine of at least 25 nanograms of phencyclidine per milliliter of the
person’s urine or has a concentration of phencyclidine in the person’s whole
blood or blood serum or plasma of at least 10 nanograms of phencyclidine per
milliliter of the person’s whole blood or blood serum or plasma.
            11.   The State Board of Pharmacy has adopted a rule pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 4729.041 that specifies the amount of salvia divinorum and the amount
of salvinorin A that constitute concentrations of salvia divinorum and
salvinorin A in a person’s urine, in a person’s whole blood, or in a person’s
blood serum or plasma at or above which the person is impaired for purposes of
operating any vehicle, streetcar, or trackless trolley within this state, the
rule is in effect, and the person has a concentration of salvia divinorum or
salvinorin A of at least that amount so specified by rule in the person’s
urine, in the person’s whole blood, or in the person’s blood serum or plasma.
      (2)   No person who, within 20 years of the conduct described in division
(A)(2)(a) of this section, previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of this division or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, a violation of division (A)(1) or (B) of this section or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or any other
equivalent offense shall do both of the following:
         (a)   Operate any vehicle within this municipality while under the
influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them;
         (b)   Subsequent to being arrested for operating the vehicle as
described in division (A)(2)(a) of this section, being asked by a law
enforcement officer to submit to a chemical test or tests under Ohio R.C.
4511.191 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and being advised
by the officer in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4511.192 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance of the consequences of the person’s refusal or
submission to the test or tests, refuse to submit to the test or tests.
   (B)   Underage Alcohol Consumption.  No person under 21 years of age shall
operate any vehicle within this municipality if, at the time of the operation, 
any of the following apply:
      (1)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02% but less than
0.08%  by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood;
      (2)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.03% but less than
0.096% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or
plasma;
      (3)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02 grams but less than
0.08 grams by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath;
      (4)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.028 grams but less
than 0.11 grams by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s urine.
   (C)   Prosecution; Limitation on Convictions.  In any proceeding arising out
of one incident, a person may be charged with a violation of division (A)(1)(a)
or (A)(2) and a violation of division (B)(1), (2), or (3) of this section, but
the person may not be convicted of more than one violation of these divisions.
   (D)   Physical Control of Vehicle While Under the Influence.
      (1)   Definition. As used in this division, “physical control”  means
being in the driver’s position of the front seat of a vehicle and having
possession of the vehicle’s ignition key or other ignition device.
      (2)   Generally. No person shall be in physical control of a vehicle
while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a combination of them
or while the person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine
contains at least the following concentration of alcohol:
         (a)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse,
or a combination of them.
         (b)   The person has a concentration of 0.08% or more but less than
0.17% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood.
         (c)   The person has a concentration of 0.096% or more but less than
0.204% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or
plasma.
         (d)   The person has a concentration of 0.08 grams or more but less
than 0.17 grams by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath.
         (e)   The person has a concentration of 0.11 grams or more but less
than 0.238 grams by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s
urine.
         (f)   The person has a concentration of 0.17% or more by weight per
unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood.
         (g)   The person has a concentration of 0.204% or more by weight per
unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or plasma.
         (h)   The person has a concentration of 0.17 grams or more by weight
of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath.
         (i)   The person has a concentration of 0.238 grams or more by weight
of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s urine.
      (3)   Underage Alcohol Consumption.  No person under 21 years of age
shall operate any vehicle within this municipality if, at the time of the
operation,  any of the following apply:
         (a)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02% but less than
0.08% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s whole blood;
         (b)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.03% but less than
0.096% by weight per unit volume of alcohol in the person’s blood serum or
plasma;
         (c)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.02 grams but less
than 0.08 grams by weight of alcohol per 210 liters of the person’s breath;
         (d)   The person has a concentration of at least 0.028 grams but less
than 0.11 grams by weight of alcohol per 100 milliliters of the person’s urine.
      (4)   Prosecution; Limitation on Convictions.  In any proceeding arising
out of one incident, a person may be charged with a violation of division (D)
(1)(a) and a violation of division (D)(2)(a),(b), or C. of this section, but
the person may not be convicted of more than one violation of these divisions.
   (E)   Evidence; Tests.
      (1)   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of division (A) or (B)
of this section or for an equivalent offense, the court may admit evidence on
the concentration of alcohol, drugs of abuse, or a combination of them in the
defendant’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, urine, or other bodily
substance at the time of the alleged violation as shown by chemical analysis of
the substance withdrawn within two hours of the time of the alleged violation. 
When a person submits to a blood test at the request of a law enforcement
officer under Ohio R.C. 4511.191 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, only a physician, a registered nurse, or a qualified technician,
chemist, or phlebotomist  shall withdraw blood for the purpose of determining
the alcohol, drug, or alcohol and drug content of the whole blood, blood serum,
or blood plasma.  This limitation does not apply to the taking of breath or
urine specimens.  A person authorized to withdraw blood under this division may
refuse to withdraw blood under this division, if in that person’s opinion, the
physical welfare of the person would be endangered by the withdrawing of
blood.  The bodily substance withdrawn shall be analyzed in accordance with
methods approved by the Director of Health by an individual possessing a valid
permit issued by the Director  pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3701.143.
      (2)   In a criminal prosecution for a violation of division (A) of this
section or for an equivalent offense, if there was at the time the bodily
substance was withdrawn a concentration of less than the applicable
concentration of alcohol specified in divisions (A)(1)(b), (c), (d) and (e) of
this section, that fact may be considered with other competent evidence in
determining the guilt or innocence of the defendant.  This division does not
limit or affect a criminal prosecution for a violation of division (B) of this
section.
      (3)   Upon the request of the person who was tested, the results of the
chemical test shall be made available to the person or the person’s attorney,
immediately upon the completion of the chemical test analysis.  The person
tested may have a physician, a registered nurse, or a qualified technician,
chemist, or phlebotomist of the person’s own choosing administer a chemical
test or tests, at the person’s expense, in addition to any administered at the
request of a law enforcement officer. If the person was under arrest as
described in Ohio R.C. 4511.191(A)(5), the arresting officer shall advise the
person at the time of the arrest that the person may have an independent
chemical test taken at the person’s own expense. If the person was under arrest
other than described in Ohio R.C. 4511.191(A)(5), the form to be read to the
person to be tested, shall state that the person may have an independent test
performed at the person’s expense.  The failure or inability to obtain an
additional chemical test by a person shall not preclude the admission of
evidence relating to the chemical test or tests taken at the request of a law
enforcement officer.
      (4)   (a)   As used in division (D)(4)(b) of this section, “National
Highway Traffic Safety Administration” means the National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration established as an administration of the United States
Department of Transportation under 96 Stat. 2415 (1983), 49 U.S.C. 105.
         (b)   In any criminal prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a
violation of division (A) or (B) of this section, of a municipal ordinance
relating to operating a vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, a drug of
abuse, or alcohol and a drug of abuse, or of a municipal ordinance relating to
operating a vehicle with a prohibited concentration of alcohol in the blood,
breath, or urine, if a law enforcement officer has administered a field
sobriety test to the operator of the vehicle involved in the violation and if
it is shown by clear and convincing evidence that the officer administered the
test in substantial compliance with the testing standards for any reliable,
credible, and generally accepted field sobriety tests that were in effect at
the time the tests were administered, including, but not limited to, any
testing standards then in effect that were set by the National Highway Traffic
Safety Administration, all of the following apply:
            1.   The officer may testify concerning the results of the field
sobriety test so administered.
            2.   The prosecution may introduce the results of the field
sobriety test so administered as evidence in any proceedings in the criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding.
            3.   If testimony is presented or evidence is introduced under
division (D)(4)(b)1. or 2. of this section and if the testimony or evidence is
admissible under the Rules of Evidence, the court shall admit the testimony or
evidence and the trier of fact shall give it whatever weight the trier of fact
considers to be appropriate.
         (c)   Division (D)(4)(b) of this section does not limit or preclude a
court, in its determination of whether the arrest of a person was supported by
probable cause or its determination of any other matter in a criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding of a type described in that division,
from considering evidence or testimony that is not otherwise disallowed by
division (D)(4)(b) of this section.
   (F)   (1)   Subject to division (F)(3) of this section, in any criminal
prosecution or juvenile court proceeding for a violation of division (A)(1)(b),
(c), (d), (e), (f), (g), (h) or (i) or (B)(1), (2), (3), or (4) of this section
or for an equivalent offense that is substantially equivalent to any of those
divisions, a laboratory report from any forensic laboratory certified by the
Department of Health that contains an analysis of the whole blood, blood serum
or plasma, breath, urine, or other bodily substance tested and that contains
all of the information specified in this division shall be admitted as prima
facie evidence of the information and statements that the report contains. The
laboratory report shall contain all of the following:
         (a)   The signature, under oath, of any person who performed the
analysis;
         (b)   Any findings as to the identity and quantity of alcohol, a drug
of abuse, or a combination of them that was found;
         (c)   A copy of a notarized statement by the laboratory director of a
designee of the director that contains the name of each certified analyst or
test performer involved with the report, the analyst’s or test performer’s
employment relationship with the laboratory that issued the report, and a
notation that performing an analysis of the type involved is part of the
analyst’s or test performer’s regular duties;
         (d)   An outline of the analyst’s or test performer’s education,
training, and experience in performing the type of analysis involved and a
certification that the laboratory satisfies appropriate quality control
standards in general and, in this particular analysis, under rules of the
Department of Health.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law regarding the admission
of evidence, a report of the type described in division (F)(1) of this section
is not admissible against the defendant to whom it pertains in any proceeding,
other than a preliminary hearing or a grand jury proceeding, unless the
prosecutor has served a copy of the report on the defendant’s attorney or, if
the defendant has no attorney, on the defendant.
      (3)   A report of the type described in division (F)(1) of this section
shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents, identity, or amount of any
substance if, within seven days after the defendant to whom the report pertains
or the defendant’s attorney receives a copy of the report, the defendant or the
defendant’s attorney demands the testimony of the person who signed the report.
The judge in the case may extend the seven-day time limit in the interest of
justice.
   (G)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, any physician,
registered nurse, or qualified technician, chemist, or phlebotomist who
withdraws blood from a person pursuant to this section, and any hospital,
first-aid station, or clinic at which blood is withdrawn from a person pursuant
to this section, is immune from criminal liability and civil liability based
upon a claim of assault and battery or any other claim that is not  a claim of
malpractice, for any act performed in withdrawing blood from the person. The
immunity provided in this division is not available to a person who withdraws
blood if the person engages in willful or wanton misconduct.
(ORC 4511.19)
   (H)   Penalty.  Whoever violates divisions (A), (C) or (D) of this section
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree in addition to the license
suspension or revocation provided in Ohio R.C. 4507.16, in addition to any
disqualification imposed under Ohio R.C. 4506.16, and in addition to any other
license suspension, any vehicle impoundment, immobilization or forfeiture, any
seizure and detention of any license, vehicle or license plates, or any other
penalty or consequence provided for in these Codified Ordinances or state law.
(Ord. 101-03, passed 7-21-2003; Ord. 97-12, passed 6-18-2012)
Statutory reference:
   Disposition of fines, immobilization of vehicle and impoundment of license
plates, criminal forfeiture for municipal ordinance conviction, see Ohio R.C.
4511.193
   Effect of refusal to submit to test, seizure of license, suspension periods,
appeal procedures, occupational driving privileges, and indigent drivers
alcohol treatment funds, see Ohio R.C. 4511.191
   Implied consent, see Ohio R.C. 4511.191
   Judicial pretrial suspension, initial appearance, see Ohio R.C. 4511.196
   Mayor’s Court to suspend driver’s license, see Ohio R.C. 1905.201
   Seizure of vehicles upon arrest, see Ohio R.C. 4511.195
   State Law penalty, see Ohio R.C. 4511.19(G)
   Trial judge to suspend driver’s license, see Ohio R.C. 4510.05
§ 434.011  IMMOBILIZING OR DISABLING DEVICE VIOLATION.
   (A)   (1)   No offender who has been granted limited or unlimited driving
privileges, during any period that the offender is required to operate only a
motor vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device, shall request
or permit any other person to breathe into the device if it is an ignition
interlock device or another type of device that monitors the concentration of
alcohol in a person’s breath or to otherwise start the motor vehicle equipped
with the device, for the purpose of providing the offender with an operable
motor vehicle.
      (2)   No person shall breathe into an immobilizing or disabling device
that is an ignition interlock device or another type of device that monitors
the concentration of alcohol in a person’s breath or otherwise start a motor
vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device, for the purpose of
providing an operable motor vehicle to another person who has been granted
limited or unlimited driving privileges under the condition that the person
operate only a motor vehicle equipped with an immobilizing or disabling device.
      (3)   No unauthorized person shall tamper with or circumvent the
operation of an immobilizing or disabling device.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of an immobilizing or
disabling device violation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 4510.44)
§ 434.02  RECKLESS OPERATION ON STREETS, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any street or highway in willful
or wanton disregard of the safety of persons or property.
   (B)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any public or private property
other than streets or highways in willful or wanton disregard of the safety of
persons or property.
   (C)   Division (B) of this section does not apply to the competitive
operation of vehicles on public or private property when the owner of such
property knowingly permits such operation thereon.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
(Ord. 15-83, passed 3-21-1983; Ord. 97-12, passed 6-18-2012)
§ 434.025  CARELESS OPERATION ON STREETS, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any street without due regard for
the safety of persons or property.
   (B)   No person shall operate a vehicle on any public or private property
other than streets or highways, without due regard for the safety of persons or
property.
   (C)   Division (B) of this section does not apply to the competitive
operation of vehicles on public or private property when the owner of such
property knowingly permits such operation thereon.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
(Ord. 15-83, passed 3-21-1983; Ord. 97-12, passed 6-18-2012)
§ 434.026  REASONABLE CONTROL.
   No person shall operate a motor vehicle, agricultural tractor, or
agricultural tractor that is towing, pulling, or otherwise drawing a unit of
farm machinery on any street, highway, or property open to the public for
vehicular traffic without being in reasonable control of the vehicle,
agricultural tractor, or unit of farm machinery.
(ORC 4511.202)
§ 434.03  MAXIMUM SPEED LIMITS; ASSURED CLEAR DISTANCE AHEAD.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle at a speed greater or less
than is reasonable or proper, having due regard for the traffic, surface, and
width of the street or highway and any other conditions, and  no person shall
drive any motor vehicle in and upon any street or highway at a greater speed
than will permit him or her to bring it to a stop within the assured clear
distance ahead.
   (B)   It is prima facie lawful, in the absence of a lower limit declared or
established pursuant to this section by the Director of Transportation or local
authorities, for the operator of a motor vehicle to operate the same at a speed
not exceeding the following:
      (1)   (a)   Twenty miles per hour in school zones during school recess
and while children are going to or leaving school during the opening or closing
hours, and when twenty miles per hour school speed limit signs are erected,
except that on controlled-access highways and expressways, if the right-of-way
line fence has been erected without pedestrian opening, the speed shall be
governed by division (B)(4) of this section, and on freeways, if the right-of-
way line fence has been erected without pedestrian opening, the speed shall be
governed by divisions (B)(10) and (B)(11) of this section.  The end of every
school zone may be marked by a sign indicating the end of the zone.  Nothing in
this section or in the Manual and Specifications for a Uniform System of
Traffic-Control Devices shall be construed to require school zones to be
indicated by signs equipped with flashing or other lights, or giving other
special notice of the hours in which the school zone speed limit is in effect.
         (b)   As used in this section, “school” means any school chartered
under Ohio R.C. 3301.16 and any nonchartered school that during the preceding
year filed with the Department of Education in compliance with O.A.C. 3301-35-
08, a copy of the school’s report for the parents of the school’s pupils
certifying that the school meets state minimum standards for nonchartered, non-
tax-supported schools and presents evidence of this filing to the jurisdiction
from which it is requesting the establishment of a school zone. “School” also
includes a special elementary school that in writing requests the County
Engineer to create a school zone at the location of the school. Upon receipt of
such written request, the County Engineer shall create a school zone at that
location by erecting appropriate signs.
         (c)   As used in this section, “school zone” means that portion of a
street or highway passing a school fronting upon the street or highway that is
encompassed by projecting the school property lines to the fronting street or
highway, and also includes that portion of a state highway.  Upon request from
local authorities for streets and highways under their jurisdiction and that
portion of a state highway under the jurisdiction of the Director of
Transportation or a request from a County Engineer in the case of a school zone
for a special elementary school, the Director may extend the traditional school
zone boundaries.  The distances in divisions (B)(1)(c)1. through 3. below shall
not exceed 300 feet per approach per direction, and are bounded by whichever of
the following distances or combination thereof the Director approves as most
appropriate:
            1.   The distance encompassed by projecting the school building
lines normal to the fronting highway and extending a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction;
            2.   The distance encompassed by projecting the school property
lines intersecting the fronting highway and extending a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction;
            3.   The distance encompassed by the special marking of the
pavement for a principal school pupil crosswalk plus a distance of 300 feet on
each approach direction of the highway.
         (d)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to invalidate the
Director’s initial action on August 9, 1976, establishing all school zones at
the traditional school zone boundaries defined by projecting school property
lines, except when those boundaries are extended as provided in divisions (B)
(1)(a) and (B)(1)(c) of this section.
         (e)   As used in this division, “crosswalk” has the meaning given that
term in Ohio R.C. 4511.01(LL)(2).
         (f)   The Director may, upon request by resolution of the Legislative
Authority and upon submission by the municipality of such engineering, traffic,
and other information as the Director considers necessary, designate a school
zone on any portion of a state route lying within the municipality that
includes a crosswalk customarily used by children going to or leaving a school
during recess and opening and closing hours, whenever the distance, as measured
in a straight line, from the school property line nearest the crosswalk to the
nearest point of a crosswalk is no more than 1,320 feet. Such a school zone
shall include the distance encompassed by the crosswalk and extending 300 feet
in each appropriate direction of the state route.
         (g)   As used in this section, “special elementary school” means a
school that meets all of the following:
            1.   It is not chartered and does not receive tax revenue from any
source.
            2.   It does not educate children beyond the eighth grade.
            3.   It is located outside the limits of a municipal corporation.
            4.   A majority of the total number of students enrolled at the
school are not related by blood.
            5.   The principal or other person in charge of the special
elementary school annually sends a report to the superintendent of the school
district in which the special elementary school is located indicating the total
number of
               students enrolled at the school, but otherwise the principal or
other person in charge does not report any other information or data to the
superintendent.
      (2)   Twenty-five miles per hour in all other portions of the
municipality, except on state routes outside business districts, through
highways outside business districts, and alleys;
      (3)   Thirty-five miles per hour on all state routes or through highways
within the municipality outside business districts, except as provided in
divisions (B)(4) and (B)(6) of this section;
      (4)   Fifty miles per hour on controlled-access highways and expressways
within the municipality, except as provided in divisions (B)(12), (B)(13), (B)
(14), (B)(15), and (B)(16) of this section;
      (5)   Fifty-five miles per hour on highways outside the municipality,
other than highways within island jurisdictions as provided in division (B)(8)
of this section, highways as provided in divisions (B)(9) and (B)(10) of this
section, and highways, expressways and freeways as provided in divisions (B)
(12), (B)(13), (B)(14), and (B)(16) of this section;
      (6)   Fifty miles per hour on state routes within the municipality
outside urban districts unless a lower prima facie speed is established as
further provided in this section;
      (7)   Fifteen miles per hour on all alleys within the municipality;
      (8)   Thirty-five miles per hour on highways outside the municipality
that are within an island jurisdiction;
      (9)   Thirty-five miles per hour on through highways, except state
routes, that are outside municipal corporations and that are within a national
park with boundaries extending through two or more counties;
      (10)   Sixty miles per hour on two-lane state routes outside municipal
corporations as established by the Director under R.C. § 4511.21(H)(2);
      (11)   Fifty-five miles per hour on freeways with paved shoulders inside
the municipality, other than freeways as provided in divisions (B)(14) and (B)
(16) of this section;
      (12)   Sixty miles per hour on rural expressways with traffic control
signals and on all portions of rural divided highways, except as provided in
divisions (B)(13) and (B)(14) of this section;
      (13)   Sixty-five miles per hour on all rural expressways without traffic
control signals;
      (14)   Seventy miles per hour on all rural freeways;
      (15)   Fifty-five miles per hour on all portions of freeways or
expressways in congested areas as determined by the Director and that are
located within a municipal corporation or within an interstate freeway
outerbelt, except as provided in division (B)(16) of this section;
      (16)   Sixty-five miles per hour on all portions of freeways or
expressways without traffic control signals in urbanized areas.
   (C)   It is prima facie unlawful for any person to exceed any of the speed
limitations in divisions (B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6), (B)(7), (B)
(8) and (B)(9) of this section or any declared or established pursuant to this
section by the Director or local authorities and it is unlawful for any person
to exceed any of the speed limitations in division (D) of this section.  No
person shall be convicted of more than one violation of this section for the
same conduct, although violations of more than one provision of this section
may be charged in the alternative in a single affidavit.
   (D)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle upon a street or highway as
follows:
      (1)   At a speed exceeding 55 miles per hour, except upon a two-lane
state route as provided in division (B)(10) of this section and upon a highway,
expressway or freeway as provided in divisions (B)(12), (B)(13), (B)(14), and
(B)(16) of this section;
      (2)   At a speed exceeding 60 miles per hour upon a two-lane state route
as provided in division (B)(10) of this section and upon a highway as provided
in division (B)(12) of this section;
      (3)   At a speed exceeding 65 miles per hour upon an expressway as
provided in division (B)(13) of this section or upon a freeway as provided in
division (B)(16) of this section, except upon a freeway as provided in division
(B)(14) of this section;
      (4)   At a speed exceeding 70 miles per hour upon a freeway as provided
in division (B)(14) of this section;
      (5)   At a speed exceeding the posted speed limit upon a highway,
expressway or freeway for which the Director has determined and declared a
speed limit pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(I)(2) or (L)(2).
   (E)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(E), in every charge of violating this
section, the affidavit and warrant shall specify the time, place and speed at
which the defendant is alleged to have driven, and in charges made in reliance
upon division (C) of this section also the speed which division (B)(1)(a), (B)
(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6), (B)(7), (B)(8) or (B)(9) of, or a limit declared
or established pursuant to, this section or R.C. § 4511.21 declares is prima
facie lawful at the time and place of the alleged violation, except that in
affidavits where a person is alleged to have driven at a greater speed than
will permit the person to bring the vehicle to stop within the assured clear
distance ahead, the affidavit and warrant need not specify the speed at which
the defendant is alleged to have driven.
   (F)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4511.21(F), when a speed in excess of both a prima
facie limitation and a limitation in division (D) of this section is alleged,
the defendant shall be charged in a single affidavit, alleging a single act,
with a violation indicated of both division (B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4),
(B)(6), (B)(7), (B)(8) or (B)(9) of this section, or of a limit declared or
established pursuant to this section or R.C. § 4511.21 by the Director or local
authorities, and of the limitation in division (d) of this section. If the
court finds a violation of division (B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3), (B)(4), (B)(6),
(B)(7), (B)(8) or (B)(9) of, or a limit declared or established pursuant to,
this section or R.C. § 4511.21 has occurred, it shall enter a judgment of
conviction under that division and dismiss the charge under division (D) of
this section. If it finds no violation of division (B)(1)(a), (B)(2), (B)(3),
(B)(4), (B)(6), (B)(7), (B)(8) or (B)(9) of, or a limit declared or established
pursuant to, this section or R.C. § 4511.21, it shall then consider whether the
evidence supports a conviction under division (D) of this section.
   (G)   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4511.21(G), points shall be assessed for a
violation of a limitation under division (D) of this section in accordance with
Ohio R.C. 4510.036.
(ORC 4511.21(A) - (G))
   (H)   Whenever, in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4511.21(H) through (N), the
maximum prima facie speed limitations as established herein have been altered,
either higher or lower, and the appropriate signs giving notice have been
erected as required, operators of motor vehicles shall be governed by the speed
limitations set forth on such signs.  It is prima facie unlawful for any person
to exceed the speed limits posted upon such signs.
   (I)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Commercial bus” means a motor vehicle designed for carrying more
than nine passengers and used for the transportation of persons for
compensation.
      (2)   “Divided” means a roadway having two or more travel lanes for
vehicles in opposite directions and that is separated by a median of more than
four feet, excluding turn lanes.
      (3)   “Interstate system” has the same meaning as in 23 U.S.C. 101.
      (4)   “Noncommercial bus” includes but is not limited to a school bus, or
a motor vehicle operated solely for the transportation of persons associated
with a charitable or nonprofit organization.
      (5)   “Outerbelt.” A portion of a freeway that is part of the interstate
system and is located in the outer vicinity of a major municipal corporation or
group of municipal corporations, as designated by the Director.
      (6)   “Rural.” Means an area outside urbanized areas and outside of a
business or urban district, and areas that extend within urbanized areas where
the roadway characteristics remain mostly unchanged from those outside the
urbanized areas.
      (7)   “Urbanized area.” Has the same meaning as in 23 U.S.C. § 101.
(ORC 4511.21(O))
   (J)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.21(P))
   (K)   If the offender operated a motor vehicle in a construction zone where
a sign was then posted in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4511.98, the court, in
addition to all other penalties provided by law, may impose upon the offender a
fine of two times the usual amount imposed for the violation.
(Ord. 92-08, passed 6-16-2008)
§ 434.035  SPEED LIMITS ON PRIVATE ROADS AND DRIVEWAYS.
   (A)   The owner of a private road or driveway located in a private
residential area containing 20 or more dwelling units may establish a speed
limit on the road or driveway by complying with all of the following
requirements:
      (1)   The speed limit is not less than 25 miles per hour and is indicated
by a sign that is in a proper position, is sufficiently legible to be seen by
an ordinarily observant person, and meets the specifications for the basic
speed limit sign included in the manual adopted by the Department of
Transportation pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4511.09;
      (2)   The owner has posted a sign at the entrance of the private road or
driveway that is in plain view and clearly informs persons entering the road or
driveway that they are entering private property, a speed limit has been
established for the road or driveway, and the speed limit is enforceable by law
enforcement officers under state law.
   (B)   No person shall operate a vehicle upon a private road or driveway as
provided in division (A) of this section at a speed exceeding any speed limit
established and posted pursuant to division (A).
   (C)   When a speed limit is established and posted in accordance with
division (A) of this section, a law enforcement officer may apprehend a person
violating the speed limit of the residential area by utilizing any of the means
described in Ohio R.C. 4511.091 or by any other accepted method of determining
the speed of a motor vehicle and may stop and charge the person with exceeding
the speed limit.
   (D)   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4511.211(D), points shall be assessed for
violation of a speed limit established and posted in accordance with division
(A) of this section in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4510.036.
   (E)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Owner” includes but is not limited to a person who holds title to
the real property in fee simple, a condominium owners’ association, a property
owners’ association, a board of directors or trustees of a private community,
and a nonprofit corporation governing a private community.
      (2)   “Private residential area containing 20 or more dwelling units”
does not include a Chautauqua assembly as defined in Ohio R.C. 4511.90.
   (F)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.211(A) - (E))
§ 434.04  SLOW SPEED; POSTED MINIMUM SPEEDS.
   (A)   No person shall stop or operate a vehicle at such an unreasonably slow
speed as to impede or block the normal and reasonable movement of traffic,
except when stopping or reduced speed is necessary for safe operation or to
comply with law.
   (B)   Whenever the Director of Transportation or local authorities determine
on the basis of an engineering and traffic investigation that slow speeds on
any part of a controlled-access highway, expressway, or freeway consistently
impede the normal and reasonable movement of traffic, the Director or such
local authority may declare a minimum speed limit below which no person shall
operate a motor vehicle, except when necessary for safe operation or in
compliance with the law.  No minimum speed limit established hereunder shall be
less than 30 miles per hour, greater than 50 miles per hour, nor effective
until the provisions of Ohio R.C. 4511.21 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, relating to appropriate signs, have been fulfilled and
local authorities have obtained the approval of the Director.
   (C)   In a case involving a violation of this section, the trier of fact, in
determining whether the vehicle was being operated at an unreasonably slow
speed, shall consider the capabilities of the vehicle and its operator.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.22)
§ 434.05  SPEED LIMITATIONS OVER BRIDGES.
   (A)   No person shall operate a vehicle over any bridge or other elevated
structure constituting a part of a highway at a speed which is greater than the
maximum speed that can be maintained with safety to such bridge or structure,
when such structure is posted with signs as provided in this section.
   (B)   The Department of Transportation upon request from any local authority
shall, or upon its own initiative may, conduct an investigation of any bridge
or other elevated structure constituting a part of a highway, and if it finds
that such structure cannot with safety withstand traffic traveling at the speed
otherwise permissible under this Traffic Code, the Department shall determine
and declare the maximum speed of traffic which such structure can withstand,
and shall cause or permit suitable signs stating such maximum speed to be
erected and maintained at a distance of a least 100 feet before each end of the
structure.
   (C)   Upon the trial of any person charged with a violation of this section,
proof of such determination of the maximum speed by the Department and the
existence of such signs shall constitute prima facie evidence of the maximum
speed which can be maintained with safety to such bridge or structure.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.23)
§ 434.06  SPEED EXCEPTIONS FOR EMERGENCY OR SAFETY VEHICLES.
   The prima facie speed limitations set forth in Ohio R.C. 4511.21 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance do not apply to emergency vehicles
or public safety vehicles when they are responding to emergency calls and are
equipped with and displaying at least one flashing, rotating, or oscillating
light visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet
to the front of the vehicle, and when the drivers thereof sound audible signals
by bell, siren, or exhaust whistle.  This section does not relieve the  driver
of an emergency vehicle or public safety vehicle from the duty to drive with
due regard for the safety of all persons using the street or highway.
(ORC 4511.24)
§ 434.07  STREET RACING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   As used in this section, “street racing” means the operation of two or
more vehicles from a point side by side at accelerating speeds in a competitive
attempt to outdistance each other, or the operation of one or more vehicles
over a common selected course, from the same point to the same point, wherein
timing is made of the participating vehicles involving competitive
accelerations or speeds.  Persons rendering assistance in any manner to such
competitive use of vehicles shall be equally charged as the participants.  The
operation of two or more vehicles side by side either at speeds in excess of
prima facie lawful speeds established by Ohio R.C. 4511.21(B)(1)(a) through (B)
(9) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or rapidly accelerating
from a common starting point to a speed in excess of such prima facie lawful
speeds shall be prima facie evidence of street racing.
   (B)   No person shall participate in street racing upon any public road,
street, or highway in this municipality.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of street racing, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition to any other sanctions, the court
shall suspend the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privileges for not less than 30 days or more than three years. No judge shall
suspend the first 30 days of any suspension of an offender’s license, permit,
or privilege imposed under this division.
(ORC 4511.251)
§ 434.08  VEHICULAR HOMICIDE; VEHICULAR MANSLAUGHTER; VEHICULAR ASSAULT.
   (A)   No person, while operating or participating in the operation of a
motor vehicle, motorcycle, snowmobile, locomotive, watercraft, or aircraft,
shall cause the death of another or the unlawful termination of another’s
pregnancy in any of the following ways:
      (1)   (a)   As the proximate result of committing a violation of Ohio
R.C. 4511.19(A) or of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
         (b)   As the proximate result of committing a violation of Ohio R.C.
1547.11(A) or of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
         (c)   As the proximate result of committing a violation of Ohio R.C.
4561.15(A)(3) or of a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   In one of the following ways:
         (a)   Recklessly;
         (b)   As the proximate result of committing, while operating or
participating in the operation of a motor vehicle or motorcycle in a
construction zone, a reckless operation offense, provided that this division
applies only if the person whose death is caused or whose pregnancy is
unlawfully terminated is in the construction zone at the time of the offender’s
commission of the reckless operation offense in the construction zone and does
not apply as described in division (D) of this section.
      (3)   In one of the following ways:
         (a)   Negligently;
         (b)   As the proximate result of committing, while operating or
participating in the operation of a motor vehicle or motorcycle in a
construction zone, a speeding offense, provided that this division applies only
if the person whose death is caused or whose pregnancy is unlawfully terminated
is in the construction zone at the time of the offender’s commission of the
speeding offense in the construction zone and does not apply as described in
division (D) of this section.
      (4)   As the proximate result of committing a violation of any provision
of any section contained in Ohio R.C. Title 45 that is a minor misdemeanor or
of a municipal ordinance that, regardless of the penalty set by ordinance for
the violation, is substantially equivalent to any provision of  any section
contained in Ohio R.C. Title 45 that is a minor misdemeanor.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) or (2) of this section is
guilty of aggravated vehicular homicide, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A)(3) of this section is guilty of
vehicular homicide. Except as otherwise provided in this division, vehicular
homicide is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Vehicular homicide committed in
violation of division (A)(3) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if, at the time of the offense, the offender was driving
under a suspension or cancellation imposed under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other
provision of the Ohio Revised Code or was operating a motor vehicle or
motorcycle, did not have a valid driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating
privilege, and was not eligible for renewal of the offender’s driver’s license
or commercial driver’s license without examination under R.C. § 4507.10 or if
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation
of this section or any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault
offense.
         (b)   In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to this
division, the court shall impose upon the offender a class four suspension of
the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) of this section is guilty of
vehicular manslaughter. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
vehicular manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the second degree. Vehicular
manslaughter is a misdemeanor of the first degree if, at the time of the
offense, the offender was driving under a suspension or cancellation imposed
under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other provision of the Revised Code or was
operating a motor vehicle or motorcycle, did not have a valid driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege, and was not eligible for renewal
of the offender’s driver’s license or commercial driver’s license without
examination under Ohio R.C. 4507.10 or if the offender previously has been
convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this section or any traffic-
related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense.
         (b)   In addition to any other sanctions imposed pursuant to this
division, the court shall impose upon the offender a class six suspension of
the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(6) or, if the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of this
section, any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense, or a
traffic- related murder, felonious assault, or attempted murder offense, a
class four suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(4).
   (C)   The court shall impose a mandatory jail term of at least 15 days on an
offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor violation of
division (A)(3)(b) of this section and may impose upon the offender a longer
jail term as authorized pursuant to R.C. § 2929.24.
   (D)   Divisions (A)(2)(b) and (A)(3)(b) of this section do not apply in a
particular construction zone unless signs of the type described in Ohio R.C.
2903.081 are erected in that construction zone in accordance with the
guidelines and design specifications established by the Director of
Transportation under Ohio R.C. 5501.27. The failure to erect signs of the type
described in Ohio R.C. 2903.081 in a particular construction zone in accordance
with those guidelines and design specifications does not limit or affect the
application of division (A)(1), (A)(2)(a), (A)(3)(a), or (A)(4) of this section
in that construction zone or the prosecution of any person who violates any of
those divisions in that construction zone.
   (E)   (1)   As used in this section:
         (a)   “Construction zone” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
5501.27.
         (b)   “Mandatory prison term” and “mandatory jail term” have the same
meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2929.01.
         (c)   “Motor vehicle” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
         (d)   “Reckless operation offense” means a violation of Ohio R.C.
4511.20 or a municipal ordinance substantially equivalent to Ohio R.C. 4511.20.
         (e)   “Speeding offense” means a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.21 or a
municipal ordinance pertaining to speed.
         (f)   “Traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense”
means a violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.04 in circumstances in which division (D)
of that section applies, a violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.06 or 2903.08, or a
violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.06, 2903.07, or 2903.08 as they existed prior to
March 23, 2000.
         (g)   “Traffic-related murder, felonious assault, or attempted murder
offense” means a violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.01 or Ohio R.C. 2903.02 in
circumstances in which the offender used a motor vehicle as the means to commit
the violation, a violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.11(A)(2) in circumstances in which
the deadly weapon used in the commission of the violation is a motor vehicle,
or an attempt to commit aggravated murder or murder in violation of Ohio R.C.
2923.02 in circumstances in which the offender used a motor vehicle as the
means to attempt to commit the aggravated murder or murder.
      (2)   For the purposes of this section, when a penalty or suspension is
enhanced because of a prior or current violation of a specified law or a prior
or current specified offense, the reference to the violation of the specified
law or the specified offense includes any violation  of any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of this state, or current or former
law of this or another state or the United States.
(ORC 2903.06)
   (F)   Vehicular assault.
      (1)   No person, while operating or participating in the operation of a
motor vehicle or motorcycle, shall cause serious physical harm to another
person or another’s unborn as the proximate result of committing, while
operating or participating in the operation of a motor vehicle or motorcycle in
a construction zone, a speeding offense, provided that this division applies
only if the person to whom the serious physical harm is caused or to whose
unborn the serious physical harm is caused is in the construction zone at the
time of the offender’s commission of the speeding offense in the construction
zone and does not apply as described in division (F)(4) of this section.
      (2)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, vehicular
assault committed in violation of division (F)(1) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. Vehicular assault committed in violation of
division (F)(1) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law if, at the time of the offense, the offender was driving under a
suspension imposed under R.C. Chapter 4510 or any other provision of the Ohio
Revised Code or if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (F)(1) of this section, R.C. § 2903.08, or
any traffic-related homicide, manslaughter, or assault offense.
         (b)   In addition to any other sanctions imposed, the court shall
impose upon the offender a class four suspension of the offender’s driver’s
license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(4).
      (3)   The court shall impose a mandatory jail term of at least seven days
on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a misdemeanor violation
of division (F)(1) of this section and may impose upon the offender a longer
jail term as authorized pursuant to R.C. § 2929.24.
      (4)   Division (F)(1) of this section does not apply in a particular
construction zone unless signs of the type described in R.C. § 2903.081 are
erected in that construction zone in accordance with the guidelines and design
specifications established by the Director of Transportation under R.C. §
5501.27.
      (5)   As used in this division (F):
         CONSTRUCTION ZONE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5501.27.
         MANDATORY JAIL TERM. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
         SPEEDING OFFENSE. Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2903.06.
         TRAFFIC-RELATED HOMICIDE, MANSLAUGHTER, OR ASSAULT OFFENSE. Has the
same meaning as in R.C. § 2903.06.
      (6)   For the purposes of this division (F), when a penalty or suspension
is enhanced because of a prior or current violation of a specified law or a
prior or current specified offense, the reference to the violation of the
specified law or the specified offense includes any violation of any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, former law of this state, or
current or former law of another state or the United States.
(R.C. 2903.08(A)(3), (C)(3), (D)(3), (E) - (G))
Statutory reference:
   Vehicular assault and aggravated vehicular assault, felony offenses, see
Ohio R.C. 2903.08
   Trial court to suspend driver’s license, see Ohio R.C. 4510.05, 4510.10
§ 434.09  OPERATION RESTRICTED FOR MINI-TRUCKS AND LOW-SPEED, UNDER- SPEED, OR
UTILITY VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall operate a low-speed vehicle upon any street or
highway having an established speed limit greater than 35 miles per hour.
      (2)   No person shall operate an under-speed or utility vehicle or a
mini-truck upon any street or highway except as follows:
         (a)   Upon a street or highway having an established speed limit not
greater than 35 miles per hour and only upon such streets or highways where the
municipality has granted permission for such operation in accordance with
division (E) of this section;
         (b)   A state park or political subdivision employee or volunteer
operating a utility vehicle exclusively within the boundaries of state parks or
political subdivision parks for the operation or maintenance of state or
political subdivision park facilities.
      (3)   No person shall operate a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter upon
any street or highway having an established speed limit greater than 45 miles
per hour.
   (B)   This section does not prohibit either of the following:
      (1)   A person operating a low-speed, under-speed, or utility vehicle or
a mini-truck from proceeding across an intersection of a street or highway
having a speed limit greater than 35 miles per hour;
      (2)   A person operating a motor-driven cycle or motor scooter from
proceeding across an intersection of a street or highway having a speed limit
greater than 45 miles per hour.
   (C)   Nothing in this section shall prevent the municipality from adopting
more stringent local ordinances, resolutions, or regulations governing the
operation of a low-speed vehicle or a mini-truck, or a motor-driven cycle or
motor scooter.
(ORC 4511.214)
   (D)   By ordinance or resolution, the municipality may authorize the
operation of under-speed or utility vehicles or mini-trucks on a public street
or highway under its jurisdiction. The municipality shall do all of the
following:
      (1)   Limit the operation of those vehicles to streets and highways
having an established speed limit not greater than 35 miles per hour;
      (2)   Require the vehicle owner who wishes to operate an under-speed or
utility vehicle or a mini- truck on the public streets or highways to submit
the vehicle to an inspection conducted by a local law enforcement agency that
complies with inspection requirements established by the Department of Public
Safety under R.C. § 4513.02;
      (3)   Permit the operation on public streets or highways of only those
vehicles that successfully pass the required vehicle inspection, are registered
in accordance with R.C. Chapter 4503, and are titled in accordance with R.C.
Chapter 4505;
      (4)   Notify the Director of Public Safety, in a manner the Director
determines, of the authorization for the operation of under-speed or utility
vehicles or mini-trucks.
   (E)   The municipality may establish additional requirements for the
operation of under-speed or utility vehicles or mini-trucks on its streets and
highways.
(ORC 4511.215)
   (F)   (1)   Except as provided in this division (G) and divisions (E) and
(F) of this section, no person shall operate a mini-truck within this
municipality.
      (2)   A person may operate a mini-truck on a farm for agricultural
purposes only when the owner of the farm qualifies for the current agricultural
use valuation tax credit. A mini-truck may be operated by or on behalf of such
a farm owner on public roads and rights-of-way only when traveling from one
farm field to another.
      (3)   A person may operate a mini-truck on property owned or leased by a
dealer who sells mini- trucks at retail.
(ORC 4519.401)
   (G)   Notwithstanding divisions (A) through (F) of this section, a person
may operate a utility vehicle on any public roads or right-of-way, other than a
freeway, when traveling from one farm field to another for agricultural
purposes if the vehicle is displaying a triangular slow-moving vehicle emblem
as described in R.C. § 4513.11.
(ORC 4511.216)
   (H)   (1)   Except as provided in this division (H) and divisions (E) and
(F) of this section, no person shall operate a mini-truck within this
municipality.
      (2)   A person may operate a mini-truck on a farm for agricultural
purposes only when the owner of the farm qualifies for the current agricultural
use valuation tax credit. A mini-truck may be operated by or on behalf of such
a farm owner on public roads and rights-of-way only when traveling from one
farm field to another.
      (3)   A person may operate a mini-truck on property owned or leased by a
dealer who sells mini- trucks at retail.
      (4)   Whoever violates this division (H) shall be penalized as provided
in division (D) of this section.
(ORC 4519.401)
§ 434.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
404.99 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 436:  LICENSING; ACCIDENTS
Section
436.01   Driver’s or commercial driver’s license required
436.02   Possession of more than one license prohibited
436.03   Driving with temporary instruction permit
436.035   Driving with probationary license
436.04   Certain acts prohibited
436.05   Owner or operator allowing another to drive
436.06   Display of license
436.071   Driving under suspension or in violation of license restriction
436.072   Operating motor vehicle or motorcycle without valid license
436.073   Driving under OVI suspension
436.074   Driving under financial responsibility law suspension or
cancellation; driving under a nonpayment of judgment suspension
436.075   Failure to reinstate license
436.08   Operation or sale without certificate of title
436.09   Display of license plates; registration; obstructions
436.10   Use of illegal license plates; loans or sales
436.11   Failure to stop after accident
436.12   Stopping after accident on other than public roads or highways
436.13   Vehicle accident resulting in damage to realty
436.14   Removal of damaged vehicle
436.15   Removal of vehicles after accidents
436.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Glass removal from street after accident, see §
412.01
   Licensing requirements of snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle and all-purpose
vehicle operator, see §
476.06
   Snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle and all-purpose vehicle accident reports,
see §
476.06
   Suspension of driver’s license, see §§
404.99(C);
606.99
   Unlicensed or uninsured motor vehicles on public or private property, see §
1348.08
Statutory reference:
   Driver’s license law, see Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507
   Employment of a minor to operate a taxicab prohibited, see Ohio R.C.
4507.321
   Motor vehicle licensing law, see Ohio R.C. Chapter 4503
   Power of trial court of record to suspend license for certain violations,
see Ohio R.C. 4510.05, 4510.15
   State accident reports, see Ohio R.C. 4509.01, 4509.06, 4509.74, 5502.11
   State point system suspension, see Ohio R.C. 4507.021
§ 436.01  DRIVER’S OR COMMERCIAL DRIVER’S LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall permit the operation of a motor vehicle upon any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking, knowing the operator does not have a valid driver’s license issued
to the operator by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507
or a valid commercial driver’s license issued under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4506.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this division
is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified
misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §
202.99, Ohio R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
202.99(D) or Ohio R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
202.99(F)(1)(b)1. and Ohio R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined
up to $1,000; and, notwithstanding §
202.99(E)(1)(c) and Ohio R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered
pursuant to §
202.99(E)(3) or § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to 500
hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under Ohio
R.C. § 2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case. If, within three
years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 4507.02(A))
   (B)   (1)   No person shall be required to obtain a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license for the purpose of temporarily driving, operating, drawing,
moving, or propelling a road roller or road machinery upon a street or highway.
      (2)   No person shall be required to obtain a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license for the purpose of temporarily driving, operating, drawing,
moving, or propelling any agricultural tractor or implement of husbandry upon a
street or highway at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less.
      (3)   No person shall drive, operate, draw, move, or propel any
agricultural tractor or implement of husbandry upon a street or highway at a
speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless the person has a current, valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license.
      (4)   No person having a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license
shall be required to have a motorcycle operator’s endorsement to operate a
motorcycle having three wheels with a motor of not more than 50 cubic
centimeters piston displacement.
      (5)   No person having a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license
shall be required to have a motorcycle operator’s endorsement to operate an
autocycle or a cab-enclosed motorcycle.
      (6)   Every person on active duty in the military or naval forces of the
United States, when furnished with a driver’s permit and when operating an
official motor vehicle in connection with such duty, is exempt from the license
requirements of Ohio R.C. Chapters 4506 and 4507. Every person on active duty
in the military or naval forces of the United States or in service with the
peace corps, volunteers in service to America, or the foreign service of the
United States, is exempt from the license requirements of such sections for the
period of the person’s active duty or service and for six months thereafter,
provided such person was a licensee under such sections at the time the person
commenced the person’s active duty or service. This section does not prevent
such a person or the person’s spouse or dependent from making an application,
as provided in Ohio R.C. 4507.10(C), for the renewal of a driver’s license or
motorcycle operator’s endorsement or as provided in Ohio R.C. 4506.14 for the
renewal of a commercial driver’s license during the period of the person’s
active duty or service.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (B)(3) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 4507.03)
   (C)   Nonresidents, permitted to drive upon the highways of their own state,
may operate any motor vehicle upon any highway in this state without
examination or license under Ohio R.C. 4507.01 to 4507.39, inclusive, upon
condition that such nonresident may be required at any time or place to prove
lawful possession or their right to operate such motor vehicle, and to
establish proper identity.
(ORC 4507.04)
   (D)   Surrender of driver’s license from another state.
      (1)   Any person who becomes a resident of this state, within 30 days of
becoming a resident, shall surrender any driver’s license issued by another
state to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a deputy registrar. If such a
person intends to operate a motor vehicle upon the public roads or highways,
the person shall apply for a driver’s license in this state. If the person
fails to apply for a driver’s license within 30 days of becoming a resident,
the person shall not operate any motor vehicle in this state under a license
issued by another state.
      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (D)(1) of this section is guilty of
a minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   The offense established under division (D)(2)(a) of this section
is a strict liability offense and strict liability is a culpable mental state
for purposes of R.C. § 2901.20. The designation of this offense as a strict
liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for
which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability
offense.
      (3)   For purposes of division (D)(1) of this section, “resident” means
any person to whom any of the following applies:
         (a)   The person maintains their principal residence in this state and
does not reside in this state as a result of the person’s active service in the
United States armed forces.
         (b)   The person is determined by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles to
be a resident in accordance with standards adopted by the Registrar under R.C.
§ 4507.01.
(R.C. § 4507.213)
§ 436.02  POSSESSION OF MORE THAN ONE LICENSE PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall receive a driver’s license, or a motorcycle operator’s
endorsement of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license, unless and until the
person surrenders to the Registrar all valid licenses issued to the person by
another jurisdiction recognized by this state.  The Registrar shall report the
surrender of a license to the issuing authority, together with information that
a license is now issued in this state.  The Registrar shall destroy any such
license that is not returned to the issuing authority. No person shall be
permitted to have more than one valid license at any time.
(ORC 4507.02(A)(2))
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 4507.99)
§ 436.03  DRIVING WITH TEMPORARY INSTRUCTION PERMIT.
   (A)   No holder of a temporary instruction permit issued under Ohio R.C.
4507.05(A) shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or
private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking
in violation of the conditions established under Ohio R.C. 4507.05(A).
   (B)   Except as provided in division (C) of this section, no holder of a
temporary instruction permit that is issued under Ohio R.C. 4507.05(A) and that
is issued on or after July 1, 1998, and who has not attained the age of 18
years, shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private
property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking between
the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m.
   (C)   The holder of a temporary instruction permit issued under Ohio R.C.
4507.05(A) on or after July 1, 1998, who has not attained the age of 18 years,
may operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or any public or private property
used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking between the
hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. if, at the time of such operation, the holder
is accompanied by the holder’s parent, guardian, or custodian, and the parent,
guardian, or custodian holds a current valid driver’s or commercial driver’s
license issued by this state, is actually occupying a seat beside the permit
holder, and does not have a prohibited concentration of alcohol in the whole
blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine as provided in Ohio R.C. 4511.19
(A).
(ORC 4507.05(F))
§ 436.035  DRIVING WITH PROBATIONARY LICENSE.
   (A)   (1)   (a)   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held
the license for less than 12 months shall operate a motor vehicle upon a
highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m. unless
the holder is accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian.
         (b)   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held the
license for 12 months or longer shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. unless the
holder is accompanied by the holder’s parent or guardian.
      (2)   (a)   Subject to division (C)(1) of this section, division (A)(1)
(a) of this section does not apply to the holder of a probationary driver’s
license who is doing either of the following:
            1.   Traveling to or from work between the hours of midnight and 6:
00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession
written documentation from the holder’s employer.
            2.   Traveling to or from an official function sponsored by the
school the holder attends between the hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., provided
that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession written documentation
from an appropriate official of the school;
            3.   Traveling to or from an official religious event between the
hours of midnight and 6:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s
immediate possession written documentation from an appropriate official
affiliated with the event.
         (b)   Division (A)(1)(b) of this section does not apply to the holder
of a probationary driver’s license who is doing either of the following:
            1.   Traveling to or from work between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and
5:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession
written documentation from the holder’s employer.
            2.   Traveling to or from an official function sponsored by the
school the holder attends between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m.,
provided that the holder has in the holder’s immediate possession written
documentation from an appropriate official of the school;
            3.   Traveling to or from an official religious event between the
hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m., provided that the holder has in the holder’s
immediate possession written documentation from an appropriate official
affiliated with the event.
      (3)   An employer, school official, or official affiliated with a
religious event is not liable in damages in a civil action for any injury,
death, or loss to person or property that allegedly arises from, or is related
to, the fact that the employer, school official, or official affiliated with a
religious event provided the holder of a probationary driver’s license with the
written documentation described in division (A)(2) of this section. The
Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall make available at no cost a form to serve as
the written documentation described in division (A)(2) of this section, and
employers, school officials, officials affiliated with religious events, and
holders of probationary driver’s licenses may utilize that form or may choose
to utilize any other written documentation to meet the requirements of that
division.
      (4)   No holder of a probationary driver’s license who has held the
license for less than 12 months shall operate a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking with more than one person who is not a family member
occupying the vehicle unless the probationary license holder is accompanied by
the probationary license holder’s parent, guardian, or custodian.
   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to a violation of division (A)(1)(a) or
(A)(1)(b) of this section if, at the time of the violation, an emergency
existed that required the holder of the probationary driver’s license to
operate a motor vehicle in violation of division (A)(1)(a) or (A)(1)(b) of this
section or the holder was an emancipated minor.
   (C)   (1)   If a person is issued a probationary driver’s license prior to
attaining the age of 17 years and the person pleads guilty to, is convicted of,
or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed a moving violation
during the six-month period commencing on the date on which the person is
issued the probationary driver’s license, the court with jurisdiction over the
violation may order that the holder must be accompanied by the holder’s parent
or guardian whenever the holder is operating a motor vehicle upon a highway or
any public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular
travel or parking for a period not to exceed six months or the date the holder
attains the age of 17 years, whichever occurs first.
      (2)   Any person who is subject to the operating restrictions established
under division (C)(1) of this section as a result of a first moving violation
may petition the court for driving privileges without being accompanied by the
holder’s parent or guardian during the period of time determined by the court
under that division. In granting the driving privileges, the court shall
specify the purposes of the privileges and shall issue the person appropriate
forms setting forth the privileges granted. If a person is convicted of, pleads
guilty to, or is adjudicated in juvenile court of having committed a second or
subsequent moving violation, the court with jurisdiction over the violation may
terminate any driving privileges previously granted under this division.
      (3)   No person shall violate any operating restriction imposed under
division (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this section.
   (D)   No holder of a probationary license shall operate a motor vehicle upon
a highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking unless the total number of occupants of the vehicle
does not exceed the total number of occupant restraining devices originally
installed in the motor vehicle by its manufacturer, and each occupant of the
vehicle is wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted
occupant restraining device.
   (E)   A restricted license may be issued to a person who is 14 or 15 years
of age under proof of hardship satisfactory to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles.
   (F)   Notwithstanding any other provisions of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether each occupant of the motor vehicle is wearing all of the
available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device as
required by division (D) of this section, or for the sole purpose of issuing a
ticket, citation or summons if that requirement has been or is being violated,
or for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a
violation of that requirement.
   (G)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of division (A)(1)(a) or (A)(1)(b) of this
section has been or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a
ticket, citation or summons for such a violation or for causing the arrest or
commencing a prosecution of a person for such a violation.
   (H)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Family member” of a probationary license holder includes any of
the following:
         (a)   A spouse;
         (b)   A child or stepchild;
         (c)   A parent, stepparent, grandparent, or parent-in-law;
         (d)   An aunt or uncle;
         (e)   A sibling, whether of the whole or half blood or by adoption, a
brother-in-law, or a sister- in-law;
         (f)   A son or daughter of the probationary license holder’s
stepparent if the stepparent has not adopted the probationary license holder;
         (g)   An eligible adult, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4507.05.
      (2)   “Moving violation” means any violation of any statute or ordinance
that regulates the operation of vehicles on the highways or streets. “Moving
violation” does not include a violation of Ohio R.C. 4513.263 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or a violation of any statute or
ordinance regulating pedestrians or the parking of vehicles, vehicle size or
load limitations, vehicle fitness requirements, or vehicle registration.
      (3)   “Occupant restraining device” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
4513.263.
(ORC 4507.071(B) - (I))
§ 436.04  CERTAIN ACTS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Display or cause or permit to be displayed, or possess any
identification card, driver’s or commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit
knowing the same to be fictitious, or to have been canceled, suspended, or
altered;
      (2)   Lend to a person not entitled thereto, or knowingly permit a person
not entitled thereto to use any identification card, driver’s or commercial
driver’s license, temporary instruction permit or commercial driver’s license
temporary instruction permit issued to the person so lending or permitting the
use thereof;
      (3)   Display, or represent as one’s own, any identification card,
driver’s or commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, or
commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit not issued to the
person so displaying the same;
      (4)   Fail to surrender to the Registrar of Motor Vehicles, upon the
Registrar’s demand, any identification card, driver’s or commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit that has been suspended or canceled;
      (5)   In any application for an identification card, driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit or any renewal or duplicate
thereof, knowingly conceal a material fact or present any physician’s statement
required under Ohio R.C. 4507.08 or 4507.081 when knowing the same to be false
or fictitious.
   (B)   Whoever violates any division of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 4507.30)
§ 436.05  OWNER OR OPERATOR ALLOWING ANOTHER TO DRIVE.
   (A)   No person shall permit a motor vehicle owned by the person or under
the person’s control to be driven by another if any of the following apply:
      (1)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person does not have a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit or valid nonresident driving privileges;
      (2)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident
operating privileges have been suspended or canceled under Ohio R.C. Chapter
4510 or any other provision of the Revised Code.
      (3)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s act of driving the motor vehicle would violate any prohibition
contained in Ohio R.C. Chapter 4509.
      (4)   The offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
other person’s act of driving would violate Ohio R.C. 4511.19 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (B)   Without limiting or precluding the consideration of any other evidence
in determining whether a violation of division (A)(1), (2), (3), or (4) of this
section has occurred, it shall be prima-facie evidence that the offender knows
or has reasonable cause to believe that the operator of the motor vehicle owned
by the offender or under the offender’s control is in a category described in
division (A)(1), (2), (3), or (4) of this section if any of the following
applies:
      (1)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (A)(1) or (3) of this section, the offender and the operator of the
motor vehicle reside in the same household and are related by consanguinity or
affinity.
      (2)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (A)(2) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor
vehicle reside in the same household, and the offender knows or has reasonable
cause to believe that the operator has been charged with or convicted of any
violation of law or ordinance, or has committed any other act or omission, that
would or could result in the suspension or cancellation of the operator’s
license, permit, or privilege.
      (3)   Regarding an operator allegedly in the category described in
division (A)(4) of this section, the offender and the operator of the motor
vehicle occupied the motor vehicle together at the time of the offense.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of wrongful entrustment of a
motor vehicle, and shall be punished as provided in divisions (C) to (H) of
this section.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this section, whoever
violates division (A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)(3) of this section is guilty of an
unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the
offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §
202.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
202.99(D) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
202.99(F)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
202.99(E)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
202.99(E)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   (a)   If, within three years of a violation of division (A)(1), (A)
(2), or (A)(3) of this section, the offender previously has pleaded guilty to
or been convicted of two or more violations of division (A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)
(3) of this section, R.C. § 4511.203(A)(1), (A)(2), or (A)(3), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) or (A)(5) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   For any violation of this section, in addition to the penalties
imposed under this Code or R.C. Chapter 2929, the court may impose a class
seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7), and, if
the vehicle involved in the offense is registered in the name of the offender,
the court may order one of the following:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3)(b) or (C)(3)(c)
of this section, the court may order, for 30 days, the immobilization of the
vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of that vehicle’s license
plates. If issued, the order shall be issued and enforced under R.C. §
4503.233.
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to one violation of this section, R.C. § 4511.203, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order, for 60 days, the
immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense and the impoundment of
that vehicle’s license plates. If issued, the order shall be issued and
enforced under R.C. § 4503.233.
         (c)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section, R.C. § 4511.203, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court may order the criminal
forfeiture to the state of the vehicle involved in the offense. If issued, the
order shall be issued and enforced under R.C. § 4503.234.
      (4)   If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to an order for
criminal forfeiture under division (C)(3)(c) of this section is assigned or
transferred and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, in addition to or
independent of any other penalty established by law, the court may fine the
offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of the National
Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds from any fine imposed under this
division shall be distributed in accordance with R.C. § 4503.234(C)(2).
   (D)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under division
(C)(3)(a) or (C)(3)(b) of this section, the court shall not release the vehicle
from the immobilization before the termination of the period of immobilization
ordered unless the court is presented with current proof of financial
responsibility with respect to that vehicle.
   (E)   If a court orders the criminal forfeiture of a vehicle under division
(C)(3)(c) of this section, upon receipt of the order from the court, neither
the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor any deputy registrar shall accept any
application for the registration or transfer of registration of any motor
vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the order. The period of denial
shall be five years after the date the order is issued, unless, during that
five-year period, the court with jurisdiction of the offense that resulted in
the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar of the
termination. If the court terminates the forfeiture and notifies the Registrar,
the Registrar shall take all necessary measures to permit the person to
register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to transfer the
registration of the vehicle.
   (F)   This section does not apply to motor vehicle rental dealers or motor
vehicle leasing dealers, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4549.65.
   (G)   Evidence of a conviction of, plea of guilty to, or adjudication as a
delinquent child for a violation of this section shall not be admissible as
evidence in any civil action that involves the offender or delinquent child who
is the subject of the conviction, plea, or adjudication and that arises from
the wrongful entrustment of a motor vehicle.
   (H)   As used in this section, a vehicle is owned by a person if, at the
time of a violation of this section, the vehicle is registered in the person’s
name.
(ORC 4511.203)
§ 436.06  DISPLAY OF LICENSE.
   (A)   The operator of a motor vehicle shall display the operator’s driver’s
license, or furnish satisfactory proof that the operator has a driver’s
license, upon demand of any peace officer or of any person damaged or injured
in any collision in which the licensee may be involved.  When a demand is
properly made, and  the operator has the operator’s driver’s license on or
about the operator’s person, the operator shall not refuse to display the
license.  A person’s failure to furnish satisfactory evidence that the person
is licensed under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507 when the person does not have the
person’s license on or about the person’s person shall be prima facie evidence
of the person’s not having obtained a driver’s license.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, whoever
violates this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
202.99, or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
202.99(D) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
202.99(F)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and notwithstanding §
202.99(E)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
202.99(E)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section,
R.C. § 4507.35, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 4507.35)
§ 436.071  DRIVING UNDER SUSPENSION OR IN VIOLATION OF LICENSE RESTRICTION.
   (A)   Driving under Suspension or in Violation of License Restriction.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(2) of this section, division (B)
of this section, §
436.074 and in R.C. §§ 4510.111 and 4510.16, no person whose driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege has
been suspended under any provision of the Revised Code, other than Ohio R.C.
Chapter 4509, or under any applicable law in any other jurisdiction in which
the person’s license or permit was issued shall operate any motor vehicle upon
the public roads and highways or upon any public or private property used by
the public for purposes of vehicular travel or parking within this municipality
during the period of suspension unless the person is granted limited driving
privileges and is operating the vehicle in accordance with the terms of the
limited driving privileges.
      (2)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking in this municipality  in violation of any restriction of the
person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit imposed under Ohio
R.C. 4506.10(D) or 4507.14.
      (3)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under
suspension at the time of the alleged violation of division (A)(1) of this
section or the person operated a motor vehicle in violation of a restriction at
the time of the alleged violation of division (A)(2) of this section. The
person charged with a violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section
may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.
      (4)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. The court may impose upon the
offender a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. §
4510.02(A)(7).
         (b)   1.   Except as provided in division (A)(4)(b)2. or (A)(4)(b)3.
of this section, the court, in addition to any other penalty that it imposes on
the offender and if the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111
or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court, in
addition to or independent of any other sentence that it imposes upon the
offender, may order the immobilization of the vehicle involved in the offense
for 30 days and the impoundment of that vehicle’s license plates for 30 days in
accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
            2.   If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to two violations of this section, or any combination of
two violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a
substantially similar municipal ordinance, the court, in addition to any other
sentence that it imposes on the offender, may order the immobilization of the
vehicle involved in the offense for 60 days and the impoundment of that
vehicle’s license plates for 60 days in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
            3.   If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to three or more violations of this section, or any
combination of three or more violations of this section or R.C. § 4510.11,
4510.111 or 4510.16, or of a substantially similar municipal ordinance, the
court, in addition to any other sentence that it imposes on the offender, may
order the criminal forfeiture of the vehicle involved in the offense to the
state.
      (5)   Any order for immobilization and impoundment under this section
shall be issued and enforced under R.C. §§ 4503.233 and 4507.02, as applicable.
The court shall not release a vehicle from immobilization ordered under this
section unless the court is presented with current proof of financial
responsibility with respect to that vehicle.
      (6)   Any order of criminal forfeiture under this section shall be issued
and enforced under R.C. § 4503.234. Upon receipt of the copy of the order from
the court, neither the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor a deputy registrar shall
accept any application for the registration or transfer of registration of any
motor vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the declaration of
forfeiture. The period of registration denial shall be five years after the
date of the order, unless, during that period, the court having jurisdiction of
the offense that led to the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the
registrar of the termination. The registrar then shall take necessary measures
to permit the person to register a vehicle owned or leased by the person or to
transfer registration of the vehicle.
      (7)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
202.99(F) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under this section.
(ORC 4510.11)
   (B)   Driving under Suspension in Violation of Other Provisions.
      (1)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking in this municipality whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license
has been suspended pursuant to R.C. § 2151.354, 2151.87, 2935.27, 3123.58,
4301.99, 4510.032, 4510.22, or 4510.33, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
      (2)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the Registrar of Motor Vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (B)(1) of this section may be admitted into evidence as
prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under suspension at the
time of the alleged violation of division (B)(1) of this section. The person
charged with a violation of division (B)(1) of this section may offer evidence
to rebut this prima facie evidence.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) of this section is guilty of
driving under suspension and shall be punished as provided in division (B)(3)
(a) or division (B)(3)(b) of this section.
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(3)(b) of this
section, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. The offender shall be
sentenced pursuant to §
202.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
202.99(D) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
202.99(F)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
202.99(E)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
202.99(E)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
         (b)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously
was convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of division (B)(1)
of this section, or any combination of two or more violations of division (B)
(1) of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree, and the offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. § 2929.28 in
an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident
or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s
operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense for
which the offender is sentenced under this section.
(ORC 4510.111)
   (C)   Repeat Traffic Offender; Point System Suspension. Any person whose
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privileges are suspended as a repeat traffic offender under R.C. § 4510.037 and
who, during the suspension, operates any motor vehicle upon any public roads
and highways is guilty of driving under a 12-point suspension, a misdemeanor of
the first degree. The court shall sentence the offender to a minimum term of
three days in jail. No court shall suspend the first three days of jail time
imposed pursuant to this division.
(ORC 4510.037(J))
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under division
(A) of this section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a
valid permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(ORC 4510.04)
§ 436.072  OPERATING MOTOR VEHICLE OR MOTORCYCLE WITHOUT VALID LICENSE.
   (A)   (1)   No person, except those expressly exempted under Ohio R.C.
4507.03, 4507.04, and 4507.05, shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public
road or highway or any public or private property used by the public for
purposes of vehicular travel or parking in this municipality unless the person
has a valid driver’s license issued under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507 or a
commercial driver’s license issued under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4506.
      (2)   No person, except a person expressly exempted under Ohio  R.C.
4507.03, 4507.04, and 4507.05, shall operate any motorcycle upon a public road
or highway or any public or private property used by the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking in this municipality unless the person has a valid
license as a motorcycle operator that was issued upon application by the
Registrar of Motor Vehicles under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507. The license shall be
in the form of an endorsement, as determined by the Registrar, upon a driver’s
or commercial driver’s license, if the person has a valid license to operate a
motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle, or in the form of a restricted
license as provided in Ohio R.C. 4507.14, if the person does not have a valid
license to operate a motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle.
   (B)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section may be admitted into
evidence as prima facie evidence that the person did not have either a valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license at the time of the alleged violation of
division (A)(1) of this section or a valid license as a motorcycle operator
either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or a restricted license at the time of the alleged violation of
division (A)(2) of this section. The person charged with a violation of
division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section may offer evidence to rebut this
prima facie evidence.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of operating a motor vehicle
or motorcycle without a valid license and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   If the trier of fact finds that the offender never has held a valid
driver’s or commercial driver’s license issued by this state or any other
jurisdiction, or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by the
offender, if the offender has never held a valid license as a motorcycle
operator, either in the form of an endorsement upon a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or in the form of a restricted license, except as otherwise
provided in this division, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. When the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
202.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to
2929.28, except that the offender shall not be sentenced to a jail term; the
offender shall not be sentenced to a community residential sanction pursuant to
§
202.99(D) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
202.99(F)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
202.99(E)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
202.99(E)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours.  The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.  If the offender
previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation of this
section or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit
or, in a case involving the operation of a motorcycle by the offender, the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license bearing the motorcycle
endorsement or the offender’s restricted license was expired at the time of the
offense, except as otherwise provided in this division, the offense is a minor
misdemeanor. If within three years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
   (D)   The court shall not impose a license suspension for a first violation
of this section or if more than three years have passed since the offender’s
last violation of Ohio R.C. 4510.12, this section, or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (E)   If the offender is sentenced under division (C)(2) of this section, if
within three years of the offense the offender previously was convicted of or
pleaded guilty to one or more violations of Ohio R.C. 4510.12, this section, or
a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance within the past three years, and
if the offender’s license was expired for more than six months at the time of
the offense, the court may impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s
driver license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit,
probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(7).
(ORC 4510.12)
§ 436.073  DRIVING UNDER OVI SUSPENSION.
   (A)   No person whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or
nonresident operating privilege has been suspended under Ohio R.C. 4511.19,
4511.191, or 4511.196 or under Ohio R.C. 4510.07 for a conviction of a
violation of a municipal OVI ordinance shall operate any motor vehicle upon the
public roads or highways within this municipality during the period of the
suspension.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of driving under OVI
suspension. The court shall sentence the offender under Ohio R.C. Chapter 2929,
subject to the differences authorized or required by this section.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2) or (3) of this
section, driving under OVI suspension is a misdemeanor of the first degree. The
court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         (a)   A mandatory jail term of three consecutive days. The three-day
term shall be imposed, unless, subject to division (C) of this section, the
court instead imposes a sentence of not less than 30 consecutive days of house
arrest with electronic monitoring. A period of house arrest with electronic
monitoring imposed under this division shall not exceed six months. If the
court imposes a mandatory three- day jail term under this division, the court
may impose a jail term in addition to that term, provided that in no case shall
the cumulative jail term imposed for the offense exceed six months;
         (b)   A fine of not less than $250 and not more than $1,000;
         (c)   A license suspension under division (E) of this section;
         (d)   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender’s name, immobilization for 30 days of the
offender’s vehicle and impoundment for 30 days of the identification license
plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization and impoundment shall be
issued and enforced in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.233.
      (2)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section or one
equivalent offense, driving under OVI suspension is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         (a)   A mandatory jail term of 10 consecutive days. Notwithstanding
the jail terms provided in Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28, the court may sentence
the offender to a longer jail term of not more than one year. The 10-day
mandatory jail term shall be imposed unless, subject to division (C) of this
section, the court instead imposes a sentence of not less than 90 consecutive
days of house arrest with electronic monitoring. The period of house arrest
with electronic monitoring shall not exceed one year;
         (b)   Notwithstanding the fines provided for in Ohio R.C. Chapter
2929, a fine of not less than $500 and not more than $2,500;
         (c)   A license suspension under division (E) of this section;
         (d)   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender’s name, immobilization of the offender’s
vehicle for 60 days and the impoundment for 60 days of the identification
license plates of that vehicle. The order for immobilization and impoundment
shall be issued and enforced in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.233.
      (3)   If, within six years of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section
or two or more equivalent offenses, driving under OVI suspension is a
misdemeanor. The court shall sentence the offender to all of the following:
         (a)   A mandatory jail term of 30 consecutive days. Notwithstanding
the jail terms provided in Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28, the court may sentence
the offender to a longer jail term of not more than one year. The court shall
not sentence the offender to a term of house arrest with electronic monitoring
in lieu of the mandatory portion of the jail term;
         (b)   Notwithstanding the fines set forth in Ohio R.C. Chapter 2929.,
a fine of not less than $500 and not more than $2,500;
         (c)   A license suspension under division (E) of this section;
         (d)   If the vehicle the offender was operating at the time of the
offense is registered in the offender’s name, criminal forfeiture to the state
of the offender’s vehicle. The order of criminal forfeiture shall be issued and
enforced in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.234. If title to a motor vehicle
that is subject to an order for criminal forfeiture under this division is
assigned or transferred and Ohio R.C. 4503.234(B)(2) or (3) applies, the court
may fine the offender the value of the vehicle as determined by publications of
the National Automobile Dealers Association. The proceeds from any fine so
imposed shall be distributed in accordance with division Ohio R.C. 4503.234(C)
(2).
   (C)   (1)   No court shall impose an alternative sentence of house arrest
with electronic monitoring under division (B)(1) or (2) of this section unless,
within 60 days of the date of sentencing, the court issues a written finding on
the record that, due to the unavailability of space at the jail where the
offender is required to serve the jail term imposed, the offender will not be
able to begin serving that term within the 60-day period following the date of
sentencing.
      (2)   An offender sentenced under this section to a period of house
arrest with electronic monitoring shall be permitted work release during that
period.
   (D)   Fifty percent of any fine imposed by a court under division (B)(1),
(2), or (3) of this section shall be deposited into the Municipal Indigent
Drivers’ Alcohol Treatment Fund under the control of that court, as created by
the municipality pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4511.191(H).
   (E)   In addition to or independent of all other penalties provided by law
or ordinance, the trial judge of any court of record or the mayor of a mayor’s
court shall impose on an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of this section a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(7).
      (1)   When permitted as specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.021, if the court
grants limited driving privileges during a suspension imposed under this
section, the privileges shall be granted on the additional condition that the
offender must display restricted license plates, issued under Ohio R.C.
4503.231, on the vehicle driven subject to the privileges, except as provided
in Ohio R.C. 4503.231(B).
      (2)   A suspension of a commercial driver’s license under this section
shall be concurrent with any period of suspension or disqualification under
Ohio R.C. 3123.58 or 4506.16. No person who is disqualified for life from
holding a commercial driver’s license under Ohio R.C. 4506.16 shall be issued a
driver’s license under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period for which the
commercial driver’s license was suspended under this section, and no person
whose commercial driver’s license is suspended under this section shall be
issued a driver’s license under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507 during the period of the
suspension.
   (F)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
202.99(F) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense that is a misdemeanor of the first degree under this
section for which the offender is sentenced.
   (G)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Electronic monitoring” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
2929.01.
      (2)   “Equivalent offense” means any of the following:
         (a)   A violation of a municipal ordinance, law of another state, or
law of the United States that is substantially equivalent to division (A) of
this section;
         (b)   A violation of a former law of this state that was substantially
equivalent to division (A) of this section.
      (3)   “Jail” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2929.01.
      (4)   “Mandatory jail term” means the mandatory term in jail of 3, 10, or
30 consecutive days that must be imposed under division (B)(1), (2), or (3) of
this section upon an offender convicted of a violation of division (A) of this
section and in relation to which all of the following apply:
         (a)   Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term
must be served in a jail.
         (b)   Except as specifically authorized under this section, the term
cannot be suspended, reduced, or otherwise modified pursuant to any provision
of the Ohio Revised Code.
(ORC 4510.14)
   (H)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(ORC 4510.04)
Statutory reference:
   Immobilization of vehicle; impoundment of license plates; criminal
forfeiture of vehicle, see Ohio R.C. 4510.161
§ 436.074  DRIVING UNDER FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY LAW SUSPENSION OR
CANCELLATION; DRIVING UNDER A NONPAYMENT OF JUDGMENT SUSPENSION.
   (A)   No person, whose driver’s or commercial driver’s license or temporary
instruction permit or nonresident’s operating privilege has been suspended or
canceled pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 4509, shall operate any motor vehicle
within this municipality, or knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned by the
person to be operated by another person in the municipality, during the period
of the suspension or cancellation, except as specifically authorized by Ohio
R.C. Chapter 4509. No person shall operate a motor vehicle within this
municipality, or knowingly permit any motor vehicle owned by the person to be
operated by another person in the municipality, during the period in which the
person is required by Ohio R.C. 4509.45 to file and maintain proof of financial
responsibility for a violation of Ohio R.C. 4509.101, unless proof of financial
responsibility is maintained with respect to that vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle upon a highway or any public
or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking in this municipality if the person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or temporary instruction permit or nonresident operating privilege has
been suspended pursuant to R.C. § 4509.37 or 4509.40 for nonpayment of a
judgment.
   (C)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (A) or (B) of this section may be admitted into evidence
as prima facie evidence that the license of the person was under either a
financial responsibility law suspension at the time of the alleged violation of
division (A) of this section or a nonpayment of judgment suspension at the time
of the alleged violation of division (B) of this section. The person charged
with a violation of division (A) or (B) of this section may offer evidence to
rebut this prima facie evidence.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of driving
under financial responsibility law suspension or cancellation and shall be
punished as provided in divisions (D) to (I) of this section. Whoever violates
division (B) of this section is guilty of driving under a nonpayment of
judgment suspension and shall be punished as provided in divisions (D) to (I)
of this section.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (D)(2) of this
section, the offense is an unclassified misdemeanor. When the offense is an
unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced pursuant to §
202.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
202.99(D) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
202.99(F)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
202.99(E)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
202.99(E)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of the offense, the offender previously was
convicted of or pleaded guilty to two or more violations of this section, or
any combination of two violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or
4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the offense is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to R.C. § 2929.28 in
an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss arising from an accident
or collision that was the direct and proximate result of the offender’s
operation of the vehicle before, during, or after committing the offense for
which the offender is sentenced under this section.
   (E)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
202.99(F) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense for which the offender is sentenced under this section.
   (F)   The court may impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege from the range of time specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
   (G)   (1)   If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if,
within three years of the offense, the offender previously has been convicted
of or pleaded guilty to one violation of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111
or 4510.16, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, the court, in
addition to or independent of any other sentence that it imposes upon the
offender, may order the immobilization for 30 days of the vehicle involved in
the offense and the impoundment for 30 days of the license plates of that
vehicle in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
      (2)   If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if, within
three years of the offense, the offender has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two violations of division this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or
4510.16, or any combination of two violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.11,
4510.111 or 4510.16, or a substantially similar municipal ordinance, the court,
in addition to or independent of any other sentence that it imposes on the
offender, may order the immobilization for 60 days of the vehicle involved in
the offense and the impoundment for 60 days of the license plates of that
vehicle in accordance with R.C. § 4503.233.
      (3)   If the vehicle is registered in the offender’s name and if, within
three years of the offense, the offender has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to three or more violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.11, 4510.111 or
4510.16, or any combination of three or more violations of this section, R.C. §
4510.11, 4510.111 or 4510.16, or a substantially similar municipal ordinance,
the court, in addition to or independent of any other sentence that it imposes
upon the offender, may order the criminal forfeiture to the state of the
vehicle involved in the offense. If title to a motor vehicle that is subject to
an order for criminal forfeiture under this division is assigned or transferred
and R.C. § 4503.234(B)(2) or (B)(3) applies, in addition to or independent of
any other penalty established by law, the court may fine the offender the value
of the vehicle as determined by publications of the national automobile dealers
association. The proceeds from any fine so imposed shall be distributed in
accordance with R.C. § 4503.234(C)(2).
   (H)   Any order for immobilization and impoundment under this section shall
be issued and enforced in accordance with R.C. §§ 4503.233 and 4507.02, as
applicable. The court shall not release a vehicle from immobilization ordered
under this section unless the court is presented with current proof of
financial responsibility with respect to that vehicle.
   (I)   An order for criminal forfeiture under this section shall be issued
and enforced under R.C. § 4503.234. Upon receipt of a copy of the order from
the court, neither the Registrar of Motor Vehicles nor a deputy registrar shall
accept any application for the registration or transfer of registration of any
motor vehicle owned or leased by the person named in the declaration of
forfeiture. The period of registration denial shall be five years after the
date of the order unless, during that period, the court having jurisdiction of
the offense that led to the order terminates the forfeiture and notifies the
registrar of the termination. The registrar then shall take the necessary
measures to permit the person to register a vehicle owned or leased by the
person or to transfer registration of the vehicle.
(ORC 4510.16)
   (J)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(ORC 4510.04)
Statutory reference:
   Immobilization of vehicle; impoundment of license plates; criminal
forfeiture of vehicle, see Ohio R.C. 4510.161
§ 436.075  FAILURE TO REINSTATE LICENSE.
   (A)   No person whose driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, or nonresident’s operating privilege has been
suspended shall operate any motor vehicle upon a public road or highway or any
public or private property after the suspension has expired unless the person
has complied with all license reinstatement requirements imposed by the court,
the Bureau of Motor Vehicles, or another provision of the Ohio Revised Code.
   (B)   Upon the request or motion of the prosecuting authority, a
noncertified copy of the law enforcement automated data system report or a
noncertified copy of a record of the registrar of motor vehicles that shows the
name, date of birth, and social security number of a person charged with a
violation of division (A) of this section may be admitted into evidence as
prima facie evidence that the license of the person had not been reinstated by
the person at the time of the alleged violation of division (A) of this
section. The person charged with a violation of division (A) of this section
may offer evidence to rebut this prima facie evidence.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to reinstate a
license, and shall be punished as follows:
      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this section, whoever
violates this section is guilty of an unclassified misdemeanor. When the
offense is an unclassified misdemeanor, the offender shall be sentenced
pursuant to §
202.99 or R.C. §§ 2929.21 to 2929.28, except that the offender shall not be
sentenced to a jail term; the offender shall not be sentenced to a community
residential sanction pursuant to §
202.99(D) or R.C. § 2929.26; notwithstanding §
202.99(F)(1)(b)1. and R.C. § 2929.28(A)(2)(a), the offender may be fined up to
$1,000; and, notwithstanding §
202.99(E)(1)(c) and R.C. § 2929.27(A)(3), the offender may be ordered pursuant
to §
202.99(E)(3) or R.C. § 2929.27(C) to serve a term of community service of up to
500 hours. The failure of an offender to complete a term of community service
imposed by the court may be punished as indirect criminal contempt under R.C. §
2705.02(A) that may be filed in the underlying case.
      (2)   If, within three years of a violation of division (A) of this
section, the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of two
or more violations of this section, R.C. § 4510.21 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (3)   In all cases, the court may impose upon the offender a class seven
suspension of the offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license,
temporary instruction permit, probationary driver’s license, or nonresident
operating privilege from the range specified in R.C. § 4510.02(A)(7).
(ORC 4510.21)
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to any prosecution brought under this
section that the alleged offender drove under suspension, without a valid
permit or driver’s or commercial driver’s license, or in violation of a
restriction because of a substantial emergency, and because no other person was
reasonably available to drive in response to the emergency.
(ORC 4510.04)
§ 436.08  OPERATION OR SALE WITHOUT CERTIFICATE OF TITLE.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate in this municipality a motor vehicle for which a
certificate of title is required without having that certificate in accordance
with Ohio R.C. Chapter 4505 or, if a physical certificate of title has not been
issued for a motor vehicle, operate the motor vehicle in this state knowing
that the ownership information relating to the vehicle has not been entered
into the automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of Common
Pleas;
      (2)   Display or display for sale or sell as a dealer or acting on behalf
of a dealer, a motor vehicle without having obtained a manufacturer’s or
importer’s certificate, a certificate of title, or an assignment of a
certificate of title for it as provided in Ohio R.C. Chapter 4505;
      (3)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title or any certificate of
registration or license plates upon cancellation of the same by the Registrar
of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as prescribed in Ohio R.C.
Chapter 4505;
      (4)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of a  Court
of Common Pleas as provided in Ohio R.C. Chapter 4505 in case of the
destruction or dismantling or change of a motor vehicle in such respect that it
is not the motor vehicle described in the certificate of title;
      (5)   Violate any rules adopted pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 4505;
      (6)   Except as otherwise provided in Ohio R.C. Chapters 4505 and 4517,
sell at wholesale a motor vehicle ownership of which is not evidenced by an
Ohio certificate of title, or the current certificate of title issued for the
motor vehicle, or the manufacturer’s certificate of origin, and all title
assignments that evidence the seller’s ownership of the motor vehicle, and an
odometer disclosure statement that complies with Ohio R.C. 4505.06 and
subchapter IV of the “Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act,” 86 Stat.
961 (1972), 15 U.S.C. 1981;
      (7)   Operate in this state a motor vehicle knowing that the certificate
of title to the vehicle or ownership of the vehicle as otherwise reflected in
the automated title processing system has been canceled.
   (B)   This section does not apply to persons engaged in the business of
warehousing or transporting motor vehicles for the purpose of salvage
disposition.
(ORC 4505.18)
§ 436.09  DISPLAY OF LICENSE PLATES; REGISTRATION; OBSTRUCTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   No person who is the owner or operator of a motor vehicle shall
fail to display in plain view on the front and rear of the motor vehicle a
license plate that bears the distinctive number and registration mark assigned
to the motor vehicle by the Ohio Director of Public Safety, including any
county identification sticker and any validation sticker issued under R.C. §§
4503.19 and 4503.191, except as follows:
         (a)   A manufacturer of motor vehicles or dealer therein, the holder
of an in transit permit, and the owner or operator of a motorcycle, motorized
bicycle or moped, motor-driven cycle or motor scooter, autocycle, cab-enclosed
motorcycle, manufactured home, mobile home, trailer, or semitrailer shall
display a license plate on the rear only.
         (b)   A motor vehicle that is issued two license plates shall display
the validation sticker only on the rear license plate, except that a commercial
tractor that does not receive an apportioned license plate under the
international registration plan shall display the validation sticker on the
front of the commercial tractor.
         (c)   An apportioned vehicle receiving an apportioned license plate
under the international registration plan shall display the license plate only
on the front of a commercial tractor and on the rear of all other vehicles.
      (2)   All license plates shall be securely fastened so as not to swing,
and shall not be covered by any material that obstructs their visibility.
      (3)   No person to whom a temporary license placard or windshield sticker
has been issued for the use of a motor vehicle under R.C. § 4503.182, and no
operator of that motor vehicle, shall fail to display the temporary license
placard in plain view from the rear of the vehicle either in the rear window or
on an external rear surface of the motor vehicle, or fail to display the
windshield sticker in plain view on the rear window of the motor vehicle. No
temporary license placard or windshield sticker shall be covered by any
material that obstructs its visibility.
      (4)   A law enforcement officer shall only issue a ticket, citation, or
summons, or cause the arrest or commence a prosecution, for the failure to
display a license plate in plain view on the front of a parked motor vehicle if
the officer first determines that another offense has occurred and either
places the operator or vehicle owner under arrest or issues a ticket, citation,
or summons to the operator or vehicle owner for the other offense.
(ORC 4503.21(A), (B))
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided by R.C. §§ 4503.103, 4503.173, 4503.41,
4503.43 and 4503.46, no person who is the owner or chauffeur of a motor vehicle
operated or driven upon the public roads or highways shall fail to file
annually the application for registration or to pay the tax therefor.
(ORC 4503.11(A))
   (C)   (1)   Within 30 days of becoming a resident of this state, any person
who owns a motor vehicle operated or driven upon the public roads or highways
shall register the vehicle in this state. If such a person fails to register a
vehicle owned by the person, the person shall not operate any motor vehicle in
this state under a license issued by another state.
      (2)   For purposes of division (C)(1) of this section, “resident” means
any person to whom any of the following applies:
         (a)   The person maintains their principal residence in this state and
does not reside in this state as a result of the person’s active service in the
United States armed forces.
         (b)   The person is determined by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles to
be a resident in accordance with standards adopted by the Registrar under R.C.
§ 4507.01.
(ORC 4503.111(A), (C))
   (D)   Upon the transfer of ownership of a motor vehicle, the registration of
the motor vehicle expires, and the original owner immediately shall remove the
license plates from the motor vehicle, except as otherwise provided in R.C. §
4503.12.
(R.C. § 4503.12(A))
   (E)   No person shall operate or drive upon the highways of this
municipality a motor vehicle acquired from a former owner who has registered
the motor vehicle, while the motor vehicle displays the distinctive number or
identification mark assigned to it upon its original registration.
(ORC 4549.11(A))
   (F)   No person who is the owner of a motor vehicle and a resident of this
state shall operate or drive the motor vehicle upon the highways of this
municipality while it displays a distinctive number or identification mark
issued by or under the authority of another state, without complying with the
laws of this state relating to the registration and identification of motor
vehicles.
(ORC 4549.12(A))
   (G)   (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (G)(1)(b),
whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section by failing to
display a license plate in plain view on the front of a motor vehicle as
required under division (a) of this section while the motor vehicle is
otherwise legally parked is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and may be fined not
more than $100. A person who is subject to the penalty prescribed in this
division (G)(1)(b) is not subject to the charging of points under R.C. §
4510.036.
         (c)   The offense established under division (a) of this section is a
strict liability offense and R.C. § 2901.20 does not apply. The designation of
this offense as a strict liability offense shall not be construed to imply that
any other offense, for which there is no specified degree of culpability, is
not a strict liability offense.
(ORC 4503.21(C))
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(ORC 4503.11(D))
      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   The offense established under division (G)(3)(a) of this section
is a strict liability offense and strict liability is a culpable mental state
for purposes of R.C. § 2901.20. The designation of this offense as a strict
liability offense shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for
which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability
offense.
(ORC 4503.111(B))
      (4)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(R.C. § 4503.12(D))
      (5)   Whoever violates division (E) of this section is guilty of
operation of a motor vehicle bearing license plates or an identification mark
issued to another, a minor misdemeanor on a first offense and a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree on each subsequent offense.
(ORC 4549.11(B))
      (6)   Whoever violates division (F) of this section is guilty of illegal
operation by a resident of this state of a motor vehicle bearing the
distinctive number or identification mark issued by a foreign jurisdiction, a
minor misdemeanor.
(ORC 4549.12(B))
§ 436.10  USE OF ILLEGAL LICENSE PLATES; LOANS OR SALES.
   (A)   No person shall operate or drive a motor vehicle upon the public roads
and highways in this municipality if it displays a license plate or a
distinctive number or identification mark that meets any of the following
criteria:
      (1)   It is fictitious;
      (2)   It is a counterfeit or an unlawfully made copy of any distinctive
number or identification mark;
      (3)   It belongs to another motor vehicle, provided that this section
does not apply to a motor vehicle that is operated on the public roads and
highways in this municipality when the motor vehicle displays license plates
that originally were issued for a motor vehicle that previously was owned by
the same person who owns the motor vehicle that is operated on the public roads
and highways in this municipality during the 30-day period described in Ohio
R.C. 4503.12(A)(4).
   (B)   A person who fails to comply with the transfer of registration
provisions of Ohio R.C. 4503.12 and is charged with a violation of that section
shall not be charged with a violation of this section.
(ORC 4549.08)  (Adopting Ordinance)
   (C)   No person shall loan, sell, give away or otherwise traffic in any
number of license plates issued by other states or other duly authorized
governmental agencies in connection with the registration of a motor vehicle,
provided, however, that nothing herein shall be deemed to apply to the issuance
of numbered license plates pursuant to law.
§ 436.11  FAILURE TO STOP AFTER ACCIDENT.
   (A)   (1)   In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision with
persons or property on a public road or highway, the operator of the motor
vehicle, having knowledge of the accident or collision, immediately shall stop
the operator’s motor vehicle at the scene of the accident or collision. The
operator shall remain at the scene of the accident or collision until the
operator has given the operator’s name and address and, if the operator is not
the owner, the name and address of the owner of that motor vehicle, together
with the registered number of that motor vehicle, to all of the following:
         (a)   Any person injured in the accident or collision;
         (b)   The operator, occupant, owner, or attendant of any motor vehicle
damaged in the accident or collision;
         (c)   The police officer at the scene of the accident or collision.
      (2)   In the event an injured person is unable to comprehend and record
the information required to be given under division (A)(1) of this section, the
other operator involved in the accident or collision shall notify the nearest
police authority concerning the location of the accident or collision, and the
operator’s name, address, and the registered number of the motor vehicle the
operator was operating. The operator shall remain at the scene of the accident
or collision until a police officer arrives, unless removed from the scene by
an emergency vehicle operated by a political subdivision or an ambulance.
      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended
motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely
attach the information required to be given in this section, in writing, to a
conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor vehicle.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after an accident. Except as otherwise provided in division (B)
(2) or (B)(3) of this section, failure to stop after an accident is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the accident or collision results in serious physical harm to a
person, failure to stop after an accident is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the accident or collision results in the death of a person,
failure to stop after an accident is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   In all cases, the court, in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction
permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range
specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(5). No judge shall suspend the first six
months of suspension of an offender’s license, permit, or privilege required by
this division.
      (5)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in Ohio R.C. 4509.01. If the offender fails to
provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense charged under this section.
(ORC 4549.02)
§ 436.12  STOPPING AFTER ACCIDENT ON OTHER THAN PUBLIC ROADS OR HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   (1)   In the case of a motor vehicle accident or collision resulting
in injury or damage to persons or property on any public or private property
other than a public road or highway, the operator of the motor vehicle, having
knowledge of the accident or collision, shall stop at the scene of the accident
or collision. Upon request of any person who is injured or damaged, or any
other person, the operator shall give that person the operator’s name and
address, and, if the operator is not the owner, the name and address of the
owner of that motor vehicle, together with the registered number of that motor
vehicle, and, if available, exhibit the operator’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license.
      (2)   If the operator of the motor vehicle involved in the accident or
collision does not provide the information specified in division (A)(1) of this
section, the operator shall give that information, within 24 hours after the
accident or collision, to the police department of the city or village in which
the accident or collision occurred, or if it occurred outside the corporate
limits of a city or village, to the sheriff of the county in which the accident
or collision occurred.
      (3)   If the accident or collision is with an unoccupied or unattended
motor vehicle, the operator who collides with the motor vehicle shall securely
attach the information required under division (A)(1) of this section, in
writing, to a conspicuous place in or on the unoccupied or unattended motor
vehicle.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident. Except as otherwise provided
in division (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this section, failure to stop after a nonpublic
road accident is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the accident or collision results in serious physical harm to a
person, failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the accident or collision results in the death of a person,
failure to stop after a nonpublic road accident is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
      (4)   In all cases, the court, in addition to any other penalties
provided by law, shall impose upon the offender a class five suspension of the
offender’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, probationary license, or nonresident operating privilege
from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(5). No judge shall suspend the
first six months of suspension of an offender’s license, permit, or privilege
required by this division.
      (5)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in Ohio R.C. 4509.01. If the offender fails to
provide that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 2929.18 or 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic loss
arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate result
of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or after
committing the offense charged under this section.
(ORC 4549.021)
§ 436.13  VEHICLE ACCIDENT RESULTING IN DAMAGE TO REALTY.
   (A)   (1)   The driver of any vehicle involved in an accident resulting in
damage to real property, or personal property attached to real property,
legally upon or adjacent to a public road or highway immediately shall stop and
take reasonable steps to locate and notify the owner or person in charge of the
property of that fact, of the driver’s name and address, and of the
registration number of vehicle the driver is driving and, upon request and if
available, shall exhibit the driver’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license.
      (2)   If the owner or person in charge of the property cannot be located
after reasonable search, the driver of the vehicle involved in the accident
resulting in damage to the property, within 24 hours after the accident, shall
forward to the police department of the municipality the same information
required to be given to the owner or person in control of the property and give
the location of the accident and a description of the damage insofar as it is
known.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
failure to stop after an accident involving the property of others, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   The offender shall provide the court with proof of financial
responsibility as defined in R.C. § 4509.01. If the offender fails to provide
that proof of financial responsibility, then, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the court may order restitution pursuant to §
202.99(F) or R.C. § 2929.28 in an amount not exceeding $5,000 for any economic
loss arising from an accident or collision that was the direct and proximate
result of the offender’s operation of the motor vehicle before, during, or
after committing the offense charged under this section.
(ORC 4549.03)
§ 436.14  REMOVAL OF DAMAGED VEHICLE.
   Any person driving a vehicle which has become involved in an accident, and
any person authorized to remove a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a street,
shall remove all glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the street
from the vehicle.
§ 436.15  REMOVAL OF VEHICLES AFTER ACCIDENTS.
   (A)   If a motor vehicle accident occurs on any highway, public street, or
other property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel and if any
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property that has been  damaged or spilled as
a result of the motor vehicle accident is blocking the highway, street, or
other property or is otherwise endangering public safety, a public safety
official may do either of the following without the consent of the owner but
with the approval of the law enforcement agency conducting any investigation of
the accident:
      (1)   Remove, or order the removal of, the motor vehicle if the motor
vehicle is unoccupied, cargo, or personal property from the portion of the
highway, public street, or property ordinarily used for vehicular travel on the
highway, public street, or other property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel.
      (2)   If the motor vehicle is a commercial motor vehicle, allow the owner
or operator of the vehicle the opportunity to arrange for the removal of the
motor vehicle within a period of time specified by the public safety official.
If the public safety official determines that the motor vehicle cannot be
removed within the specified period of time, the public safety official shall
remove or order the removal of the motor vehicle.
   (B)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, the
Department of Transportation, any employee of the Department of Transportation,
or a public safety official who authorizes or participates in the removal of
any unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property as authorized by
division (A) of this section, regardless of whether the removal is executed by
a private towing service, is not liable for civil damages for any injury,
death, or loss to person or property that results from the removal of that
unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property. Further, except as
provided in division (B)(2) of this section, if a public safety official
authorizes, employs, or arranges to have a private towing service remove any
unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property as authorized by division
(A) of this section, that private towing service is not liable for civil
damages for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that results from
the removal of that unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property.
      (2)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
         (a)   Any person or entity involved in the removal of an unoccupied
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property pursuant to division (A) of this
section if that removal causes or contributes to the release of a hazardous
material or to structural damage to the roadway;
         (b)   A private towing service that was not authorized, employed, or
arranged by a public safety official to remove an unoccupied motor vehicle,
cargo, or personal property under this section;
         (c)   Except as provided in division (B)(2)(d) of this section, a
private towing service that was authorized, employed, or arranged by a public
safety official to perform the removal of the unoccupied motor vehicle, cargo,
or personal property but the private towing service performed the removal in a
negligent manner;
         (d)   A private towing service that was authorized, employed, or
arranged by a public safety official to perform the removal of the unoccupied
motor vehicle, cargo, or personal property that was endangering public safety
but the private towing service performed the removal in a reckless manner.
   (C)   As used in divisions (A) and (B) of this section:
      (1)   “Hazardous material” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2305.232.
      (2)   “Public safety official” means any of the following:
         (a)   The sheriff of the county, or the chief of police in the
municipal corporation, township, or township, port authority, or joint police
district, in which the accident occurred;
         (b)   A state highway patrol trooper;
         (c)   The chief of the fire department having jurisdiction where the
accident occurred;
         (d)   A duly authorized subordinate acting on behalf of an official
specified in divisions (a) to C. of this definition.
(ORC 4513.66)
   (D)   If a towing service is removing a motor vehicle, and the removal was
not authorized under Ohio R.C. 4513.60, 4513.601, 4513.61, or 4513.66, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, prior to removing the motor
vehicle, the towing service shall provide a written estimate of the price for
the removal to the operator of the motor vehicle, if requested.
   (E)   The towing service shall ensure that any estimate provided under
division (D) of this section includes the fees, services to be rendered, and
destination of the vehicle.
   (F)   If a towing service fails to provide a written estimate as required by
this section, the towing service shall not charge fees for the towing and
storage of the motor vehicle that exceed 25% of any applicable fees established
by the public utilities commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25(B)(4)
or, if the vehicle was towed within a municipal corporation that has
established vehicle removal and storage fees, 25% of the fees established by
the municipal corporation.
   (G)   Any storage facility that accepts towed vehicles shall conspicuously
post a notice at the entrance to the storage facility that states the
limitation on fees established under division (F) of this section.
(ORC 4513.68)
§ 436.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
404.99 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 438:  SAFETY AND EQUIPMENT
Section
438.01   Driving unsafe vehicles; application
438.02   Lighted lights; measurement of distances and heights
438.03   Headlights on motor vehicles and motorcycles
438.04   Tail light; illumination of rear license plate   
438.05   Rear red reflectors
438.06   Safety lighting on commercial vehicles
438.07   Obscured lights on vehicles in combination
438.08   Red light or red flag on extended loads
438.09   Lights on parked or stopped vehicles
438.10   Lights on slow-moving vehicles; emblem required; lights and reflectors
on multi-wheel agricultural tractors or farm machinery
438.11   Spotlight and auxiliary lights
438.12   Cowl, fender and back-up lights
438.13   Two lights displayed
438.14   Use of headlight beams
438.15   Lights of less intensity on slow-moving vehicles
438.16   Number of lights permitted; red and flashing lights
438.165   Lights and sound-producing devices on coroners’ vehicles
438.17   Vehicles transporting preschool children
438.18   Focus and aim of headlights
438.19   Motor vehicle and motorcycle brakes
438.20   Horn, siren and theft alarm signal
438.21   Muffler; muffler cutout; excessive smoke, gas or noise
438.22   Rear-view mirror; clear view to front, both sides and rear
438.23   Windshield required; sign or poster upon windshield; windshield wiper
438.235   Tinted glass; materials on glass
438.24   Limited load extension on left side of passenger vehicle
438.25   Motor vehicle stop lights
438.26   Bumpers
438.27   Air cleaner required
438.28   Boarding or leaving moving vehicle
438.29   Use of child restraints
438.30   Use of occupant restraining devices
438.32   Air bags
438.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Bicycle equipment, see §
474.05
   Improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle, see §
672.04
   Occupying travel trailers while in motion, see §
440.08
   Snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle and all-purpose vehicle equipment, see §
476.02
   Towing requirements; exception to size and weight restrictions, see §
440.05
   Use of stop and turn signals, see §
432.13
   Vehicles transporting explosives, see §
440.04
   Wheel protectors for commercial vehicles, see §
440.03
Statutory reference:
   Collector’s vehicles, see Ohio R.C. 4513.38, 4513.41
   Warning devices for commercial vehicles disabled upon freeways, see Ohio
R.C. 4513.28
§ 438.01  DRIVING UNSAFE VEHICLES; APPLICATION.
   (A)   No person shall drive or move, or cause or knowingly permit to be
driven or moved, on any highway any vehicle or combination of vehicles which is
in such unsafe condition as to endanger any person.
(ORC 4513.02)
   (B)   Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to prohibit the
use of additional parts and accessories on any vehicle not inconsistent with
the provisions of this chapter.
§ 438.02  LIGHTED LIGHTS; MEASUREMENT OF DISTANCES AND HEIGHTS.
   (A)   Every vehicle, other than a motorized bicycle, operated upon a street
or highway within this state shall display lighted lights and illuminating
devices as required by Ohio R.C. 4513.04 through 4513.37 during all of the
following times:
      (1)   The time from sunset to sunrise;
      (2)   At any other time when, due to insufficient natural light or
unfavorable atmospheric conditions, persons, vehicles, and substantial objects
on the highway are not discernible at a distance of 1,000 feet ahead;
      (3)   At any time when the windshield wipers of the vehicle are in use
because of precipitation on the windshield.
   (B)   Every motorized bicycle shall display at such times lighted lights
meeting the rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety under Ohio R.C.
4511.521. No motor vehicle, during any time specified in this section, shall be
operated upon a street or highway within this state using only parking lights
as illumination.
   (C)   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the distance
from which certain lamps and devices shall render objects visible, or within
which such lamps or devices shall be visible, such distance shall be measured
upon a straight level unlighted highway under normal atmospheric conditions
unless a different condition is expressly stated.
   (D)   Whenever in such sections a requirement is declared as to the mounted
height of lights or devices, it shall mean from the center of such light or
device to the level ground upon which the vehicle stands.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause the operator of a vehicle being operated upon a
street or highway within this state to stop the vehicle solely because the
officer observes that a violation of division (A)(3) of this section has been
or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of that division, or causing the arrest of or
commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of that division.
(ORC 4513.03)
§ 438.03  HEADLIGHTS ON MOTOR VEHICLES AND MOTORCYCLES.
   (A)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, shall be equipped with
at least two headlights with at least one near each side of the front of the
motor vehicle.
   (B)   Every motorcycle shall be equipped with at least one and not more than
two headlights.
(ORC 4513.04)
§ 438.04  TAIL LIGHT; ILLUMINATION OF REAR LICENSE PLATE.
   (A)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer or vehicle
which is being drawn at the end of a train of vehicles shall be equipped with
at least one tail light mounted on the rear which, when lighted, shall emit a
red light visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear, provided that in the
case of a train of vehicles only the tail light on the rearmost vehicle need be
visible from the distance specified.
   (B)   Either a tail light or a separate light shall be so constructed and
placed as to illuminate with a white light the rear registration plate, when
such registration plate is required, and render it legible from a distance of
50 feet to the rear.  Any tail light, together with any separate light for
illuminating the rear registration plate, shall be so wired as to be lighted
whenever the headlights or auxiliary driving lights are lighted, except where
separate lighting systems are provided for trailers for the purpose of
illuminating such registration plate.
(ORC 4513.05)
§ 438.05  REAR RED REFLECTORS.
   (A)   Every new motor vehicle sold after September 6, 1941, and operated on
a highway, other than a commercial tractor to which a trailer or semitrailer is
attached, shall carry at the rear, either as a part of the tail lamps or
separately, two red reflectors meeting the requirements of this section, except
that vehicles of the type mentioned in Ohio R.C. 4513.07 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance shall be equipped with reflectors as required by
the regulations provided for in that section.
   (B)   Every such reflector shall be of such size and characteristics and so
maintained as to be visible at night from all distances within 300 feet to 50
feet from such vehicle.
(ORC 4513.06)
§ 438.06  SAFETY LIGHTING ON COMMERCIAL VEHICLES.
   (A)   When the Director of Public Safety prescribes and promulgates
regulations relating to clearance lights, marker lights, reflectors and stop
lights on buses, trucks, commercial tractors, trailers, semitrailers and pole
trailers, when operated upon any highway, these vehicles shall be equipped as
required by such regulations, and such equipment shall be lighted at all times
mentioned in Ohio R.C. 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, except that clearance lights and side marker lights need not be
lighted on any such vehicle when it is operated within the municipality where
there is sufficient light to reveal any person or substantial object on the
highway at a distance of 500 feet.
   (B)   Such equipment shall be in addition to all other lights specifically
required by Ohio R.C. 4513.03 through 4513.16, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinances.
   (C)   Vehicles operated under the jurisdiction of the Public Utilities
Commission are not subject to this section.
(ORC 4513.07)
§ 438.07  OBSCURED LIGHTS ON VEHICLES IN COMBINATION.
   Whenever motor and other vehicles are operated in combination during the
time that lights are required, any light, except tail lights, which by reason
of its location on a vehicle of the combination would be obscured by another
vehicle of the combination, need not be lighted, but this section does not
affect the requirement that lighted clearance lights be displayed on the front
of the foremost vehicle required to have clearance lights or that all lights
required on the rear of the rearmost vehicle of any combination shall be
lighted.
(ORC 4513.08)
§ 438.08  RED LIGHT OR RED FLAG ON EXTENDED LOADS.
   Whenever the load upon any vehicle extends to the rear four feet or more
beyond the bed or body of this vehicle, there shall be displayed at the extreme
rear end of the load, at the times specified in Ohio R.C. 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, a red light or lantern plainly
visible from a distance of at least 500 feet to the sides and rear.  The red
light or lantern required by this section is in addition to the red rear light
required upon every vehicle.  At any other time there shall be displayed at the
extreme rear end of such load a red flag or cloth not less than 16 inches
square.
(ORC 4513.09)
§ 438.09  LIGHTS ON PARKED OR STOPPED VEHICLES.
   Except in case of an emergency, whenever a vehicle is parked or stopped upon
a roadway open to traffic or a shoulder adjacent thereto, whether attended or
unattended, during the times mentioned in Ohio R.C. 4513.03 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, such vehicle shall be equipped with one or more
lights which shall exhibit a white or amber light on the roadway side visible
from a distance of 500 feet to the front of such vehicle, and a red light
visible from a distance of 500 feet to the rear.  No lights need be displayed
upon any such vehicle when it is stopped or parked within the municipality
where there is sufficient  light to reveal any person or substantial object
within a distance of 500 feet upon such highway.  Any lighted headlights upon a
parked vehicle shall be depressed or dimmed.
(ORC 4513.10)
§ 438.10  LIGHTS ON SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES; EMBLEM REQUIRED; LIGHTS AND
REFLECTORS ON MULTI-WHEEL AGRICULTURAL TRACTORS OR FARM MACHINERY.
   (A)   All vehicles other than bicycles, including animal-drawn vehicles and
vehicles referred to in Ohio R.C. 4513.02(G), not specifically required to be
equipped with lamps or other lighting devices by Ohio R.C. 4513.03 through
4513.10, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, shall, at the
times specified in Ohio R.C. 4513.03  or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, be equipped with at least one lamp displaying a white light visible
from a distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the front of the vehicle and
also shall be equipped with two lamps displaying red light visible from a
distance of not less than 1,000 feet to the rear of the vehicle, or as an
alternative, one lamp displaying a red light visible from a distance of not
less than 1,000 feet to the rear and two red reflectors visible from all
distances of 600 feet to 100 feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful
lower beams of headlamps.  Lamps and reflectors required by this section shall
meet standards adopted by the Director of Public Safety.
   (B)   All boat trailers, farm machinery and other machinery, including all
road construction machinery, upon a street or highway, except when being used
in actual construction and maintenance work in an area guarded by a flagperson,
or where flares are used, or when operating or traveling within the limits of a
construction area designated by the Director of Transportation, a city or
village engineer, or the county engineer of the several counties, when such
construction area is marked in accordance with requirements of the Director and
the Manual and Specifications for a Uniform System of Traffic-Control Devices,
as set forth in Ohio R.C. 4511.09, which is designed for operation at a speed
of 25 miles per hour or less, shall be operated at a speed not exceeding 25
miles per hour, and shall display a triangular slow-moving vehicle emblem
(SMV).  The emblem shall be mounted so as to be visible from a distance of not
less than 500 feet to the rear.  The Director of Public Safety shall adopt
standards and specifications for the design and position of mounting the SMV
emblem.  The standards and specifications for SMV emblems referred to in this
section shall correlate with and, so far as possible, conform with those
approved by the American Society of Agricultural Engineers.  A unit of farm
machinery that is designed by its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater
than 25 miles per hour may be operated on a street or highway at a speed
greater than 25 miles per hour provided it is operated in accordance with this
section. As used in this division, “machinery” does not include any vehicle
designed to be drawn by an animal.
   (C)   The use of the SMV emblem shall be restricted to animal-drawn vehicles
and to the slow-moving vehicles specified in division (B) of this section
operating or traveling within the limits of the highway.  Its use on slow-
moving vehicles being transported upon other types of vehicles or on any other
type of vehicle or stationary object on the highway is prohibited.
   (D)   (1)   No person shall sell, lease, rent or operate any boat trailer,
farm machinery or other machinery defined as a slow-moving vehicle in division
(B) of this section, except those units designed to be completely mounted on a
primary power unit, which is manufactured or assembled on or after April 1,
1966, unless the vehicle is equipped with a slow-moving vehicle emblem mounting
device as specified in division (B) of this section.
      (2)   No person shall sell, lease, rent, or operate on a street or
highway any unit of farm machinery that is designed by its manufacturer to
operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour unless the unit displays a
slow-moving vehicle emblem as specified in division (B) of this section and a
speed identification symbol that meets the specifications contained in the
American Society of Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S584 JAN2005,
Agricultural Equipment: Speed Identification Symbol (SIS).
   (E)   Any boat trailer, farm machinery or other machinery defined as a slow-
moving vehicle in division (B) of this section, in addition to the use of the
slow-moving vehicle emblem, and any unit of farm machinery that is designed by
its manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour, in
addition to the display of a speed identification symbol, may be equipped with
a red flashing light that shall be visible from a distance of not less than
1,000 feet to the rear at all times specified in Ohio R.C. 4513.03 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.  When a double-faced light is
used, it shall display amber light to the front and red light to the rear.  In
addition to the lights described in this division, farm machinery and motor
vehicles escorting farm machinery may display a flashing, oscillating or
rotating amber light, as permitted by Ohio R.C. 4513.17 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and also may display simultaneously flashing
turn signals or warning lights, as permitted by that section.
   (F)   (1)   Every animal-drawn vehicle upon a street or highway shall at all
times be equipped in one of the following ways:
         (a)   With a slow-moving vehicle emblem complying with division (B) of
this section;
         (b)   With alternate reflective material complying with rules adopted
under division (F)(2) below;
         (c)   With both a slow-moving vehicle emblem and alternate reflective
material as specified in division (F)(2) below.
      (2)   Rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety, subject to Ohio
R.C. Chapter 119, establishing standards and specifications for the position of
mounting of the alternate reflective material authorized by this division,
permit, as a minimum, the alternate reflective material to be black, gray, or
silver in color.  The alternate reflective material shall be mounted on the
animal-drawn vehicle so as to be visible, at all times specified in Ohio R.C.
4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, from a distance of
not less than 500 feet to the rear when illuminated by the lawful lower beams
of headlamps.
   (G)   (1)   Every unit of farm machinery that is designed by its
manufacturer to operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour shall display
a slow-moving vehicle emblem and a speed identification symbol that meets the
specifications contained in the American Society of Agricultural Engineers
Standard ANSI/ASAE S584 JAN2005, Agricultural Equipment: Speed Identification
Symbol (SIS) when the unit is operated upon a street or highway, irrespective
of the speed at which the unit is operated on the street or highway. The speed
identification symbol shall indicate the maximum speed in miles per hour at
which the unit of farm machinery is designed by its manufacturer to operate.
The display of the speed identification symbol shall be in accordance with the
standard prescribed in this division.
      (2)   If an agricultural tractor that is designed by its manufacturer to
operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour is being operated on a street
or highway at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour and is towing, pulling, or
otherwise drawing a unit of farm machinery, the unit of farm machinery shall
display a slow-moving vehicle emblem and a speed identification symbol that is
the same as the speed identification symbol that is displayed on the
agricultural tractor.
   (H)   When an agricultural tractor that is designed by its manufacturer to
operate at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour is being operated on a street
or highway at a speed greater than 25 miles per hour, the operator shall
possess some documentation published or provided by the manufacturer indicating
the maximum speed in miles per hour at which the manufacturer designed the
agricultural tractor to operate.
   (I)   As used in this section, “boat trailer” means any vehicle designed and
used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage and a marina,
or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or highway for a
distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less.
(ORC 4513.11)
   (J)   Lights and Reflector Requirements for Multi-wheel Agricultural
Tractors or Farm Machinery.
      (1)   (a)   Every multi-wheel agricultural tractor whose model year was
2001 or earlier, when being operated or traveling on a street or highway at the
times specified in Ohio R.C. 4513.03, or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, at a minimum shall be equipped with and display reflectors and
illuminated amber lamps so that the extreme left and right projections of the
tractor are indicated by flashing lamps displaying amber light, visible to the
front and the rear; by amber reflectors, all visible to the front; and by red
reflectors, all visible to the rear.
         (b)   The lamps displaying amber light need not flash simultaneously
and need not flash in conjunction with any directional signals of the tractor.
         (c)   The lamps and reflectors required by division (J)(1)(a) of this
section and their placement shall meet standards and specifications contained
in rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety in accordance with Ohio R.C.
Chapter 119.  The rules governing the amber lamps, amber reflectors, and red
reflectors and their placement shall correlate with and, as far as possible,
conform with paragraphs 4.1.4.1, 4.1.7.1, and 4.1.7.2, respectively, of the
American Society of Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S279.10 OCT98,
Lighting and Marking of Agricultural Equipment on Highways.
      (2)   Every unit of farm machinery whose model year was 2002 or later,
when being operated or traveling on a street or highway at the times specified
in Ohio R.C. 4513.03, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, shall
be equipped with and display markings and illuminated lamps that meet or exceed
the lighting, illumination, and marking standards and specifications that are
applicable to that type of farm machinery for the unit’s model year specified
in the American Society of Agricultural Engineers Standard ANSI/ASAE S279.11
APR01, Lighting and Marking of Agricultural Equipment on Highways, or any
subsequent revisions of that standard.
      (3)   The lights and reflectors required by division (J)(1) of this
section are in addition to the slow- moving vehicle emblem and lights required
or permitted by Ohio R.C. 4513.11 or 4513.17, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, to be displayed on farm machinery being operated or
traveling on a street or highway.
      (4)   No person shall operate any unit of farm machinery on a street or
highway or cause any unit of farm machinery to travel on a street or highway in
violation of divisions (J)(1) or (J)(2) of this section.
(ORC 4513.111)
§ 438.11  SPOTLIGHT AND AUXILIARY LIGHTS.
   (A)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than one spotlight and
every lighted spotlight shall be so aimed and used upon approaching another
vehicle that no part of the high-intensity portion of the beam will be directed
to the left of the prolongation of the extreme left side of the vehicle, nor
more than 100 feet ahead of the vehicle.
   (B)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with not more than three auxiliary
driving lights mounted on the front of the vehicle.  Any such lights which do
not conform to the specifications for auxiliary driving lights and the
regulations for their use prescribed by the Director of Public Safety shall not
be used.
(ORC 4513.12)
§ 438.12  COWL, FENDER AND BACK-UP LIGHTS.
   (A)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with side cowl or fender lights
which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.
   (B)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with lights on each side thereof
which shall emit a white or amber light without glare.
   (C)   Any motor vehicle may be equipped with back-up lights, either
separately or in combination with another light.  No back-up lights shall be
continuously lighted when the motor vehicle is in forward motion.
(ORC 4513.13)
§ 438.13  TWO LIGHTS DISPLAYED.
   At all times mentioned in Ohio R.C. 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, at least two lighted lights shall be displayed, one near
each side of the front of every motor vehicle, except when such vehicle is
parked subject to the regulations governing lights on parked vehicles.
(ORC 4513.14)
§ 438.14  USE OF HEADLIGHT BEAMS.
   Whenever a motor vehicle is being operated on a roadway or shoulder adjacent
thereto during the times specified in Ohio R.C. 4513.03 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the driver shall use a distribution of light,
or composite beam, directed high enough and of sufficient intensity to reveal
persons, vehicles and substantial objects at a safe distance in advance of the
vehicle, subject to the following requirements:
   (A)   Whenever the driver of a vehicle approaches an oncoming vehicle, such
driver shall use a distribution of light, or composite beam, so aimed that the
glaring rays are not projected into the eyes of the oncoming driver.
   (B)   Every new motor vehicle registered in this state which has multiple-
beam road lighting equipment shall be equipped with a beam indicator, which
shall be lighted whenever the uppermost distribution of light from the
headlights is in use, and shall not otherwise be lighted.  This indicator shall
be so designed and located that, when lighted, it will be readily visible
without glare to the driver of the vehicle.
(ORC 4513.15)
§ 438.15  LIGHTS OF LESS INTENSITY ON SLOW-MOVING VEHICLES.
   Any motor vehicle may be operated under the conditions specified in Ohio
R.C. 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance when it is
equipped with two lighted lights upon the front thereof capable of revealing
persons and substantial objects 75 feet ahead, in lieu of lights required in
Ohio R.C. 4513.14 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, provided
that such vehicle shall not be operated at a speed in excess of 20 miles per
hour.
(ORC 4513.16)
§ 438.16  NUMBER OF LIGHTS PERMITTED; RED AND FLASHING LIGHTS.
   (A)   Whenever a motor vehicle equipped with headlights is also equipped
with any auxiliary lights or spotlight or any other light on the front thereof
projecting a beam of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower, not more than a
total of five of any such lights on the front of a vehicle shall be lighted at
any one time when the vehicle is upon a highway.
   (B)   Any lighted light or illuminating device upon a motor vehicle, other
than headlights, spotlights, signal lights, or auxiliary driving lights, that
projects a beam of light of an intensity greater than 300 candlepower shall be
so directed that no part of the beam will strike the level of the roadway on
which the vehicle stands at a distance of more than 75 feet from the vehicle.
   (C)   (1)   Flashing lights are prohibited on motor vehicles, except as a
means for indicating a right or a left turn, or in the presence of vehicular
traffic hazard requiring unusual care in approaching, or overtaking or
passing.  This prohibition does not apply to emergency vehicles, road service
vehicles servicing or towing a disabled vehicle, stationary waste collection
vehicles actively collecting garbage, refuse, trash, or recyclable materials on
the roadside, rural mail delivery vehicles, vehicles as provided in Ohio R.C.
4513.182 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, highway maintenance
vehicles, funeral hearses, funeral escort vehicles, and similar equipment
operated by the Department or local authorities, which shall be equipped with
and display, when used on a street or highway for the special purpose
necessitating such lights, a flashing, oscillating or rotating amber light, but
shall not display a flashing, oscillating or rotating light of any other color,
nor to vehicles or machinery permitted by Ohio R.C. 4513.11 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance to have a flashing red light.
      (2)   When used on a street or highway, farm machinery and vehicles
escorting farm machinery may be equipped with and display a flashing,
oscillating or rotating amber light, and the prohibition contained in division
(C)(1) of this section does not apply to such machinery or vehicles.  Farm
machinery may also display the lights described in Ohio R.C. 4513.11 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (D)   Except a person operating a public safety vehicle, as defined in Ohio
R.C. 4511.01(E), or a school bus, no person shall operate, move, or park upon
or permit to stand within the right-of-way of any public street or highway any
vehicle or equipment that is equipped with and displaying a flashing red or a
flashing combination red and white light, or an oscillating or rotating red
light, or a combination red and white oscillating or rotating light; and except
a public law enforcement officer, or other person sworn to enforce the criminal
and traffic laws of the state, operating a public safety vehicle when on duty,
no person shall operate, move or park upon or permit to stand within the right-
of-way of any street or highway any vehicle or equipment that is equipped with,
or upon which is mounted, and displaying a flashing blue or a flashing
combination blue and white light, or an oscillating or rotating blue light, or
a combination blue and white oscillating or rotating light.
   (E)   This section does not prohibit the use of warning lights required by
law or the simultaneous flashing of turn signals on disabled vehicles or on
vehicles being operated in unfavorable atmospheric conditions in order to
enhance their visibility.  This section also does not prohibit the simultaneous
flashing of turn signals or warning lights whether on farm machinery or
vehicles escorting farm machinery when used on a street or highway.
(ORC 4513.17)
§ 438.165  LIGHTS AND SOUND-PRODUCING DEVICES ON CORONERS’ VEHICLES.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a motor vehicle operated
by a coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s investigator may be equipped with a
flashing, oscillating or rotating red or blue light and siren, whistle or bell
capable of emitting sound audible under normal conditions from a distance of
not less than 500 feet.  Such a vehicle may display the flashing, oscillating
or rotating red or blue light and may give the audible signal of the siren,
whistle or bell only when responding to a fatality or a fatal motor vehicle
accident on a street or highway and only at those locations where the stoppage
of traffic impedes the ability of the coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s
investigator to arrive at the site of the fatality.
   (B)   This section does not relieve the coroner, deputy coroner or coroner’s
investigator operating a motor vehicle from the duty to drive with due regard
for the safety of all persons and property upon the highway.
(ORC 4513.171)
§ 438.17  VEHICLES TRANSPORTING PRESCHOOL CHILDREN.
   (A)   No person shall operate any motor vehicle owned, leased, or hired by a
nursery school, kindergarten, or day-care center, while transporting preschool
children to or from such an institution unless the motor vehicle is equipped
with and displaying two amber flashing lights mounted on a bar attached to the
top of the vehicle, and a sign bearing the designation “caution — children,”
which shall be attached to the bar carrying the amber flashing lights in such a
manner as to be legible to persons both in front of and behind the vehicle. 
The lights and sign shall meet standards and specifications adopted by the
Director of Public Safety.
   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle displaying the lights and sign
required by this section for any purpose other than the transportation of
preschool children as provided in this section.
(ORC 4513.182)
§ 438.18  FOCUS AND AIM OF HEADLIGHTS.
   (A)   No person shall use any lights mentioned in Ohio R.C. 4513.03 through
4513.18, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinances, upon any motor
vehicle, trailer or semitrailer unless these lights are equipped, mounted and
adjusted as to focus and aim in accordance with regulations which are
prescribed by the Director of Public Safety.
   (B)   The headlights on any motor vehicle shall comply with the headlamp
color requirements contained in Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number
108, 49 C.F.R. § 571.108. No person shall operate a motor vehicle in violation
of this division.
(ORC 4513.19)
§ 438.19  MOTOR VEHICLE AND MOTORCYCLE BRAKES.
   (A)   Every motor vehicle, other than a motorcycle, when operated upon a
highway shall be equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and
to stop and hold the motor vehicle, including two separate means of applying
the brakes, each of which means shall be effective to apply the brakes to at
least two wheels.  If these two separate means of applying the brakes are
connected in any way, then on such motor vehicles, manufactured or assembled
after January 1, 1942, they shall be so constructed that failure of any one
part of the operating mechanism shall not leave the motor vehicle without
brakes on at least two wheels.
   (B)   Every motorcycle, when operated upon a highway shall be equipped with
at least one adequate brake, which may be operated by hand or by foot.
   (C)   Every motorized bicycle shall be equipped with brakes meeting the
rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety under Ohio R.C. 4511.521.
   (D)   When operated upon the highways, the following vehicles  shall be
equipped with brakes adequate to control the movement of and to stop and to
hold the vehicle, designed to be applied by the driver of the towing motor
vehicle from its cab, and also designed and connected so that, in case of a
breakaway of the towed vehicle, the brakes shall be automatically applied:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every trailer or
semitrailer, except a pole trailer, with an empty weight of 2,000 pounds or
more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 1942;
      (2)   Every manufactured home or travel trailer with an empty weight of
2,000 pounds or more, manufactured or assembled on or after January 1, 2001.
   (E)   Every watercraft trailer with a gross weight or manufacturer’s gross
vehicle weight rating of 3,000 pounds or more that is manufactured or assembled
on or after January 1, 2008, shall have separate brakes equipped with hydraulic
surge or electrically operated brakes on two wheels.
   (F)   In any combination of motor-drawn trailers or semitrailers equipped
with brakes, means shall be provided for applying the rearmost brakes in
approximate synchronism with the brakes on the towing vehicle, and developing
the required braking effort on the rearmost wheels at the fastest rate; or
means shall be provided for applying braking effort first on the rearmost
brakes; or both of the above means, capable of being used alternatively, may be
employed.
   (G)   Every vehicle and combination of vehicles, except motorcycles and
motorized bicycles, and except trailers and semitrailers of a gross weight of
less than 2,000 pounds, and pole trailers, shall be equipped with parking
brakes adequate to hold the vehicle on any grade on which it is operated, under
all conditions of loading, on a surface free from snow, ice, or loose
material.  The parking brakes shall be capable of being applied in conformance
with the foregoing requirements by the driver’s muscular effort or by spring
action or by equivalent means.  Their operation may be assisted by the service
brakes or other source of power provided that failure of the service brake
actuation system or other power assisting mechanism will not prevent the
parking brakes from being applied in conformance with the foregoing
requirements.  The parking brakes shall be so designed that when once applied
they shall remain applied with the required effectiveness despite exhaustion of
any source of energy or leakage of any kind.
   (H)   The same brake drums, brake shoes and lining assemblies, brake shoe
anchors, and mechanical brake shoe actuation mechanism normally associated with
the wheel brake assemblies may be used for both the service brakes and the
parking brakes.  If the means of applying the parking brakes and the service
brakes are connected in any way, they shall be so constructed that failure of
any one part shall not leave the vehicle without operative brakes.
   (I)   Every motor vehicle or combination of motor-drawn vehicles shall, at
all times and under all conditions of loading, be capable of being stopped on a
dry, smooth, level road free from loose material, upon application of the
service or foot brake, within the following specified distances, or shall be
capable of being decelerated at a sustained rate corresponding to these
distances:
      (1)   Vehicles or combinations of vehicles having brakes on all wheels
shall come to a stop in 30 feet or less from a speed of 20 miles per hour.
      (2)   Vehicles or combinations of vehicles not having brakes on all
wheels shall come to a stop in 40 feet or less from a speed of 20 miles per
hour.
   (J)   All brakes shall be maintained in good working order and shall be so
adjusted as to operate as equally as practicable with respect to the wheels on
opposite sides of the vehicle.
(ORC 4513.20)
§ 438.20  HORN, SIREN AND THEFT ALARM SIGNAL.
   (A)   Every motor vehicle when operated upon a highway shall be equipped
with a horn which is in good working order and capable of emitting sound
audible, under normal conditions, from a distance of not less than 200 feet.
   (B)   No motor vehicle shall be equipped with, nor shall any person use upon
a vehicle, any siren, whistle, or bell.  Any vehicle may be equipped with a
theft alarm signal device which shall be so arranged that it cannot be used as
an ordinary warning signal.  Every emergency vehicle shall be equipped with a
siren, whistle or bell, capable of emitting sound audible under normal
conditions from a distance of not less than 500 feet and of a type approved by
the Director of Public Safety.  Such equipment shall not be used except when
such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call or is in the
immediate pursuit of an actual or suspected violator of the law, in which case
the driver of the emergency vehicle shall sound such equipment when it is
necessary to warn pedestrians and other drivers of the approach thereof.
(ORC 4513.21)
   (C)   No person shall use the horn of a motor vehicle except to give warning
to other drivers or pedestrians.
§ 438.21  MUFFLER; MUFFLER CUTOUT; EXCESSIVE SMOKE, GAS OR NOISE.
   (A)   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle with an internal combustion engine
shall at all times be equipped with a muffler which is in good working order
and in constant operation to prevent excessive or unusual noise, and no person
shall use a muffler cutout, bypass or similar device upon a motor vehicle on a
highway.  Every motorcycle muffler shall be equipped with baffle plates.
   (B)   No person shall own, operate or have in the person’s possession any
motor vehicle or motorcycle equipped with a device for producing excessive
smoke or gas, or so equipped as to permit oil or any other chemical to flow
into or upon the exhaust pipe or muffler of such vehicle, or equipped in any
way to produce or emit smoke or dangerous or annoying gases from any portion of
such vehicle, other than the ordinary gases emitted by the exhaust of an
internal combustion engine under normal operation.
(ORC 4513.22)
§ 438.22  REAR-VIEW MIRROR; CLEAR VIEW TO FRONT, BOTH SIDES AND REAR.
   Every motor vehicle and motorcycle shall be equipped with a mirror so
located as to reflect to the operator a view of the highway to the rear of such
vehicle or motorcycle.  Operators of vehicles and motorcycles shall have a
clear and unobstructed view to the front and to both sides of their vehicles
and motorcycles and shall have a clear view to the rear of their vehicles and
motorcycles by mirror.
(ORC 4513.23)
§ 438.23  WINDSHIELD REQUIRED; SIGN OR POSTER UPON WINDSHIELD; WINDSHIELD
WIPER.
   (A)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle on a street or highway in this
municipality, other than a motorcycle or motorized bicycle, that is not
equipped with a windshield.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall drive any motor vehicle, other than a bus, with
any sign, poster, or other non- transparent material upon the front windshield,
sidewings, side, or rear windows of such vehicle other than a certificate or
other paper required to be displayed by law, except that there may be in the
lower left-hand or right-hand corner of the windshield a sign, poster, or decal
not to exceed four inches in height by six inches in width.  No sign, poster,
or decal shall be displayed in the front windshield in such a manner as to
conceal the vehicle identification number for the motor vehicle when, in
accordance with federal law, that number is located inside the vehicle
passenger compartment and so placed as to be readable through the vehicle
glazing without moving any part of the vehicle.
      (2)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
driving a passenger car with an electronic device, including an antenna,
electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device,
or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if the
device meets both of the following:
         (a)   It does not restrict the vehicle operator’s sight lines to the
road and highway signs and signals.
         (b)   It does not conceal the vehicle identification number.
      (3)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
driving a commercial car with an electronic device, including an antenna,
electronic tolling or other transponder, camera, directional navigation device,
or other similar electronic device located in the front windshield if the
device meets both of the following:
         (a)   It does not restrict the vehicle operator’s sight lines to the
road and highway signs and signals.
         (b)   It is mounted not more than six inches below the upper edge of
the windshield and is outside the area swept by the vehicle’s windshield
wipers.
   (C)   The windshield on every motor vehicle shall be equipped with a device
for cleaning rain, snow, or other moisture from the windshield.  The device
shall be maintained in good working order and so constructed as to be
controlled or operated by the operator of the vehicle.
(ORC 4513.24)
§ 438.235  TINTED GLASS; MATERIALS ON GLASS.
   (A)   No person shall operate, on any highway or other public or private
property open to the public for vehicular travel or parking, lease, or rent any
motor vehicle that is registered in this state unless the motor vehicle
conforms to the requirements concerning tinted glass and reflectorized material
of Ohio R.C. 4513.241 and of any applicable rule adopted under that section.
   (B)   No person shall install in or on any motor vehicle any glass or other
material that fails to conform to the requirements of Ohio R.C. 4513.241 or of
any rule adopted under that section.
   (C)   (1)   No used motor vehicle dealer or new motor vehicle dealer, as
defined in Ohio R.C. 4517.01, shall sell any motor vehicle that fails to
conform to the requirements of Ohio R.C. 4513.241 or of any rule adopted under
that section.
      (2)   No manufacturer, remanufacturer, or distributor, as defined in R.C.
§ 4517.01, shall provide to a motor vehicle dealer licensed under R.C. Chapter
4517 or to any other person, a motor vehicle that fails to conform to the
requirements of R.C. § 4513.241  or of any rule adopted under that section.
   (D)   No reflectorized materials shall be permitted upon or in any front
windshield, side windows, sidewings, or rear window.
   (E)   This section does not apply to the manufacturer’s tinting or glazing
of motor vehicle windows or windshields that is otherwise in compliance with or
permitted by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard #205.
   (F)   With regard to any side window behind a driver’s seat or any rear
window other than any window on an emergency door, this division (B) does not
apply to any school bus used to transport a child with disabilities pursuant to
Ohio R.C. Chapter 3323, whom it is impossible or impractical to transport by
regular school bus in the course of regular route transportation provided by a
school district. As used in this division, “child with disabilities” has the
same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3323.01.
   (G)   This section does not apply to any school bus that is to be sold and
operated outside the municipality.
   (H)   (1)   This section does not apply to a motor vehicle used by a law
enforcement agency under either of the following circumstances:
         (a)   The vehicle does not have distinctive markings of a law
enforcement vehicle but is operated by or on behalf of the law enforcement
agency in an authorized investigation or other activity requiring that the
presence and identity of the vehicle occupants be undisclosed.
         (b)   The vehicle primarily is used by the law enforcement canine unit
for transporting a police dog.
      (2)   As used in this division, “law enforcement agency” means a police
department, the office of a sheriff, the State Highway Patrol, a county
prosecuting attorney, or a federal, state, or local governmental body that
enforces criminal laws and that has employees who have a statutory power of
arrest.
(ORC 4513.241(C) - (J))
Statutory reference:
   Administrative regulations, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-41
§ 438.24  LIMITED LOAD EXTENSION ON LEFT SIDE OF PASSENGER VEHICLE.
   No passenger-type vehicle shall be operated on a highway with any load
carried on the vehicle which extends more than six inches beyond the line of
the fenders on the vehicle’s left side.
(ORC 4513.30)
§ 438.25  MOTOR VEHICLE STOP LIGHTS.
   (A)   Every motor vehicle, trailer, semitrailer, and pole trailer when
operated upon a highway shall be equipped with two or more stop lights, except
that passenger cars manufactured or assembled prior to January 1, 1967,
motorcycles, and motor-driven cycles shall be equipped with at least one stop
light.  Stop lights shall be mounted on the rear of the vehicle, actuated upon
application of the service brake, and may be incorporated with other rear
lights.  Such stop lights when actuated shall emit a red light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear; provided that in the case of a train of
vehicles only the stop lights on the rearmost vehicle need be visible from the
distance specified.
   (B)   Such stop lights when actuated shall give a steady warning light to
the rear of a vehicle or train of vehicles to indicate the intention of the
operator to diminish the speed of or stop a vehicle or train of vehicles.
   (C)   When stop lights are used as required by this section, they shall be
constructed or installed so as to provide adequate and reliable illumination
and shall conform to the appropriate rules and regulations established under
Ohio R.C. 4513.19.
   (D)   Historical motor vehicles as defined in Ohio R.C. 4503.181, not
originally manufactured with stop lights, are not subject to this section.
(ORC 4513.071)
§ 438.26  BUMPERS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Gross vehicle weight rating” means the manufacturer’s gross
vehicle weight rating established for that vehicle.
      (2)   “Manufacturer” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
      (3)   “Multipurpose passenger vehicle” means a motor vehicle with motive
power, except a motorcycle, designed to carry ten persons or less, that is
constructed either on a truck chassis or with special features for occasional
off-road operation.
      (4)   “Passenger car” means any motor vehicle with motive power, designed
for carrying ten persons or less, except a multipurpose passenger vehicle or
motorcycle.
      (5)   “Truck” means every motor vehicle, except trailers and
semitrailers, designed and used to carry property and having a gross vehicle
weight rating of 10,000 pounds or less.
   (B)   Rules adopted by the Director of Public Safety, in accordance with
Ohio R.C. Chapter 119, shall govern the maximum bumper height or, in the
absence of bumpers and in cases where bumper height have been lowered or
modified, the maximum height to the bottom of the frame rail of any passenger
car, multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck.
   (C)   No person shall operate upon a street or highway any passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle or truck registered in this state that does not
conform to the requirements of this section or any applicable rule adopted
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4513.021.
   (D)   No person shall modify any motor vehicle registered in this state in
such a manner as to cause the vehicle body or chassis to come in contact with
the ground, expose the fuel tank to damage from collision, or cause the wheels
to come in contact with the body under normal operation, and no person shall
disconnect any part of the original suspension system of the vehicle to defeat
the safe operation of that system.
   (E)   Nothing contained in this section or in the rules adopted pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 4513.021 shall be construed to prohibit either of the following:
      (1)   The installation upon a passenger car, multipurpose passenger
vehicle or truck registered in this state of heavy duty equipment, including
shock absorbers and overload springs:
      (2)   The operation on a street or highway of a passenger car,
multipurpose passenger vehicle, or truck registered in this state with normal
wear to the suspension system if the normal wear does not adversely affect the
control of the vehicle.
   (F)   This section and the rules adopted pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4513.021 do
not apply to any specially designed or modified passenger car, multipurpose
passenger vehicle, or truck when operated off a street or highway in races and
similar events.
(ORC 4513.021)
Statutory reference:
   Maximum height on bumpers, see O.A.C. Chapter 4501-43
§ 438.27  AIR CLEANER REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate upon any street, alley or other public place any
motor vehicle which is not equipped with a functioning air cleaner, except for
motor vehicles equipped with electronic fuel-injection engines.
§ 438.28  BOARDING OR LEAVING MOVING VEHICLE.
   No person shall board or alight from a bus or other vehicle while the bus or
vehicle is in motion.
§ 438.29  USE OF CHILD RESTRAINTS.
   (A)   When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety
vehicle as defined in Ohio R.C. 4511.01, that is required by the United States
Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of
manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child
properly secured in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions in a child
restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards:
      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age;
      (2)   A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.
   (B)   When any child who is in either or both of the following categories is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab, that is owned,
leased, or otherwise under the control of a nursery school or day- care center,
the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child properly secured in
accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions in a child restraint system
that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards:
      (1)   A child who is less than four years of age;
      (2)   A child who weighs less than 40 pounds.
   (C)   When any child who is less than eight years of age and less than four
feet nine inches in height, who is not required by division (A) or (B) of this
section to be secured in a child restraint system, is being transported in a
motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety vehicle as defined in Ohio
R.C. 4511.01 or a vehicle that is regulated under Ohio R.C. 5104.011, that is
required by the United States Department of Transportation to be equipped with
seat belts at the time of manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor
vehicle shall have the child properly secured in accordance with the
manufacturer’s instructions on a booster seat that meets federal motor vehicle
safety standards.
   (D)   When any child who is at least eight years of age but not older than
15 years of age, and who is not otherwise required by division (A), (B), or (C)
of this section to be secured in a child restraint system or booster seat, is
being transported in a motor vehicle, other than a taxicab or public safety
vehicle as defined in Ohio R.C. 4511.01, that is required by the United States
Department of Transportation to be equipped with seat belts at the time of
manufacture or assembly, the operator of the motor vehicle shall have the child
properly restrained either in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions
in a child restraint system that meets federal motor vehicle safety standards
or in an occupant restraining device as defined in Ohio R.C. 4513.263.
   (E)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law
enforcement officer shall cause an operator of a motor vehicle being operated
on any street or highway to stop the motor vehicle for the sole purpose of
determining whether a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section has been
or is being committed or for the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or
summons for a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section or causing the
arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for a violation of division
(C) or (D) of this section, and absent another violation of law, a law
enforcement officer’s view of the interior or visual inspection of a motor
vehicle being operated on any street or highway may not be used for the purpose
of determining whether a violation of division (C) or (D) of this section has
been or is being committed.
   (F)   The Director of Public Safety shall adopt such rules as are necessary
to carry out this section.
   (G)   The failure of an operator of a motor vehicle to secure a child in a
child restraint system, a booster seat, or an occupant restraining device as
required in this section is not negligence imputable to the child, is not
admissible as evidence in any civil action involving the rights of the child
against any other person allegedly liable for injuries to the child, is not to
be used as a basis for a criminal prosecution of the operator of the motor
vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section, and is not
admissible as evidence in any criminal action involving the operator of the
motor vehicle other than a prosecution for a violation of this section.
   (H)   This section does not apply when an emergency exists that threatens
the life of any person operating or occupying a motor vehicle that is being
used to transport a child who otherwise would be required to be restrained
under this section. This section does not apply to a person operating a motor
vehicle who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this
state under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4731 or a chiropractor licensed to practice in
this state under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4734 that states that the child who
otherwise would be required to be restrained under this section has a physical
impairment that makes use of a child restraint system, booster seat, or an
occupant restraining device impossible or impractical, provided that the person
operating the vehicle has safely and appropriately restrained the child in
accordance with any recommendations of the physician or chiropractor as noted
on the affidavit.
   (I)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require any person to
carry with the person the birth certificate of a child to prove the age of the
child, but the production of a valid birth certificate for a child showing that
the child was not of an age to which this section applies is a defense against
any ticket, citation, or summons issued for violating this section.
(ORC 4511.81(A) - (H), (K))
§ 438.30  USE OF OCCUPANT RESTRAINING DEVICES.
   (A)   Definitions.  For the purpose of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
      (1)   “Automobile” means any commercial tractor, passenger car,
commercial car, or truck that is required to be factory-equipped with an
occupant restraining device for the operator or any passenger by regulations
adopted by the United States Secretary of Transportation pursuant to the
“National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966,” 80 Stat. 719, 15
U.S.C. 1392.
      (2)   “Commercial tractor,” “passenger car,” and “commercial car” have
the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
      (3)   “Occupant restraining device” means a seat safety belt, shoulder
belt, harness, or other safety device for restraining a person who is an
operator of or passenger in an automobile and that satisfies the minimum
federal vehicle safety standards established by the United States Department of
Transportation.
      (4)   “Passenger” means any person in an automobile, other than its
operator, who is occupying a seating position for which an occupant restraining
device is provided.
      (5)   “Tort action” means a civil action for damages for injury, death,
or loss to person or property. “Tort action” includes a product liability
claim, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2307.71, and as asbestos claim, as defined in
Ohio R.C. 2307.91, but does not include a civil action for damages for breach
of contract or another agreement between persons.
      (6)   “Vehicle” and “motor vehicle,” as used in the definitions of the
terms set forth above, have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
   (B)   Prohibited Acts.  No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless he or she is
wearing all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
restraining device, or operate a school bus that has an occupant restraining
device installed for use in its operator’s seat unless he or she is wearing all
of the available elements of the device, as properly adjusted.
      (2)   Operate an automobile on any street or highway unless each
passenger in the automobile who is subject to the requirement set forth in
division (B)(3) of this section is wearing all of the available elements of a
properly adjusted occupant restraining device.
      (3)   Occupy, as a passenger, a seating position on the front seat of an
automobile being operated on any street or highway unless he or she is wearing
all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining
device.
      (4)   Operate a taxicab on any street or highway unless all factory-
equipped occupant restraining devices in the taxicab are maintained in usable
form.
   (C)   Exceptions.
      (1)   Division (B)(3) of this section does not apply to a person who is
required by R.C. § 4511.81 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to
be secured in a child restraint device or booster seat.
      (2)   Division (B)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who is
an employee of the United States Postal Service or of a newspaper home delivery
service, during any period in which the person is engaged in the operation of
an automobile to deliver mail or newspapers to addressees.
      (3)   Divisions (B)(1) and (B)(3) of this section do not apply to a
person who has an affidavit signed by a physician licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4731 or a chiropractor licensed to practice in this
state under R.C. Chapter 4734 that states the following:
         (a)   That the person has a physical impairment that makes use of an
occupant restraining device impossible or impractical;
         (b)   Whether the physical impairment is temporary, permanent, or
reasonably expected to be permanent;
         (c)   If the physical impairment is temporary, how long the physical
impairment is expected to make the use of an occupant restraining device
impossible or impractical.
      (4)   Divisions (B)(1) and (B)(3) of this section do not apply to a
person who has registered with the Registrar of Motor Vehicles in accordance
with division (C)(5) of this section.
      (5)   A person who has received an affidavit under division (C)(3) of
this section stating that the person has a permanent or reasonably expected to
be permanent physical impairment that makes use of an occupant restraining
device impossible or impracticable may register with the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles attesting to that fact. Upon such registration, the Registrar shall
make that information available in the law enforcement automated data system. A
person included in the database under division (C)(5) of this section is not
required to have the affidavit obtained in accordance with division (C)(3) of
this section in their possession while operating or occupying an automobile.
      (6)   A physician or chiropractor who issues an affidavit for the
purposes of division (C)(3) or (C)(4) of this section is immune from civil
liability arising from any injury or death sustained by the person who was
issued the affidavit due to the failure of the person to wear an occupant
restraining device unless the physician or chiropractor, in issuing the
affidavit, acted in a manner that constituted willful, wanton, or reckless
misconduct.
      (7)   The Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall adopt rules in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 119 establishing a process for a person to be included in the
database under division (C)(5) of this section. The information provided and
included in the database under division (C)(5) of this section is not a public
record subject to inspection or copying under R.C. § 149.43.
   (D)   Officers Not Permitted to Stop Cars to Determine Violation. 
Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no law enforcement
officer shall cause an operator of an automobile being operated on any street
or highway to stop the automobile for the sole purpose of determining whether a
violation of division (B) of this section has been or is being committed or for
the sole purpose of issuing a ticket, citation, or summons for the violation or
for causing the arrest of or commencing a prosecution of a person for the
violation.  No law enforcement officer shall view the interior or visually
inspect any automobile being operated on any street or highway for the sole
purpose of determining whether the violation has been or is being committed.
   (E)   All fines collected for violations of division (B) of this section
shall be forwarded to the Finance Director of the City. The requirements of
Ohio R.C. 4513.263(E) with respect to forwarding said funds to the Treasurer of
the State of Ohio and the percentage distribution therein shall be of no force
and effect for violations of §
438.30 of these Codified Ordinances.
   (F)   Limitations on Evidence Used for Prosecution.
      (1)   Subject to division (F)(2) of this section, the failure of a person
to wear all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant
restraining device in violation of division (B)(1) or (B)(3) of this section or
the failure of a person to ensure that each minor who is a passenger of an
automobile being operated by that person is wearing all of the available
elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining device in violation of
division (B)(2) of this section shall not be considered or used by the trier of
fact in a tort action as evidence of negligence or contributory negligence.
But, the trier of fact may determine based on evidence admitted consistent with
the Ohio Rules of Evidence that the failure contributed to the harm alleged in
the tort action and may diminish a recovery of compensatory damages that
represents non- economic loss, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2307.011, in a tort
action that could have been recovered but for the plaintiff’s failure to wear
all of the available elements of a properly adjusted occupant restraining
device. Evidence of that failure shall not be used as a basis for a criminal
prosecution of the person other than a prosecution for a violation of this
section; and shall not be admissible as evidence in a criminal action involving
the person other than a prosecution for a violation of this section.
      (2)   If, at the time of an accident involving a passenger car equipped
with occupant restraining devices, any occupant of the passenger car who
sustained injury or death was not wearing an available occupant restraining
device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a device, or was
not wearing such a device as properly adjusted, then, consistent with the Rules
of Evidence, the fact that the occupant was not wearing the available occupant
restraining device, was not wearing all of the available elements of such a
device, or was not wearing such a device as properly adjusted is admissible in
evidence in relation to any claim for relief in a tort action to the extent
that the claim for relief satisfies all of the following:
         (a)   It seeks to recover damages for injury or death to the occupant;
         (b)   The defendant in question is the manufacturer, designer,
distributor, or seller of the passenger car;
         (c)   The claim for relief against the defendant in question is that
the injury or death sustained by the occupant was enhanced or aggravated by
some design defect in the passenger car or that the passenger car was not
crashworthy.
   (G)   Penalty.
      (1)   Whoever violates division (B)(1) of this section shall be fined
$30.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B)(2) of this section shall be subject
to the penalty set forth in §
404.99.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (B)(3) of this section shall be fined
$20.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (B)(4) of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
division (B)(4) of this section, whoever violates division (B)(4) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4513.263) (Ord. 147-01, passed 11-19-2001)
§ 438.32  AIR BAGS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Air bag.” Has the same meaning as in 49 C.F.R. § 579.4, as
amended.
      (2)   “Counterfeit air bag.” An air bag displaying a mark identical or
similar to the genuine mark of a motor vehicle manufacturer, without the
authorization of the motor vehicle manufacturer.
      (3)   “Nonfunctional air bag.” Any of the following:
         (a)   A replacement air bag that has been previously deployed or
damaged;
         (b)   A replacement air bag that has an electrical fault that is
detected by the air bag diagnostic system of a vehicle after the air bag is
installed;
         (c)   A counterfeit air bag, air bag cover, or some other object that
is installed in a vehicle to deceive an owner or operator of the vehicle into
believing that a functional air bag has been installed.
   (B)   No person shall install or reinstall in any motor vehicle a
counterfeit or nonfunctional air bag or any object intended to fulfill the
function of an air bag other than an air bag that was designed in conformance
with or that is regulated by Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 208
for the make, model, and model year of the vehicle, knowing that the object is
not in accordance with that standard.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly manufacture, import, sell, or offer for sale
any of the following:
      (1)   A counterfeit air bag;
      (2)   A nonfunctional air bag;
      (3)   Any other object that is intended to be installed in a motor
vehicle to fulfill the function of an air bag and that is not in conformance
with Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard Number 208 for the make, model, and
model year of the vehicle in which the object is intended to be installed.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly sell, install, or reinstall a device in a
motor vehicle that causes the diagnostic system of a vehicle to inaccurately
indicate that the vehicle is equipped with a functional air bag.
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (B) or (D) of this section is guilty
of improper replacement of a motor vehicle air bag, a misdemeanor of the first
degree on a first offense. On each subsequent offense, or if the violation
results in serious physical harm to an individual, the person is guilty of a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (C) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Each manufacture, importation, installation, reinstallation, sale,
or offer for sale in violation of this section shall constitute a separate and
distinct violation.
(ORC 4549.20)
§ 438.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
404.99 for general Traffic Code penalty is no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 440:  COMMERCIAL AND HEAVY VEHICLES
Section
440.01   Load limits
440.02   Maximum width, height and length
440.03   Wheel protectors
440.04   Vehicles transporting explosives
440.05   Towing requirements; exception to size and weight restrictions
440.06   Loads dropping or leaking; tracking mud; removal required
440.07   Vehicles with spikes, lugs and chains
440.08   Occupying travel trailer or manufactured home while in motion
440.09   Route and load information
440.10   Shifting load; loose loads
440.11   School bus no longer used for school purposes
440.12   Requirements for extra signal equipment
440.13   Disabled vehicle; display of warning devices
440.14   Construction sites
440.15   Weight reduction during thaws
440.16   Inspection as to unlawful load
440.17   Display of tax cards
440.18   Chauffeured limousines
440.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Bus stops and taxicab stands, see §
452.10
   Fatigued or ill drivers, see §
442.09
   Parking of commercial vehicles, see §§
452.14 et seq.
   Riding in cargo storage areas, see §
416.06
   Slow-moving equipment at grade crossings, see §
432.33
   Stopping at grade crossings, see §§
432.32,
432.33
   Truck loading zones, see §
452.09
Statutory reference:
   Arrest notice of drivers, see Ohio R.C. 5577.14
   Display of certificates of registration, see Ohio R.C. 4549.18
§ 440.01  LOAD LIMITS.
   (A)   State Regulations.
      (1)   (a)   The municipality, with respect to highways under their
jurisdiction, upon application in writing, shall issue a special regional heavy
hauling permit authorizing the applicant to operate or move a vehicle or
combination of vehicles as follows:
            1.   At a size or weight of vehicle or load exceeding the maximum
specified in R.C. §§ 5577.01 to 5577.09, or otherwise not in conformity with
R.C. §§ 4513.01 to 4513.37.
            2.   Upon any highway under the jurisdiction of the municipality
except those highways with a condition insufficient to bear the weight of the
vehicle or combination of vehicles as stated in the application.
            3.   Issuance of a special regional heavy hauling permit is subject
to the payment of a fee established by the municipality in accordance with this
section.
         (b)   In circumstances where a person is not eligible to receive a
permit under division (A)(1)(a) of this section, the municipality, with respect
to highways under its jurisdiction, upon application in writing and for good
cause shown, may issue a special permit in writing authorizing the applicant to
operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight of
vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified in Ohio R.C. 5577.01 through
5577.09, or otherwise not in conformity with Ohio R.C. 4513.01 through 4513.37,
upon any highway under its jurisdiction.
      (2)   Notwithstanding Ohio R.C. 715.22 and 723.01, the holder of a permit
issued by the Director of Transportation under Ohio R.C. 4513.34 may move the
vehicle or combination of vehicles described in the special permit on any
highway that is a part of the state highway system when the movement is partly
within and partly without the corporate limits of the municipality.  No local
authority shall require any other permit or license or charge any license fee
or other charge against the holder of a permit for the movement of a vehicle or
combination of vehicles on any highway which is a part of the state highway
system.  The Ohio Director of Transportation shall not require the holder of a
permit issued by the municipality to obtain a special permit for the movement
of vehicles or combination of vehicles on highways within the jurisdiction of
the municipality.  Permits may be issued for any period of time not to exceed
one year, as the local authority in its discretion determines advisable or for
the duration of any public construction project.
      (3)   (a)   The application for a permit issued under this section shall
be in the form that the municipality prescribes. The municipality may prescribe
a permit fee to be imposed and collected when any permit described in this
section is issued.  The permit fee may be in an amount sufficient to reimburse
the municipality for the administrative costs incurred in issuing the permit,
and also to cover the cost of normal and expected damage caused to the roadway
or a street or highway structure as the result of the operation of the
nonconforming vehicle or combination of vehicles. 
         (b)   For the purposes of this section and of rules adopted by the
Director under Ohio R.C. 4513.34, milk transported in bulk by vehicle is deemed
a nondivisible load.
      (4)   The municipality shall issue a special regional heavy hauling
permit under division (A)(1)(a) of this section upon application and payment of
the applicable fee. However, the municipality may issue or withhold a special
permit specified in division (A)(1)(b) of this section. If a permit is to be
issued, the municipality may limit or prescribe conditions of operation for the
vehicle and may require the posting of a bond or other security conditioned
upon the sufficiency of the permit fee to compensate for damage caused to the
roadway or a street or highway structure. In addition, the municipality, as a
condition of issuance of an overweight permit, may require the applicant to
develop and enter into a mutual agreement with the municipality to compensate
for or to repair excess damage caused to the roadway by travel under the
permit.
      (5)   Every permit issued under this section shall be carried in the
vehicle or combination of vehicles to which it refers and shall be open to
inspection by any police officer or authorized agent of any authority granting
the permit.  No person shall violate any of the terms of a permit.
      (6)   The Director of Transportation may debar an applicant from applying
for a special permit under this section upon a finding based on a reasonable
belief that the applicant has done any of the actions specified in R.C. §
4513.34(F).
      (7)   Notice and procedures for debarment shall be as provided in R.C. §
4513.34(G).
      (8)   (a)   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under
this section that relate to gross load limits.
         (b)   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this
section that relate to axle load by more than 2,000 pounds per axle or group of
axles.
         (c)   No person shall violate the terms of a permit issued under this
section that relate to an approved route except upon order of a law enforcement
officer.
      (9)   A permit issued by the municipality under this section for the
operation of a vehicle or combination of vehicles is valid for the purposes of
the vehicle operation in accordance with the conditions and limitations
specified on the permit. Such a permit is voidable by law enforcement   only
for operation of a vehicle or combination of vehicles in violation of the
weight, dimension, or route provisions of the permit. However, a permit is not
voidable for operation in violation of a route provision of a permit if the
operation is upon the order of a law enforcement officer.
(ORC 4513.34)  (Adopting Ordinance)
   (B)   Local Streets.  No person shall operate a vehicle exceeding a size as
specified by Ohio R.C. 5577.01 through 5577.09, or otherwise not in conformity
with Ohio R.C. 4513.01 through 4513.37, or exceeding a gross weight of five
tons, upon any street in the municipality other than state routes and county
roads, except those local streets designated as a truck route and marked as
such by appropriate traffic signs, and except when such operation is necessary
to load or unload property, to go to or from the usual place of storage of such
vehicle or to perform any other legitimate business or act other than passage
through the municipality. Operators of vehicles so deviating from either a
state route or a designated truck route within the municipality shall confine
such deviation to that required in order to accomplish the purpose of the
departure. On county roads, Council or other duly designated local authority
shall establish reasonable weight limits commensurate with the construction and
material specifications for such roads and the load resistance of such roads as
determined by the County Engineer. County roads shall be posted with signs
indicating such weight limits.
   (C)   Through Trucks.  No through trucks, semitrailers or trailers will be
permitted on any city streets.
   (D)   Wallings Road.  Wallings Road from the easterly corporation line to
the westerly corporation line is hereby declared to be a residential street and
through trucks are hereby prohibited from using the same, provided that signs
sufficient in number to apprise an ordinary observant person of the existence
of this division have been placed in the manner required by law.
   (E)   Local Permit for Hauling Dirt.  A special permit will be necessary for
work requiring more than thirty cubic yards of excavation or fill material to
be hauled. Upon application and payment of $25, the Director of Public Service
will grant a permit for work to be performed on a public right-of-way. The
Building Commissioner will grant permits for work not on  a public right-of-
way. Permits will be in effect for ninety days from the date of issuance.  No
permittee shall be required to obtain a special permit from the Ohio Director
of Transportation for the movement of the vehicle or combination of vehicles on
streets or highways under local jurisdiction. However, the approval of the Ohio
Director of Transportation shall be required for movement upon state routes as
provided in division (A) of this section.
      (1)   Haul Roads.  Haul roads will be assigned by the Director of Public
Service and/or the Building Commissioner with the approval of the City
Engineer. Haul roads shall be strictly adhered to. Whoever violates this
paragraph shall be subject to the penalty prescribed in §
440.99 .
      (2)   Work to Be Permitted.  Work shall be permitted according to the
following schedule:
         Monday through Friday       8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m.
         Saturday             8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.
         Sunday               No work permitted
      (3)   Emergency Work. Special permission to extend the times set forth in
division (E)(2) of this section may be granted by the Mayor for immediate
preservation of the public health, safety and welfare.
      (4)   Sunday and Night Work.  Upon application, in writing, and for good
cause shown, and with the approval of the majority of Council and the signature
of the Mayor, special permission may be granted to work on Sundays or at night.
   (F)   Residential Exception.  Notwithstanding the other provisions of this
section, any resident who has obtained a building permit, or any resident who
has an existing single-family residential dwelling and has an approved single
lot topography plan on file, shall be permitted to haul ten truck loads of fill
dirt not to exceed twenty tons gross vehicle weight per load.
   (G)   Definitions.
      (1)   As used in division (G) through (J) of this section:
         (a)   “Axle” mean one or more load-carrying wheels mounted in a single
transverse vertical plane.
         (b)   “Spacing between axles” means the distance between any two
successive transverse vertical planes.
         (c)   Maximum axle load” means the gross weight of the vehicle and
load imposed by any axle upon the road surface.
         (d)   Maximum wheel load” means the proportionate gross weight of the
vehicle and load imposed by any wheel upon the road surface.
      (2)   “Vehicle,” as used in division (I) of this section, means any
single vehicle when not in combination, or any combination of vehicles, as
defined by Ohio R.C. 4501.01
(ORC 5577.01)
      (3)   As used in this section:
         (a)   “Pneumatic tire” means a tire of rubber or fabric, or a tire of
similar material, inflated with air.
         (b)   “Solid tire” means a tire of rubber or similar elastic material
not dependent upon confined air for the support of the load.
(ORC 4501.01)
   (H)   Weight of Load; Width of Tire.  No person, firm, or corporation shall
transport over the improved public streets, alleys, intercounty highways, state
highways, bridges or culverts in this municipality, in any vehicle propelled by
muscular, motor, or other power, any burden, including weight of vehicle and
load, greater than the following:
      (1)   (a)   In vehicles having metal tires three inches or less in width,
a load of 500 pounds for each inch of the total width of the tire on all
wheels;
         (b)   When the tires on such vehicles exceed three inches in width, an
additional load of 800 pounds shall be permitted for each inch by which the
total width of the tires on all wheels exceeds 12 inches.
      (2)   In vehicles having tires of rubber or other similar substances, for
each inch of the total width of tires on all wheels, as follows:
 
Tire Width (in inches) Load Limit (in pounds)
3                      450
3.5                    450
4                      500
5                      600
6 and over             650
 
      (3)   The total width of tires on all wheels shall be, in the case of
solid tires of rubber or other similar substance, the actual width in inches of
all such tires between the flanges at the base of the tires, but in no event
shall that portion of tire coming in contact with the road surface be less than
two-thirds the width so measured between the flanges.
      (4)   In the case of pneumatic tires, of rubber or other similar
substance, the total width of tires on all wheels shall be the actual width of
all such tires, measured at the widest portion thereof when inflated and not
bearing a load.
      (5)   In no event shall the load, including the proportionate weight of
vehicle that can be concentrated on any wheel, exceed 650 pounds to each inch
in width of the tread as defined in this division (H)(3) for solid tires, or
each inch in the actual diameter of pneumatic tires measured when inflated and
not bearing a load.
(ORC 5577.03)
   (I)   Vehicles with Pneumatic Tires, Load Limits.
      (1)   The maximum wheel load of any one wheel of any vehicle, load,
object, or structure operated or moved upon improved public highways, streets,
bridges, or culverts shall not exceed 650 pounds per inch width of pneumatic
tire, measured as prescribed by division (H)(3) of this section.
      (2)   The weight of the vehicle and load imposed upon a road surface that
is part of the interstate system by vehicles with pneumatic tires shall not
exceed any of the following weight limitations:
         (a)   On any one axle, 20,000 pounds;
         (b)   On any tandem axle, 34,000 pounds;
         (c)   On any two or more consecutive axles, the maximum weight as
determined by application of the formula provided in division (I)(3) of this
section.
      (3)   (a)   For purposes of division (I)(2)(c) of this section, the
maximum gross weight on any two or more consecutive axles shall be determined
by application of the following formula:
W = 500[(LN/N-1) + 12N + 36]
         (b)   In this formula, W equals the overall gross weight on any group
of two or more consecutive axles to the nearest 500 pounds, L equals the
distance in rounded whole feet between the extreme of any group of two or more
consecutive axles, and N equals the number of axles in the group under
consideration. However, two consecutive sets of tandem axles may carry a gross
load of 34,000 pounds each, provided the overall distance between the first and
last axles of such consecutive sets of tandem axles is 36 feet or more.
      (4)   Except as provided in division (I)(9) of this section, the weight
of vehicle and load imposed upon a road surface that is not part of the
interstate system by vehicles with pneumatic tires shall not exceed any of the
following weight limitations:
         (a)   On any one axle, 20,000 pounds;
         (b)   On any two successive axles:
            1.   Spaced four feet or less apart, and weighed simultaneously,
24,000 pounds;
            2.   Spaced more than four feet apart, and weighed simultaneously,
34,000 pounds, plus 1,000 pounds per foot or fraction thereof, over four feet,
not to exceed 40,000 pounds.
         (c)   On any three successive load-bearing axles designed to equalize
the load between such axles and spaced so that each such axle of the three-axle
group is more than four feet from the next axle in the three-axle group and so
that the spacing between the first axle and the third axle of the three-axle
group is no more than nine feet, and with such load-bearing three-axle group
weighed simultaneously as a unit:
            1.   48,000 pounds, with the total weight of the vehicle and load
not exceeding 38,000 pounds plus an additional 900 pounds for each foot of
spacing between the front axle and the rearmost axle of the vehicle;
            2.   As an alternative to division (B)(4)(c)1. of this section,
42,500 pounds, if part of a six-axle vehicle combination with at least 20 feet
of spacing between the front axle and rearmost axle, with the total weight of
vehicle and load not exceeding 54,000 pounds plus an additional 600 pounds for
each foot of spacing between the front axle and the rearmost axle of the
vehicle.
         (d)   The total weight of the vehicle and load utilizing any
combination of axles, other than as provided for three-axle groups in division
(I)(4) of this section, shall not exceed 38,000 pounds plus an additional 900
for each foot of spacing between the front axle and rearmost axle of the
vehicle.
      (5)   Notwithstanding divisions (I)(2) and (I)(4) of this section, the
maximum overall gross weight of vehicle and load imposed upon the road surface
shall not exceed 80,000 pounds.
      (6)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, when a vehicle is
towing another vehicle, such drawbar or other connection shall be of a length
such as will limit the spacing between nearest axles of the respective vehicles
to a distance not in excess of 12½ feet.
      (7)   As used in division (I)(2) of this section, “tandem axle” means two
or more consecutive axles whose centers may be included between parallel
transverse vertical planes spaced more than 40 inches but not more than 96
inches apart, extending across the full width of the vehicle.
      (8)   This section does not apply to passenger bus-type vehicles operated
by a regional transit authority pursuant to Ohio R.C. 306.30 through 306.54.
      (9)   Either division (I)(2) or (I)(4) of this section applies to the
weight of a vehicle and its load imposed upon any road surface that is not a
part of the interstate system by vehicles with pneumatic tires. As between
divisions (I)(2) and (I)(4) of this section, only the division that yields the
highest total gross vehicle weight limit shall be applied to any such vehicle.
Once that division has been determined, only the limits contained in the
subdivisions of that division shall apply to that vehicle.
(ORC 5577.04)
   (J)   Axle and Wheel Load, Gross Weights and Towing Connection Length for
Solid Rubber Tires.
      (1)   No vehicle, load, object, or structure having a maximum axle load
greater than 16,000 pounds when such vehicle is equipped with solid rubber
tires shall be operated or moved upon the improved public highways, streets,
bridges, or culverts. The maximum wheel load of any one wheel of such vehicle
shall not exceed 650 pounds per inch width of tire, measured as prescribed by
division (H)(3) of this section, nor shall any solid tire of rubber or other
resilient material, on any wheel of any such vehicle, be less than one inch
thick when measured from the top of the flanges of the tire channel.
      (2)   The weight of vehicle and load imposed upon the road surface by any
two successive axles, spaced four feet or less apart, shall not exceed 19,000
pounds for solid tires, or by any two successive axles spaced more than four
feet but less than eight feet apart, shall not exceed 24,000 pounds for solid
tires; or by any two successive axles, spaced eight feet or more apart, shall
not exceed 28,000 pounds for solid tires; nor shall the total weight of vehicle
and load exceed, for solid rubber tires, 28,000 pounds plus an additional 600
pounds for each foot or fraction thereof of spacing between the front axle and
the rearmost axle of the vehicle; nor shall the weight of vehicle and load
imposed upon the road surface by any vehicle equipped with solid rubber tires
exceed 80% of the permissible weight of vehicle and load as provided for
pneumatic tires.
      (3)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, when a vehicle is
towing another vehicle, such drawbar or other connection shall be of a length
such as will limit the spacing between nearest the axles of the respective
vehicles to a distance not in excess of 12½ feet. If the provisions of this
division (J) are held to exceed the weight limitations or other provisions set
forth in the “Federal Aid Highway Act of 1958,” 72 Stat. 902, 23 U.S.C. 127,
this section shall become null and void to the extent of such inconsistency.
(ORC 5507.041)
   (K)   Special Permits for Vehicles.  Upon application, in writing, and for
good cause shown, a special permit, in writing, authorizing the applicant to
operate or move a vehicle or combination of vehicles of a size or weight of
vehicle or load exceeding the maximum specified in this section may be approved
by a majority of the Council, with the signature of the Mayor.
   (L)   Special Permit Exceptions.  a special permit need not be obtained for:
      (1)   Vehicles operated by the Police Department, the Fire Department or
the Department of Public Service, or similar vehicles of other municipalities
or townships operating in a mutual aid capacity;
      (2)   Vehicles operated by a state, county or regional governmental
entity;
      (3)   School buses;
      (4)   Public utility vehicles;
      (5)   Moving vans;
      (6)   Vehicles operated for the occasional purpose of making deliveries
or pick-ups of commercial products, or providing normal commercial service,
provided that such movement to or from premises not located on state routes is
conducted by the shortest route possible or by a route designated by the
Director of Public Safety;
      (7)   Vehicles making any movement necessitated by an emergency;
      (8)   Vehicles going to or from their usual place of storage; or
      (9)   Farm machinery and equipment.
§ 440.02  MAXIMUM WIDTH, HEIGHT AND LENGTH.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be operated upon the public highways, streets,
bridges, and culverts within this municipality whose dimensions exceed those
specified in this section.
   (B)   No such vehicle shall have a width in excess of:
      (1)   104 inches for passenger bus type vehicles operated exclusively
within the municipality.
      (2)   102 inches, excluding such safety devices as are required by law,
for passenger bus type vehicles operated over freeways, and such other state
roads with minimum pavement widths of 22 feet, except those roads or portions
of roads over which operation of 102-inch buses is prohibited by order of the
Director of Transportation.
      (3)   132 inches for traction engines.
      (4)   102 inches for recreational vehicles, excluding safety devices and
retracted awnings and other appurtenances of six inches or less in width and
except that the Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch recreational
vehicles on designated state highways or portions of highways.
      (5)   102 inches, including load, for all other vehicles, except that the
Director may prohibit the operation of 102-inch vehicles on such state highways
or portions of state highways as the Director designates.
   (C)   No such vehicle shall have a length in excess of:
      (1)   66 feet for passenger bus type vehicles and articulated passenger
bus type vehicles operated by a regional transit authority pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 306.30 to 306.54.
      (2)   45 feet for all other passenger bus type vehicles.
      (3)   53 feet for any semitrailer when operated in a commercial tractor-
semitrailer combination, with or without load, except that the Director may
prohibit the operation of any such commercial tractor- semitrailer combination
on such state highways or portions of state highways as the Director
designates.
      (4)   28.5 feet for any semitrailer or trailer when operated in a
commercial tractor-semitrailer-trailer or commercial tractor-semitrailer-
semitrailer combination, except that the Director may prohibit the operation of
any such commercial tractor-semitrailer-trailer or commercial tractor-
semitrailer-semitrailer combination on such state highways or portions of state
highways as the Director designates.
      (5)   (a)   97 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle transporter
combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle transporter
combinations when operated on any interstate, United States route, or state
route, including reasonable access travel on all other roadways for a distance
not to exceed one road mile from any interstate, United States route, or state
route, not to exceed three saddlemounted vehicles, but which may include one
fullmount;
         (b)   75 feet for drive-away saddlemount vehicle transporter
combinations and drive-away saddlemount with fullmount vehicle transporter
combinations when operated on any roadway not designated as an interstate,
United States route, or state route, not to exceed three saddlemounted
vehicles, but which may include one fullmount.
      (6)   65 feet for any other combination of vehicles coupled together,
with or without load, except as provided in division (C)(3) and (4), and in
division (E) below.
      (7)   45 feet for recreational vehicles.
      (8)   50 feet for all other vehicles, except trailers and semitrailers,
with or without load.
   (D)   No such vehicle shall have a height in excess of 13.5 feet, with or
without load.
   (E)   An automobile transporter or boat transporter shall be allowed a
length of 65 feet, and a stinger- steered automobile transporter or stinger-
steered boat transporter shall be allowed a length of 75 feet, except that the
load thereon may extend no more than four feet beyond the rear of such vehicles
and may extend no more than three feet beyond the front of such vehicles, and
except further that the Director may prohibit the operation of a stinger-
steered automobile transporter, stinger-steered boat transporter, or a B-train
assembly on any state highway or portion of any state highway that the Director
designates.
   (F)   (1)   The widths prescribed in division (B) of this section shall not
include side mirrors, turn signal lamps, marker lamps, handholds for cab entry
and egress, flexible fender extensions, mud flaps, splash and spray suppressant
devices, and load-induced tire bulge.
      (2)   The widths prescribed in division (B)(5) of this section shall not
include automatic covering devices, tarp and tarp hardware, and tiedown
assemblies, provided these safety devices do not extend more than three inches
from either side of the vehicle.
      (3)   The lengths prescribed in divisions (C)(2) to (C)(7) shall not
include safety devices, bumpers attached to the front or rear of such bus or
combination, non-property carrying devices or components that do not extend
more than 24 inches beyond the rear of the vehicle and are needed for loading
or unloading, B-train assembly used between the first and second semitrailer of
a commercial tractor-semitrailer-semitrailer combination, energy conservation
devices as provided in any regulations adopted by the Secretary of the United
States Department of Transportation, or any noncargo-carrying refrigerator
equipment attached to the front of trailers and semitrailers.  In special
cases, vehicles that dimensions exceed those prescribed by this section may
operate in accordance with rules adopted by the Director.
   (G)   (1)   This section does not apply to fire engines, fire trucks, or
other vehicles or apparatus belonging to the municipality or to the volunteer
fire department thereof or used by such department in the discharge of its
functions.  This section does not apply to vehicles and pole trailers used in
the transportation of wooden and metal poles, nor to the transportation of
pipes or well-drilling equipment, nor to farm machinery and equipment. 
      (2)   The owner or operator of any vehicle, machinery, or equipment not
specifically enumerated in this section but the dimensions of which exceed the
dimensions provided by this section, when operating the same on the highways
and streets of the municipality, shall comply with the rules of the Director
governing such movement.  Any person adversely affected shall have the same
right of appeal as provided in Ohio R.C. Chapter 119.
      (3)   This section does not require the municipality or any railroad or
other private corporation to provide sufficient vertical clearance to permit
the operation of such vehicle, or to make any changes in or about existing
structures now crossing streets, roads, and other public thoroughfares.
   (H)   As used in this section, “recreational vehicle” has the same meaning
as in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
(ORC 5577.05)
   (I)   No person shall violate any rule or regulation promulgated by the
Director of Transportation in accordance with Ohio R.C. 5577.05.
(ORC 5577.06)
§ 440.03  WHEEL PROTECTORS.
   No person shall drive or operate, or cause to be driven or operated, any
commercial car, trailer, or semitrailer, used for the transportation of goods
or property, the gross weight of which, with load, exceeds three tons, upon the
public highways, streets, bridges, and culverts within the municipality, unless
such vehicle is equipped with suitable metal protectors or substantial flexible
flaps on the rearmost wheels of such vehicle or combination of vehicles to
prevent, as far as practicable, the wheels from throwing dirt, water, or other
materials on the windshields of following vehicles.  Such protectors or flaps
shall have a ground clearance of not more than one-third of the distance from
the center of the rearmost axle to the center of the flaps under any conditions
of loading of the vehicle, and they shall be at least as wide as the tires they
are protecting.  If the vehicle is so designed and constructed that such
requirements are accomplished by means  of fenders, body construction, or other
means of enclosure, then no such protectors or flaps are required.  Rear wheels
not covered at the top by fenders, bodies, or other parts of the vehicle shall
be covered at the top by protective means extending at least to the center line
of the rearmost axle.
(ORC 5577.11)
§ 440.04  VEHICLES TRANSPORTING EXPLOSIVES.
   Any person operating any vehicle transporting explosives upon a highway
shall at all times comply with the following requirements:
   (A)   The vehicle shall be marked or placarded on each side and on the rear
with the word “EXPLOSIVES” in letters not less than eight inches high, or there
shall be displayed on the rear of such vehicle a red flag not less than 24
inches square marked with the word “DANGER” in white letters six inches high,
or shall be marked or placarded in accordance with § 177.823 of the United
States Department of Transportation regulations.
   (B)   The vehicle shall be equipped with not less than two fire
extinguishers, filled and ready for immediate use, and placed at convenient
points on such vehicle.
(ORC 4513.29)
§ 440.05  TOWING REQUIREMENTS; EXCEPTION TO SIZE AND WEIGHT RESTRICTIONS.
   (A)   When one vehicle is towing another vehicle, the drawbar or other
connection shall be of sufficient strength to pull all the weight towed
thereby, and the drawbar or other connection shall not exceed 15 feet from one
vehicle to the other, except the connection between any two vehicles
transporting poles, pipe, machinery, or other objects of structural nature
which cannot readily be dismembered.
   (B)   When one vehicle is towing another and the connection consists only of
a chain, rope, or cable, there shall be displayed upon such connection a white
flag or cloth not less than 12 inches square.
   (C)   In addition to such drawbar or other connection, each trailer and each
semitrailer which is not connected to a commercial tractor by means of a fifth
wheel shall be coupled with stay chains or cables to the vehicle by which it is
being drawn.  These chains or cables shall be of sufficient size and strength
to prevent the towed vehicle’s parting from the drawing vehicle in case the
drawbar or other connection should break or become disengaged.  In case of a
loaded pole trailer, the connecting pole to the drawing vehicle shall be
coupled to the drawing vehicle with stay chains or cables of sufficient size
and strength to prevent the towed vehicle’s parting from the drawing vehicle.
   (D)   Every trailer or semitrailer, except pole and cable trailers and pole
and cable dollies operated by a public utility as defined in Ohio R.C. 5727.01,
shall be equipped with a coupling device which shall be so designed and
constructed that the trailer will follow substantially in the path of the
vehicle drawing it, without whipping or swerving from side to side.  Vehicles
used to transport agricultural produce or agricultural production materials
between a local place of storage and supply and the farm, when drawn or towed
on a street or highway at a speed of 25 miles per hour or less, and vehicles
designed and used exclusively to transport a boat between a place of storage
and a marina, or in and around a marina, when drawn or towed on a street or
highway for a distance of no more than ten miles and at a speed of 25 miles per
hour or less, shall have a drawbar or other connection, including the hitch
mounted on the towing vehicle, which shall be of sufficient strength to pull
all the weight towed thereby.  Only one such vehicle used to transport
agricultural produce or agricultural production materials as provided in this
section may be towed or drawn at one time except as follows:
      (1)   An agricultural tractor may tow or draw more than one such vehicle;
      (2)   A pickup truck or straight truck designed by the manufacturer to
carry a load of not less than one-half ton and not more than two tons may tow
or draw not more than two such vehicles that are being used to transport
agricultural produce from the farm to a local place of storage.  No vehicle
being so towed by such a pickup truck or straight truck shall be considered to
be a motor vehicle.
(ORC 4513.32)
   (E)   Exception to Size and Weight Restrictions.
      (1)   The size and weight provisions of this chapter and R.C. Chapter
5577 do not apply to a any of the following:
         (a)   A person who is engaged in the initial towing or removal of a
wrecked or disabled motor vehicle from the site of an emergency on a public
highway where the vehicle became wrecked or disabled to the nearest site where
the vehicle can be brought into conformance with the requirements of this
chapter and R.C. Chapter 5577, to the nearest storage facility, or to the
nearest qualified repair facility;
         (b)   A person who is en route to the site of an emergency on a public
highway to remove a wrecked or disabled motor vehicle;
         (c)   A person who is returning from delivering a wrecked or disabled
motor vehicle to a site, storage facility, or repair facility as specified in
division (C)(1)(a) of this section.
      (2)   Any subsequent towing of a wrecked or disabled vehicle shall comply
with the size and weight provisions of this chapter and R.C. Chapter 5577.
      (3)   No court shall impose any penalty prescribed in R.C. § 5577.99 or
the civil liability established in R.C. § 5577.12 upon a person who is
operating a vehicle in the manner described in division (C)(1) of this section.
(R.C. § 5577.15)
§ 440.06  LOADS DROPPING OR LEAKING; TRACKING MUD; REMOVAL REQUIRED.
   (A)   No vehicle shall be driven or moved on any highway unless the vehicle
is so constructed, loaded, or covered as to prevent any of its load from
dropping, sifting, leaking, or otherwise escaping therefrom, except that sand
or other substances may be dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or
water or other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in cleaning or
maintaining the roadway.   
   (B)   Except for a farm vehicle used to transport agricultural produce or
agricultural production materials or a rubbish vehicle in the process of
acquiring its load, no vehicle loaded with garbage, swill, cans, bottles, waste
paper, ashes, refuse, trash, rubbish, waste, wire, paper, cartons, boxes,
glass, solid waste, or any other material of an unsanitary nature that is
susceptible to blowing or bouncing from a moving vehicle shall be driven or
moved on any highway unless the load is covered with a sufficient cover to
prevent the load or any part of the load from spilling onto the highway.
   (C)   No person shall operate any vehicle so as to track mud on any public
way or place.
   (D)   It shall be the duty of the driver of a vehicle who unlawfully drops
or deposits mud or permits the load or any portion thereof to be dropped or
deposited upon any public way or place to immediately remove the same or cause
it to be removed.
(ORC 4513.31)  (Ord. 88-39, passed 3-21-1988)
§ 440.07  VEHICLES WITH SPIKES, LUGS AND CHAINS.
   (A)   No person shall drive over the improved highways of this municipality
a traction engine or tractor with tires or wheels equipped with ice picks,
spuds, spikes, chains or other projections of any kind extending beyond the
cleats, and no person shall tow or in any way pull another vehicle over the
improved highways of this municipality which towed or pulled vehicle has tires
or wheels equipped with ice picks, spuds, spikes, chains or other projections
of any kind.  “Traction engine” or “tractor,” as used in this section, applies
to all self-propelling engines equipped with metal-tired wheels operated or
propelled by any form of engine, motor or mechanical power.
   (B)   This municipality shall not adopt, enforce, or maintain any ordinance,
rule or regulation contrary to or inconsistent with division (A), nor shall
this municipality require any license tax upon or registration fee for any
traction engine, tractor, or trailer, or any permit or license to operate. 
Operators of traction engines or tractors shall have the same rights upon the
public streets and highways as the drivers of any other vehicles, unless some
other safe and convenient way is provided, and no public road open to traffic
shall be closed to traction engines or tractors.
(ORC 5589.08)
   (C)   For the purposes of this section, “studded tire” means any tire
designed for use on a vehicle and equipped with metal studs or studs of wear-
resisting material that project beyond the tread of the traction surface of the
tire.
   (D)   (1)   Except as provided in division (D)(2) of this section, no person
shall operate any motor vehicle other than a public safety vehicle or school
bus that is equipped with studded tires on any street or highway in this
municipality, except during the period extending from the first day of November
of each year through the fifteenth day of April of the succeeding year.
      (2)   A person may operate a motor vehicle that is equipped with
retractable studded tires with the studs retracted at any time of the year, but
shall operate the motor vehicle with the studs extended only as provided in
division (B)(1) of this section.
   (E)   Division (D) of this section does not apply to the use of tire chains
when there is snow or ice on the streets or highways where such chains are
being used, or the immediate vicinity thereof.
(ORC 5589.081)
§ 440.08  OCCUPYING TRAVEL TRAILER OR MANUFACTURED HOME WHILE IN MOTION.
   No person shall occupy any travel trailer or manufactured or mobile home
while it is being used as a conveyance upon a street or highway.
(ORC 4511.701)
§ 440.09  ROUTE AND LOAD INFORMATION.
   Drivers of vehicles described in this chapter are required, upon request by
a police officer, to give full and true information as to the route they are
following and the name of the consignor and consignee and place of delivery or
removal and the location of any consignment being hauled or goods being
removed, and upon a designation by such police officer of a route to be
followed, shall immediately adopt and pursue such route.
§ 440.10  SHIFTING LOAD; LOOSE LOADS.
   (A)   In addition to any other lawful requirements of load distribution, no
person shall operate any vehicle upon a street or highway unless such vehicle
is so laden as to prevent its contents from shifting or otherwise unbalancing
the vehicle to such an extent as to interfere with the safe operation of the
same.
   (B)   No motor vehicle or trailer shall be driven unless the tailboard or
tailgate, tarpaulins, chains (except ground or contact chains), ropes, stakes,
poles, and the like, or any part of the load, are securely fastened to prevent
dangling, flapping, swinging or falling from the side, end or top of the load
or body. All projecting cargo shall be properly guarded by a red flag or cloth
or a red light or lantern as required by Ohio R.C. 4513.09, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
§ 440.11  SCHOOL BUS NO LONGER USED FOR SCHOOL PURPOSES.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, no person who is
the owner of a bus that previously was registered as a school bus that is used
or is to be used exclusively for purposes other than the transportation of
children, shall operate the bus or permit it to be operated within the city
unless such bus has been painted a color different from that prescribed for
school buses by Ohio R.C. 4511.77 and painted in such a way that the words
“stop” and “school bus” are obliterated.
   (B)   Any church bus that previously was registered as a school bus and is
registered under Ohio R.C. 4503.07 may retain the paint color prescribed for
school buses by Ohio R.C. 4511.77 if the bus complies with all of the
following:
      (1)   The words “school bus” required by Ohio R.C. 4511.77 are covered or
obliterated and the bus is marked on the front and rear with the words “church
bus” painted in black lettering not less than ten inches in height;
      (2)   The automatically extended stop warning sign required by Ohio R.C.
4511.75 is removed and the word “stop” required by Ohio R.C. 4511.77 is covered
or obliterated;
      (3)   The flashing red and amber lights required by Ohio R.C. 4511.771
are covered or removed;
      (4)   The inspection decal required by Ohio R.C. 4511.761 is covered and
removed; and
      (5)   The identification number assigned under Ohio R.C. 4511.764 and
marked in black lettering on the front and rear of the bus is covered or
obliterated. 
(ORC 4511.762)
§ 440.12  REQUIREMENTS FOR EXTRA SIGNAL EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   No person shall operate any motor truck, bus or commercial tractor
upon any highway within the city at any time from sunset to sunrise unless
there is carried in such vehicle, except as provided in division (B) of this
section, the following equipment, which shall be of the types approved by the
State Director of Transportation:
      (1)   At least three flares or three red reflectors or three red electric
lanterns, each of which may be seen and distinguished at a distance of 500 feet
under normal atmospheric conditions at night time;
      (2)   At least three red-burning fusees, unless red reflectors or red
electric lanterns are carried;
      (3)   At least two red cloth flags, not less than twelve inches square,
with standards to support them; and
      (4)   The type of red reflectors shall comply with such standards and
specifications in effect on September 16, 1963, or later established by the
Interstate Commerce Commission and must be certified as meeting such standards
by Underwriters’ Laboratories.
   (B)   No person shall operate at the time and under the conditions stated in
this section any motor vehicle used in transporting flammable liquids in bulk,
or in transporting compressed flammable gases, unless there is carried in such
vehicle three red electric lanterns or three red reflectors meeting the
requirements stated above.  There shall not be carried in any such vehicle any
flare, fusee or signal produced by a flame.
   (C)   This section does not apply to any person who operates any motor
vehicle in a work area designated by protection equipment devices that are
displayed and used in accordance with the manual adopted by the Ohio Department
of Transportation under Ohio R.C. 4511.09.
(ORC 4513.27)
§ 440.13  DISABLED VEHICLE; DISPLAY OF WARNING DEVICES.
   (A)   Whenever any motor truck, bus, commercial tractor, trailer,
semitrailer or pole trailer is disabled upon the traveled portion of any
highway, freeway, expressway, thruway and connecting, entering or exiting
ramps, or a shoulder thereof, in the city at any time when lighted lamps are
required on vehicles, the operator of such vehicle shall display the following
warning devices upon the highway or other public way, as aforesaid, during the
time the vehicle is so disabled, except as provided in division (B) of this
section:
      (1)   A lighted fusee shall be immediately placed on the roadway at the
traffic side of the vehicle unless red electric lanterns or red reflectors are
displayed.
      (2)   Within the burning period of the fusee and as promptly as possible,
three lighted flares or pot torches or three red reflectors or three red
electric lanterns shall be placed on the roadway as follows:
         (a)   One at a distance of forty paces or approximately 100 feet in
advance of the vehicle;
         (b)   One at a distance of forty paces or approximately 100 feet to
the rear of the vehicle, except as hereinafter provided, each in the center of
the lane of traffic occupied by the disabled vehicle; and
         (c)   One at the traffic side of the vehicle.
   (B)   Whenever any vehicle used in transporting flammable liquids in bulk,
or transporting compressed flammable gases is disabled upon a highway at any
time or place mentioned in division (A) above, the driver of such vehicle shall
display upon the roadway the following warning devices:
      (1)   One red electric lantern or one red reflector shall be immediately
placed on the roadway at the traffic side of the vehicle; and
      (2)   Two other red electric lanterns or two other red reflectors shall
be placed to the front and rear of the vehicle in the same manner prescribed
for flares in division (A) above.
   (C)   When a vehicle of a type specified in division (B) of this section is
disabled, the use of flares, fusees or any signal produced by flame as warning
signals is prohibited.
   (D)   Whenever any vehicle of a type referred to in this section is disabled
upon the traveled portion of a highway or other public way, as provided in
division (A) of this section, or the shoulder thereof, in the city at any time
when the display of fusees, flares, red reflectors or electric lanterns is not
required, the operator of such vehicle shall display two red flags upon the
roadway in the lane of traffic occupied by the disabled vehicle, one at a
distance of forty paces or approximately 100 feet in advance of the vehicle and
one at a distance of forty paces or approximately 100 feet to the rear of the
vehicle, except as provided in this section.
   (E)   The flares, fusees, lanterns, red reflectors and flags to be displayed
as required in this section shall conform with the requirements of Ohio R.C.
4513.27.
   (F)   In the event the vehicle is disabled near a curve, crest of a hill or
other obstruction of view, the flare, flag, reflector or lantern in that
direction shall be placed as to afford ample warning to other users of the
highway, but in no case less than forty paces or approximately 100 feet nor
more than 120 paces or approximately 300 feet from the disabled vehicle.
   (G)   This section does not apply to the operator of any vehicle in a work
area designated by protection equipment devices that are displayed and used in
accordance with the manual adopted by the Ohio Department of Transportation
under Ohio R.C. 4511.09.
(ORC 4513.28)
§ 440.14  CONSTRUCTION SITES.
   On all construction jobs within the city where earth-moving equipment,
trucks, men or materials are being transported frequently across a public
thoroughfare within the limits of the municipality, the contractor in charge of
the operation shall employ a flagman who shall warn approaching traffic of the
hazard and stop traffic when necessary so that the earth-moving equipment,
vehicles, men or supplies can be transported safely across any street or
thoroughfare that involves interference with the vehicular flow of traffic
within the area.
§ 440.15  WEIGHT REDUCTION DURING THAWS.
   Whenever thawing or excessive moisture renders any section of any street,
alley or other public thoroughfare within the municipality insufficient to bear
loads of the weights prescribed in §
440.01, the Director of Public Safety, by order, may reduce the maximum
allowable loads on such street, alley or any section thereof, but not by more
than 50% of the maximum weights otherwise permitted, for and during such time
as such condition of thawing or excessive moisture continues to exist.
§ 440.16  INSPECTION AS TO UNLAWFUL LOAD.
   (A)   Any police officer having reason to believe that the weight of a
vehicle and its load is unlawful may require the driver of such vehicle to stop
and submit to a weighing of it by means of a compact, self- contained,
portable, sealed scale specially adapted to determining the wheel loads of
vehicles on highways; a sealed scale permanently installed in a fixed location,
having a load-receiving element specially adapted to determining the wheel
loads of highway vehicles; a sealed scale permanently installed in a fixed
location; having a load-receiving element specially adapted to determining the
combined load of all wheels on a single axle or on successive axles of a
highway vehicle; or a sealed scale adapted to weighing highway vehicles, loaded
or unloaded. The driver of such vehicle shall, if necessary, be directed to
proceed to the nearest available of such sealed scales to accomplish the
weighing, provided such scales are within three miles of the point where such
vehicle is stopped. Any vehicle stopped in accordance with this section may be
held by the police officer for a reasonable time only to accomplish the
weighing as prescribed by this section. All scales used in determining the
lawful weight of a vehicle and its load shall be annually compared by a
municipal, county or state sealer with the state standards or standards
approved by the state, and such scales shall not be sealed if they do not
conform to the state standards or standards approved by the state.
   (B)   (1)   At each end of a permanently installed scale, there shall be a
straight approach in the same plane as the platform, of sufficient length and
width to ensure the level positioning of vehicles during weight determinations.
      (2)   During determination of weight by compact, self-contained,
portable, sealed scales, specially adapted to determining the wheel loads of
vehicles on highways, they shall always be used on terrain of sufficient length
and width to accommodate the entire vehicle being weighed. Such terrain shall
be level, or if not level it shall be of such elevation that the difference in
elevation between the wheels on any one axle does not exceed two inches and the
difference in elevation between axles being weighed does not exceed one- fourth
of an inch per foot of the distance between such axles.
   (C)   Whenever such officer, upon weighing a vehicle and load, determines
that the weight is unlawful, he may require the driver to stop the vehicle in a
suitable place and remain standing until such portion of the load is removed as
is necessary to reduce the weight of such vehicle to the limit permitted under
Ohio R.C. 5577.01 to 5577.14.
(ORC 4513.33)
§ 440.17  DISPLAY OF TAX CARDS.
   No motor transportation company or private motor carrier shall operate any
motor vehicle for the transportation of persons or property, or both, for hire
on any road, street or highway in the municipality without carrying thereon an
annual tax card, an emergency tax receipt card or a reciprocity tax decal, as
required under any administrative order of the Public Utilities Commission of
Ohio, as authorized and provided under Ohio R.C. 4921.18 and 4923.11.
(Ord. 89-153, passed 12-18-1989)
§ 440.18  CHAUFFEURED LIMOUSINES.
   (A)   The operator of a chauffeured limousine shall accept passengers only
on the basis of prearranged contracts, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4501.01, and
shall not cruise in search of patronage unless the limousine is in compliance
with any statute or ordinance governing the operation of taxicabs or other
similar vehicles for hire.
   (B)   The operator of a chauffeured limousine may provide transportation to
passengers who arrange for the transportation through an intermediary,
including a digital dispatching service. Notwithstanding any law to the
contrary, when providing transportation arranged through an intermediary, the
operator of a chauffeured limousine may establish the fare and method of fare
calculation, so long as the method of fare calculation is provided to the
passenger upon request.
   (C)   No person shall advertise or hold himself or herself out as doing
business as a limousine service or livery service or other similar designation
unless each vehicle used by the person to provide the service is registered in
accordance with Ohio R.C. 4503.24 and is in compliance with Ohio R.C. 4509.80.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 4511.85)
§ 440.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, whoever
violates any of the weight provisions of §
440.01 shall be fined in accordance with the following schedule.
 
Fines
Overload (pounds) Not Less Than Not More Than
1,001 to 1,500     $60.00             $90.00
1,501 to 2,000     70.00              100.00
2,001 to 2,500     100.00             150.00
2,501 to 3,000     110.00             165.00
3,001 to 3,500     120.00             180.00
3,501 to 4,000     130.00             210.00
4,001 to 4,500     140.00             210.00
4,501 to 5,000     150.00             225.00
5,001 to 5,500     160.00             240.00
5,501 to 6,000     170.00             255.00
6,001 to 6,500     180.00             270.00
6,501 to 7,000     190.00             285.00
7,001 to 7,500     200.00             300.00
7,501 to 8,000     210.00             315.00
8,001 to 8,500     220.00             330.00
8,501 to 9,000     230.00             345.00
9,001 to 9,500     240.00             360.00
9,501 to 10,000    250.00             375.00
10,001 to 10,500   470.00             705.00
10,501 to 11,000   490.00             735.00
11,001 to 11,500   510.00             765.00
11,501 to 12,000   530.00             795.00
12,001 to 12,500   550.00             825.00
12,501 to 13,000   570.00             855.00
13,001 to 13,500   590.00             885.00
13,501 to 14,000   610.00             915.00
14,001 to 14,500   630.00             945.00
14,501 to 15,000   650.00             975.00
15,001 to 15,500   670.00             1,005.00
15,501 to 16,000   690.00             1,035.00
16,001 to 16,500   710.00             1,065.00
16,501 to 17,000   730.00             1,095.00
17,001 to 17,500   750.00             1,125.00
17,501 to 18,000   770.00             1,155.00
18,001 to 18,500   790.00             1,185.00
18,501 to 19,000   810.00             1,215.00
19,001 to 19,500   830.00             1,245.00
19,501 to 20,000   850.00             1,275.00
More than 20,000   100.00 plus        100.00 plus
$4.00 per 100 lbs. $6.00 per 100 lbs.
 
      (2)   In addition to the fines herein designated, whoever violates any of
the weight provisions of §
440.01 may be imprisoned for not more than six months.
   (B)   No penalty prescribed in this section shall be imposed on any vehicle
combination if:
      (1)   The overload on any axle does not exceed 1,000 pounds; and
      (2)   The immediately preceding or following axle, except the front axle
of the vehicle combination, is underloaded by the same or a greater amount. For
purposes of this division, two axles on one vehicle less than eight feet apart
shall be considered as one axle.
   (C)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of §
440.01(F) shall be fined not less than $500 nor more than $1,000.
(Ord. 36-87, passed 4-6-1987)
Editor’s note:
   See §
404.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 442:  DRIVERS OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
Section
442.01   Definitions
442.02   Use of actual gross weight in lieu of rating
442.03   Licensing requirements
442.04   Physical qualification to operate commercial motor vehicles
442.05   Criminal offenses
442.06   Application of 49 C.F.R. 383
442.07   Information required of prospective drivers by employers; unauthorized
driving
442.08   Authority of peace officers re drunk driving
442.09   Permitting or driving while fatigued or ill prohibited
442.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Driving under the influence, generally, see §
434.01
   Load limits, see §
440.01
   Route and load information, see §
440.09
   Stopping after accidents, generally, see §§
436.11,
436.12
Statutory reference:
   Arrest notice of drivers, see Ohio R.C. 5577.14
   Hours of service of truck drivers, see Ohio R.C. 4921.30, 4923.16
   Warning devices when disabled on freeways, see Ohio R.C. 4513.28
§ 442.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   “Alcohol concentration.”  The concentration of alcohol in a person’s blood,
breath or urine.  When expressed as a percentage, it means grams of alcohol per
the following:
      (1)   100 milliliters of whole blood, blood serum, or blood plasma;
      (2)   210 liters of breath;
      (3)   100 milliliters of urine.
   “Commercial driver’s license.”  A license issued in accordance with Ohio
R.C. Chapter 4506 that authorizes an individual to drive a commercial motor
vehicle.
   “Commercial driver’s license information system.”  The information system
established pursuant to the requirements of the “Commercial Motor Vehicle
Safety Act of 1986,” 100 Stat. 3207-171, 49 U.S.C. App. 2701.
   “Commercial motor vehicle.”  Except when used in Ohio R.C. 4506.25, any
motor vehicle designed or used to transport persons or property that meets any
of the following qualifications:
      (1)   Any combination of vehicles with a gross vehicle weight or combined
gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more, provided that the gross
vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight rating of the vehicle or vehicles being
towed is in excess of 10,000 pounds;
      (2)   Any single vehicle with a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle
weight rating of 26,001 pounds or more;
      (3)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is not a Class A
or Class B vehicle, but is designed to transport 16 or more passengers
including the driver;
      (4)   Any school bus with a gross vehicle weight or gross vehicle weight
rating of less than 26,001 pounds that is designed to transport fewer than 16
passengers including the driver;
      (5)   Is transporting hazardous materials for which placarding is
required under 49 C.F.R. Part 172, Subpart F, as amended; or
      (6)   Any single vehicle or combination of vehicles that is designed to
be operated and to travel on a public street or highway and is considered by
the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration to be a commercial motor
vehicle, including, but not limited to, a motorized crane, a vehicle whose
function is to pump cement, a rig for drilling wells, and a portable crane.
   “Controlled substance.”  Includes all of the following:
      (1)   Any substance classified as a controlled substance under the
“Controlled Substances Act,” 80 Stat. 1242 (1970), 21 U.S.C. 802(6), as
amended;
      (2)   Any substance included in Schedules I through V of 21 C.F.R. Part
1308, as amended;
      (3)   Any drug of abuse.
   “Conviction.”  An unvacated adjudication of guilt or a determination that a
person has violated or failed to comply with the law in a court of original
jurisdiction or an authorized administrative tribunal, an unvacated forfeiture
of bail or collateral deposited to secure the person’s appearance in court, a
plea of guilty or nolo contendere accepted by the court, the payment of a fine
or court cost, or violation of a condition of release without bail, regardless
of whether or not the penalty is rebated, suspended or probated.
   “Disqualification.”  Means any of the following:
      (1)   The suspension, revocation, or cancellation of a person’s
privileges to operate a commercial motor vehicle;
      (2)   Any withdrawal of a person’s privileges to operate a commercial
motor vehicle as the result of a violation of state or local law relating to
motor vehicle traffic control other than parking, vehicle weight, or vehicle
defect violations;
      (3)   A determination by the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration
that a person is not qualified to operate a commercial motor vehicle under 49
C.F.R. 391.
   “Domiciled.”  Having a true, fixed, principal, and permanent residence to
which an individual intends to return.
   “Downgrade.”  Any of the following, as applicable:
      (1)   A change in the commercial driver’s license, or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit, holder’s self-certified status as
described in division Ohio R.C. 4506.10(A)(1);
      (2)   A change to a lesser class of vehicle;
      (3)   Removal of commercial driver’s license privileges from the
individual’s driver’s license.
   “Drive.”  To drive, operate or be in physical control of a motor vehicle.
   “Driver.”  Any person who drives, operates or is in physical control of a
commercial motor vehicle or is required to have a commercial driver’s license.
   “Driver’s license.”  A license issued by the Bureau of Motor Vehicles that
authorizes an individual to drive.
   “Drug of abuse.”  Any controlled substance, dangerous drug as defined in
Ohio R.C. 4729.01, or over- the-counter medication that, when taken in
quantities exceeding the recommended dosage, can result in impairment of
judgment or reflexes.
   “Electronic device.”  Includes a cellular telephone, a personal digital
assistant, a pager, a computer, and any other device used to input, write,
send, receive, or read text.
   “Eligible unit of local government.” A village, township, or county that has
a population of not more than 3,000 persons according to the most recent
federal census.
   “Employer.” Any person, including the federal government, any state, and a
political subdivision of any state, that owns or leases a commercial motor
vehicle or assigns a person to drive such a motor vehicle.
   “Endorsement.”  An authorization on a person’s commercial driver’s license
that is required to permit the person to operate a specified type of commercial
motor vehicle.
   “Farm truck.” A truck controlled and operated by a farmer for use in the
transportation to or from a farm, for a distance of not more than 150 miles, of
products of the farm, including livestock and its products, poultry and its
products, floricultural and horticultural products, and in the transportation
to the farm, from a distance of not more than 150 miles, of supplies for the
farm, including tile, fence and every other thing or commodity used in
agricultural, floricultural, horticultural, livestock, and poultry production,
and livestock, poultry, and other animals and things used for breeding,
feeding, or other purposes connected with the operation of the farm, when the
truck is operated in accordance with this definition and is not used in the
operations of a motor carrier, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4923.01.
   “Fatality.”  The death of a person as the result of a motor vehicle accident
occurring not more than 365 days prior to the date of death.
   “Felony.”  Any offense under federal or state law that is punishable by
death or imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and includes any offense
specifically classified as a felony under the law of this state, regardless of
the penalty that may be imposed.
   “Foreign jurisdiction.”  Any jurisdiction other than a state.
   “Gross vehicle weight rating.”  The value specified by the manufacturer as
the maximum loaded weight of a single or a combination vehicle. The gross
vehicle weight rating of a combination vehicle is the gross vehicle weight
rating of the power unit plus the gross vehicle weight rating of each towed
unit.
   “Hazardous materials.”  Any material that has been designated as hazardous
under 49 U.S.C. 5103 and is required to be placarded under 49 C.F.R. Part 172,
Subpart F or any quantity of a material listed as a select agent or toxin in 42
C.F.R. Part 73, as amended.
   “Imminent hazard.” The existence of a condition that presents a substantial
likelihood that death, serious illness, severe personal injury, or a
substantial endangerment to health, property, or the environment may occur
before the reasonably foreseeable completion date of a formal proceeding begun
to lessen the risk of death, illness, injury, or endangerment.
   “Medical variance.”  One of the following received by a driver from the
Federal Motor Carrier Safety Administration that allows the driver to be issued
a medical certificate:
      (1)   An exemption letter permitting operation of a commercial motor
vehicle under 49 C.F.R. part 381, subpart C or 49 C.F.R. 391.64;
      (2)   A skill performance evaluation certificate permitting operation of
a commercial motor vehicle pursuant to 49 C.F.R. 391.49.
   “Mobile telephone.”  A mobile communication device that falls under or uses
any commercial mobile radio service as defined in 47 C.F.R. part 20, except
that mobile telephone does not include two-way or citizens band radio services.
   “Motor vehicle.”  A vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer, or semitrailer
propelled or drawn by mechanical power used on highways, except that such term
does not include a vehicle, machine, tractor, trailer, or semitrailer operated
exclusively on a rail.
   “Out-of-service order.”  A declaration by an authorized enforcement officer
of a federal, state, local, Canadian, or Mexican jurisdiction declaring that
the driver, commercial motor vehicle, or commercial motor carrier operation is
out of service as defined in 49 C.F.R. 390.5.
   “Peace officer.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2935.01.
   “Portable tank.”  A liquid or gaseous packaging designed primarily to be
loaded on or temporarily attached to a vehicle and equipped with skids,
mountings, or accessories to facilitate handling of the tank by mechanical
means.
   “Public safety vehicle.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01(E)(1)
and (E)(3).
   “Recreational vehicle.” Includes every vehicle that is defined as a
recreational vehicle in Ohio R.C. 4501.01 and is used exclusively for purposes
other than engaging in business for profit.
   “Residence.”  Any person’s residence determined in accordance with standards
prescribed in the rules adopted by the Registrar.
   “School bus.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
   “Serious traffic violation.”  Any of the following:
      (1)   A conviction arising from a single charge of operating a commercial
motor vehicle in violation of any provision of Ohio R.C. 4506.03;
      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (2)(b) of this definition, a
violation while operating a commercial motor vehicle of a law of this state, or
any municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or any other
substantially similar law of another state or political subdivision of another
state, prohibiting either of the following:
            1.   Texting while driving;
            2.   Using a handheld mobile telephone.
         (b)   It is not a serious traffic violation if the person was texting
or using a handheld mobile telephone to contact law enforcement or other
emergency services.
      (3)   A conviction arising from the operation of any motor vehicle that
involves any of the following:
         (a)   A single charge of any speed in excess of the posted speed limit
by 15 miles per hour or more;
         (b)   Violations of Ohio R.C. 4511.20 or 4511.201 or any substantially
equivalent ordinance or resolution, or of any substantially equivalent law of
another state or political subdivision of another state;
         (c)   Violation of a law of this state or an ordinance or resolution
relating to traffic control, other than a parking violation, or of any
substantially equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of
another state, that results in a fatal accident;
         (d)   Violation of Ohio R.C. 4506.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or of any substantially
equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of another state, that
involves the operation of a commercial motor vehicle without a valid commercial
driver’s license with the proper class or endorsement for the specific vehicle
group being operated or for the passengers or type of cargo being transported;
         (e)   Violation of Ohio R.C. 4506.03 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance or county or township resolution, or of any substantially
equivalent law of another state or political subdivision of another state, that
involves the operation of a commercial motor vehicle without a valid commercial
driver’s license being in the person’s possession;
         (f)   Violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.33 or 4511.34, or any municipal
ordinance or county or township resolution substantially equivalent to either
of those sections, or any substantially equivalent law of another state or
political subdivision of another state;
         (g)   Violation of any other law of this state, any law of another
state, or any ordinance or resolution of a political subdivision of this state
or another state that meets both of the following requirements:
            1.   It relates to traffic control, other than a parking violation;
            2.   It is determined to be a serious traffic violation by the
United States Secretary of Transportation and is designated by the director as
such by rule.
   “State.”  A state of the United States and includes the District of
Columbia.
   “Tank vehicle.”  Any commercial motor vehicle that is designed to transport
any liquid or gaseous materials within a tank or tanks that are either
permanently or temporarily attached to the vehicle or its chassis and have an
individual rated capacity of more than 119 gallons and an aggregate rated
capacity of 1,000 gallons or more. The term does not include a commercial motor
vehicle transporting an empty storage container tank that is not designed for
transportation, has a rated capacity of 1,000 gallons or more, and is
temporarily attached to a flatbed trailer.
   “Tester.” Means a person or entity acting pursuant to a valid agreement
entered into pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4506.09(B).
   “Texting.”  Manually entering alphanumeric text into, or reading text from,
an electronic device. “Texting” includes short message service (SMS), e-mail,
instant messaging, a command or request to access a world wide web page,
pressing more than a single button to initiate or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone, or engaging in any other form of
electronic text retrieval or entry, for present or future communication.
“Texting” does not include the following:
      (1)   Using voice commands to initiate, receive, or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone;
      (2)   Inputting, selecting, or reading information on a global
positioning system or navigation system;
      (3)   Pressing a single button to initiate or terminate a voice
communication using a mobile telephone; or
      (4)   Using, for a purpose that is not otherwise prohibited by law, a
device capable of performing multiple functions, such as a fleet management
system, a dispatching device, a mobile telephone, a citizens band radio, or a
music player.
   “Texting while driving.”  Texting while operating a commercial motor
vehicle, with the motor running, including while temporarily stationary because
of traffic, a traffic control device, or other momentary delays. Texting while
driving  does not include operating a commercial motor vehicle with or without
the motor running when the driver has moved the vehicle to the side of, or off,
a highway and is stopped in a location where the vehicle can safely remain
stationary.
   “United States.”  Means the 50 states and the District of Columbia.
   “Upgrade.”  A change in the class of vehicles, endorsements, or self-
certified status as described in Ohio R.C. 4506.10(A)(1) that expands the
ability of a current commercial driver’s license holder to operate commercial
motor vehicles under this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 4506.
   “Use of a handheld mobile telephone.”  Means:
      (1)   Using at least one hand to hold a mobile telephone to conduct a
voice communication;
      (2)   Dialing or answering a mobile telephone by pressing more than a
single button; or
      (3)   Reaching for a mobile telephone in a manner that requires a driver
to maneuver so that the driver is no longer in a seated driving position, or
restrained by a seat belt that is installed in accordance with 49 C.F.R. 393.93
and adjusted in accordance with the vehicle manufacturer's instructions.
   “Vehicle.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
(ORC 4506.01)
§ 442.02  USE OF ACTUAL GROSS WEIGHT IN LIEU OF RATING.
   For purposes of this chapter, the actual gross weight of a vehicle or
combination of vehicles may be used in lieu of a gross vehicle weight rating to
determine whether a vehicle or combination of vehicles qualifies  as a
commercial motor vehicle if the gross vehicle weight rating specified by the
manufacturer for the vehicle of combination of vehicles is not determinable, or
if the manufacturer of the vehicle has not specified a gross vehicle weight
rating.
(ORC 4506.011)
§ 442.03  LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having in the person’s
possession or otherwise under the person’s control more than one valid driver’s
license issued by this state, any other state, or by a foreign jurisdiction;
      (2)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle on a highway in this municipality
in violation of an out-of- service order while the person’s driving privilege
is suspended, revoked, or cancelled, or while the person is subject to
disqualification;
      (3)   Drive a motor vehicle on a highway in the municipality under the
authority of a commercial driver’s license issued by another state or a foreign
jurisdiction, after having been a resident of this state for 30 days or longer;
      (4)   Knowingly give false information in any application or
certification required by Ohio R.C. 4506.07.
   (B)   The municipality shall give every conviction occurring out of this
state and notice of which was received by the State Department of Public Safety
after December 31, 1989, full faith and credit and treat it for sanctioning
purposes under this chapter as though the conviction had occurred in this
state.
(ORC 4506.04(A), (B))
   (C)   No person shall drive any commercial motor vehicle for which an
endorsement is required under Ohio R.C. 4506.12 unless the proper endorsement
appears on the persons’s commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit. No person shall drive a commercial motor
vehicle in violation of a restriction established under Ohio R.C. 4506.12 that
appears on the person’s commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s
license temporary instruction permit.
(ORC 4506.12(I))
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1), (2) or (3) of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) of this section is guilty of
falsification, a misdemeanor of the first degree. In addition, the provisions
of Ohio R.C. 4507.19 apply.
(ORC 4506.04(C))
      (3)   (a)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   The offenses established under division (C) of this section are
strict liability offenses and Ohio R.C. 2901.20 does not apply. The designation
of these offenses as strict liability offenses shall not be construed to imply
that any other offense for which there is no specified degree of culpability,
whether in this section or another section of this code or the Ohio Revised
Code, is not a strict liability offense.
(ORC 4506.12(J))
§ 442.04  PHYSICAL QUALIFICATION TO OPERATE COMMERCIAL  MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person who holds a valid commercial driver’s license shall drive a
commercial motor vehicle unless the person is physically qualified to do so.
      (1)   Any person applying for a commercial driver’s license or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit, the renewal or upgrade of a
commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit, or the transfer of a commercial driver’s license from out
of state shall self-certify to the Registrar for purposes of 49 C.F.R. 383.71
one of the following in regard to the applicant’s operation of a commercial
motor vehicle, as applicable:
         (a)   1.   If the applicant operates or expects to operate a
commercial motor vehicle in interstate or foreign commerce and is subject to
and meets the requirements under 49 C.F.R. part 391, the applicant shall self-
certify that the applicant is non-excepted interstate and shall provide the
Registrar with the original or a copy of a medical examiner’s certificate and
each subsequently issued medical examiner’s certificate prepared by a qualified
medical examiner to maintain a medically certified status on the applicant’s
commercial driver licensing system driver record;
            2.   If the applicant operates or expects to operate a commercial
motor vehicle in interstate commerce, but engages in transportation or
operations excepted under 49 C.F.R. 390.3(F), 391.2, 391.68, or 398.3 from all
or parts of the qualification requirements of 49 C.F.R. part 391, the applicant
shall self- certify that the applicant is excepted interstate and is not
required to obtain a medical examiner’s certificate;
         (b)   1.   If the applicant operates only in intrastate commerce and
is subject to state driver qualification requirements, the applicant shall
self-certify that the applicant is non-excepted intrastate;
            2.   If the applicant operates only in intrastate commerce and is
excepted from all or parts of the state driver qualification requirements, the
applicant shall self-certify that the applicant is excepted intrastate.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the expiration date on a person’s commercial
driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit,
every commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit holder shall provide the Registrar with the certification
required by this section on or after January 30, 2012, but prior to January 30,
2014.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 4506.10(A), (E))
§ 442.05  CRIMINAL OFFENSES.
   (A)   No person who holds a commercial driver’s license or commercial
driver’s license temporary instruction permit or who operates a motor vehicle
for which a commercial driver’s license or permit is required shall do any of
the following:
      (1)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having a measurable or
detectable amount of alcohol or of a controlled substance in the person’s
blood, breath, or urine;
      (2)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of 0.04% or more by whole blood or breath;
      (3)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of .048% or more by blood serum or blood plasma;
      (4)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle while having an alcohol
concentration of .056% or more by urine;
      (5)   Drive a motor vehicle while under the influence of a controlled
substance;
      (6)   Drive a motor vehicle in violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19 or a
municipal O.V.I. ordinance as defined in Ohio R.C. 4511.181;
      (7)   Use a vehicle in the commission of a felony;
      (8)   Refuse to submit to a test under Ohio R.C. 4506.17 or Ohio R.C.
4511.191, or any substantially similar municipal ordinance;
      (9)   Operate a commercial motor vehicle while the person’s commercial
driver’s license or permit or other commercial driving privileges are revoked,
suspended, cancelled, or disqualified;
      (10)   Cause a fatality through the negligent operation of a commercial
motor vehicle, including but not limited to the offenses of aggravated
vehicular homicide, vehicular homicide, and vehicular manslaughter;
      (11)   Fail to stop after an accident in violation of Ohio R.C. 4549.02
to 4549.03, or any substantially similar municipal ordinance;
      (12)   Drive a commercial motor vehicle in violation of any provision of
Ohio R.C. 4511.61 to 4511.63 or any federal or local law or ordinance
pertaining to railroad-highway grade crossings;
      (13)   Use a motor vehicle in the commission of a felony involving the
manufacture, distribution, or dispensing of a controlled substance as defined
in Ohio R.C. 3719.01 or the possession with intent to manufacture, distribute,
or dispense a controlled substance.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 4506.15)
Statutory reference:
   Alcohol or controlled substance testing, disqualification of drivers, see
Ohio R.C. 4506.17
   Disqualification of drivers for violations, see Ohio R.C. 4506.16
§ 442.06  APPLICATION OF 49 C.F.R. 383.
   (A)   The provisions of 49 C.F.R. 383, Subpart C (Notification Requirements
and Employer Responsibilities), as amended, shall apply to all commercial
drivers or persons who apply for employment as commercial drivers. No person
shall fail to make a report to the person’s employer as required by this
section.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 4506.19)
§ 442.07  INFORMATION REQUIRED OF PROSPECTIVE DRIVERS BY EMPLOYERS;
UNAUTHORIZED DRIVING.
   (A)   Each employer shall require every applicant for employment as a driver
of a commercial vehicle to provide the applicant’s employment history for the
ten years preceding the date the employment application is submitted to the
prospective employer. The following information shall be submitted:
      (1)   A list of the names and addresses of the applicant’s previous
employers for which the applicant was the operator of a commercial motor
vehicle;
      (2)   The dates the applicant was employed by these employers;
      (3)   The reason for leaving each of these employers..
   (B)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize any driver employed by
the employer to drive a commercial motor vehicle during any period in which any
of the following apply:
      (1)   The driver’s commercial driver’s license is suspended, revoked, or
cancelled by any state or a foreign jurisdiction;
      (2)   The driver has lost the privilege to drive, or currently is
disqualified from driving, a commercial motor vehicle in any state or foreign
jurisdiction;
      (3)   The driver, the commercial motor vehicle the driver is driving, or
the motor carrier operation is subject to an out-of-service order in any state
or a foreign jurisdiction;
      (4)   The driver has more than one driver’s license.
   (C)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a
commercial motor vehicle in violation of Ohio R.C. 4506.15.
   (D)   No employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a
commercial motor vehicle if the driver does not hold a valid, current
commercial driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary
instruction permit bearing the proper class or endorsements for the vehicle. No
employer shall knowingly permit or authorize a driver to operate a commercial
motor vehicle in violation of the restrictions on the driver’s commercial
driver’s license or commercial driver’s license temporary instruction permit.
   (E)   Whoever violates division (A), (B) or (D) of this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (F)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 4506.20)
§ 442.08  AUTHORITY OF PEACE OFFICERS RE DRUNK DRIVING.
   (A)   Within the jurisdictional limits of the appointing authority, any
peace officer shall stop and detain any person found violating Ohio R.C.
4506.15, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, without obtaining
a warrant. When there is reasonable ground to believe that a violation of Ohio
R.C. 4506.15, or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, has been
committed and a test or tests of the person’s whole blood, blood plasma or
blood serum, breath or urine is necessary, the peace officer shall take the
person to an appropriate place for testing.  If a person refuses to submit to a
test after being warned as provided in Ohio R.C. 4506.17(C), or submits to a
test that discloses the presence of a controlled substance or an alcohol
concentration of 0.04% or more by whole blood or breath, an alcohol
concentration of .048% or more by blood serum or blood plasma, or an alcohol
concentration of .056% or more by urine, the peace officer shall require that
the person immediately surrender the person’s commercial driver’s license to
the peace officer.
   (B)   As used in this section, “jurisdictional limits” means the limits
within which a peace officer may arrest and detain a person without a warrant
under Ohio R.C. 2935.03, except that the Superintendent and the troopers of the
State Highway Patrol may stop and detain, without warrant, any person who, in
the presence of the Superintendent or any trooper, is engaged in a violation of
any of the provisions of this subchapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 4506.
(ORC 4506.23)
§ 442.09  PERMITTING OR DRIVING WHILE FATIGUED OR ILL PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall drive a commercial motor vehicle, as defined in Ohio
R.C. 4506.01, or a commercial car or commercial tractor, as defined in Ohio
R.C. 4501.01, while the person’s ability or alertness is so impaired by
fatigue, illness, or other causes that it is unsafe for the person to drive
such vehicle.  No driver shall use any drug which would adversely affect the
driver’s ability or alertness.
   (B)   No owner, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4501.01, of a commercial motor
vehicle, commercial car or commercial tractor, or a person employing or
otherwise directing the driver of such vehicle, shall require or knowingly
permit a driver in any such condition described in division (A) of this section
to drive such vehicle upon any street or highway.
(ORC 4511.79)
§ 442.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
404.99 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 444:  OFFENSES RELATING TO THEFT AND FRAUD
Section
444.02   Police may remove ignition key
444.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Criminal damaging or endangering, see §
642.10
   Criminal mischief (tampering), see §
642.11
   Receiving stolen property, see §
642.22
   Theft, see §§
642.02,
642.03
   Unattended vehicles; duty to lock ignition, remove key, set brake, etc., see
§
452.06
   Unauthorized use of a vehicle; vehicle trespass, see §
642.04
§ 444.02  POLICE MAY REMOVE IGNITION KEY.
   A law enforcement officer may remove the ignition key left in the ignition
switch of an unlocked and unattended motor vehicle parked on a street or
highway.  The officer removing the key shall place notification upon the
vehicle detailing his or her name and badge number, the place where the key may
be reclaimed, and the procedure for reclaiming the key.  The key shall be
returned to the owner of the motor vehicle upon presentation of proof of
ownership.
(ORC 4549.05)
§ 444.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
404.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 446:  TRANSPORTATION OF RADIOACTIVE MATERIALS
Section
446.01   Purpose and definitions
446.02   Permit required
446.03   Notice
446.04   Issuance of permit
446.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Drivers of commercial cars or tractors, see
Chapter 442
   Vehicles transporting explosives, see §
440.04
Statutory reference:
   Atomic energy development activities, see Ohio R.C. 4163.01 et seq.
   Issuance of insurance policy relative to radioactive material risks, see
Ohio R.C. 5729.07
   Radioactive material defined, see Ohio R.C. 3701.90(B)
§ 446.01  PURPOSE AND DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum standards and
regulations ensuring the safe shipment and transportation of radioactive
materials through the city.
   (B)   As used in this chapter.
      (1)   “Radioactive material” means any material or combination of
materials which spontaneously emits ionizing radiation. Materials in which the
estimated specific activity is not greater than 0.002 microcuries per gram of
material, and in which the radioactivity is essentially uniformly distributed,
are not considered to be radioactive materials.
      (2)   “A large quantity of radioactive materials” means a quantity the
aggregate radioactivity of which exceeds that specified in 10 C.F.R. 71,
entitled “Packaging of Radioactive Material for Transport,” Section 71.4(f).
      (3)   “Curie” means an expression of the quantity of radiation in terms
of the number of atoms which disintegrate per second; a curie is that quantity
of radioactive materials which decays such that 37,000,000,000 atoms
disintegrate per second.
      (4)   “Millicurie” means one thousandth of a curie.
      (5)   “Person” means any individual, partnership or corporation engaged
in the transportation of passengers or property, as a common, contract or
private carrier, or freight forwarder, as those terms are used in the
Interstate Commerce Act, as amended.
(Ord. 65-79, passed 6-18-1979)
§ 446.02  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   A permit issued by the Chief of Police or his designated
representative shall be required for the shipping or transportation of the
following radioactive materials by motor vehicle into, within, through or out
of the city:
      (1)   Plutonium isotopes in any quantity and form exceeding two grams or
twenty curies, whichever is less;
      (2)   Uranium enriched in the isotope U-235 exceeding twenty-five atomic
percent of the total uranium content in quantities where the U-235 content
exceeds one kilogram;
      (3)   Any element with an atomic number of eighty-eight or greater, the
activity of which exceeds twenty curies;
      (4)   Spent reactor fuel elements or mixed fission products associated
with such fuel elements, the activity of which exceeds twenty curies;
      (5)   A large quantity of radioactive materials;
      (6)   Any quantity, arrangement and packaging combination of fissile
material specified by the United States Nuclear Regulatory Commission as a
“Fissile Class III” shipment in 10 C.F.R. 71 entitled “Packaging of Radioactive
Materials for Transport,” § 71.4(d)(3); or
      (7)   Any shipment or transportation of radioactive material that is
required by the appropriate regulating agency to be accompanied by an escort
for safety reasons.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to radioactive materials shipped or
transported by or for the United States Government for military or security
purposes or which are related to national defense.
(Ord. 65-79, passed 6-18-1979)
§ 446.03  NOTICE.
   When those radioactive materials requiring a permit as specified in this
chapter are to be shipped or transported into, within, through or out of the
city, the shipper, carrier or person otherwise responsible shall first notify
the Chief of Police or his designated representative, on a form provided for
such purpose, two weeks prior to the date of shipment. The form shall include
the date of shipment, the type and quantity of radioactive materials involved,
the method of transportation, the route, the starting point, the destination
and such other information as the Chief of Police or his designated
representative may reasonably require. Any information which cannot be supplied
two weeks prior to shipment or transportation shall be supplied promptly by the
person responsible for such shipment or transportation when such information
becomes available to him. Nothing herein shall be construed as requiring the
disclosure of any defense information  or restricted data as defined in the
Atomic Energy Act of 1954 and the Energy Reorganization Act of 1974, as
amended.
(Ord. 65-79, passed 6-18-1979)
§ 446.04  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The Chief of Police or his designated representative shall not issue a
permit to any person for the shipment or transportation of those radioactive
materials specified in this chapter unless:
      (1)   There is a showing that the radioactive material has been or will
be containerized and packaged and that all warning labels have been or will be
affixed to the outer container holding the radioactive material and the motor
vehicle transporting such material, in conformity with the regulations of the
United States Department of Transportation, the United States Nuclear
Regulatory Commission or other related federal or state agencies, regardless of
whether the shipment is being made intracity, intrastate or interstate; and
      (2)   There is a showing that the shipment or transportation of
radioactive materials is necessitated by urgent public policy or national
security interests transcending public safety and health concerns of the city.
   (B)   As used in this section, an “urgent public policy” includes medical
and educational interests but does not include interests other than medical and
educational interests unless expressly authorized in writing by the United
States Department of Transportation or by any other appropriate federal or
state agency which may be required by the Chief of Police or his designated
representative. Such authorization shall state that the particular interest
involved is, in the opinion of the agency, permitted by federal or state
regulations pertaining to the shipment or transportation of radioactive
materials, and that the interest involved justifies the apparent risks
resulting from such shipment or transportation.
   (C)   Radioactive materials that are permitted to be shipped or transferred
through the city pursuant to this chapter shall be shipped or transported
through the city over such route or routes, or at such time or times of the
day, consistent with the public health, safety and welfare and the convenience
of the shipper or carrier, as the Chief of Police or his designated
representative may direct.
(Ord. 65-79, passed 6-18-1979)
§ 446.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
404.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
TITLE EIGHT:  PARKING
   
CHAP. 452.  PARKING GENERALLY
CHAPTER 452:  PARKING GENERALLY
Section
452.01   Prohibition against parking on streets or highways
452.02   Police may remove illegally parked vehicle; emergencies
452.03   Prohibited standing or parking places
452.04   Manner of parallel and angle parking; handicapped persons
452.05   Willfully leaving vehicles on private or public property
452.055   Parking prohibitions on private property; private tow-away zones
452.06   Unattended vehicles; duty to lock ignition, remove key, set brake,
etc.
452.07   Opening doors on side available to traffic
452.08   Selling, washing or repairing vehicle upon roadway
452.09   Truck loading zones
452.10   Bus stops and taxicab stands
452.11   Parking in alleys and narrow streets; exceptions
452.12   Parking and storage of camping and recreational equipment/trailers/
boat trailers/work trailers
452.13   Snow emergency
452.14   Night parking of commercial vehicles in residential districts
452.15   Motor carriers
452.16   Detached trailers
452.17   Special restrictions for Broadview Road, Royalton Road and Interstate
77
452.18   Registered owner prima facie liable for unlawful parking
452.19   Waiver
452.20   Signs at city limits
452.21   Parking during building construction
452.22   Parking for special events
452.23   Parking on Market Place West within 300 feet of Royalton Road
452.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Conformity of off-street parking facilities with handicapped accessibility
guidelines, see §
1348.08
   Fire lanes, see
Chapter 1640
   Impounding; redemption, see §
404.05
   Lights on parked or stopped vehicles, see §
438.09
   Maintenance of parking areas, see §
1348.08
   Off-street parking, see
Chapter 1284
   Parking defined, see §
402.23
   Parking near stopped fire apparatus, see §
432.25
   Police may remove ignition key from unattended vehicle, see §
444.02
   Parking of bicycles; locks, see §
474.08
   Stop defined, see §
402.41
   Stopping and standing defined, see §
402.43
   Storage of junk vehicles, see §
660.07
§ 452.01  PROHIBITION AGAINST PARKING ON STREETS OR HIGHWAYS.
   (A)   Upon any highway no person shall stop, park, or leave standing any
vehicle, whether attended or unattended, upon the paved or main traveled part
of the highway if it is practicable to stop, park, or so leave such vehicle off
the paved or main traveled part of the highway.  In every event a clear and
unobstructed portion of the highway opposite such standing vehicle shall be
left for the free passage of other vehicles, and a clear view of such stopped
vehicle shall be available from a distance of 200 feet in each direction upon
such highway.
   (B)   This section does not apply to the driver of any vehicle which is
disabled while on the paved or improved or main traveled portion of a highway
in such manner and to such extent that it is impossible to avoid stopping and
temporarily leaving the disabled vehicle in such position.
(ORC 4511.66)
§ 452.02  POLICE MAY REMOVE ILLEGALLY PARKED VEHICLE; EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle standing upon a highway in
violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.66 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, such officer may move such vehicle, or require the driver or other
person in charge of the vehicle to move the same, to a position off the paved
or improved or main traveled part of such highway.
   (B)   Whenever any police officer finds a vehicle unattended upon any
highway, bridge, or causeway, or in any tunnel, where such vehicles constitutes
an obstruction to traffic, such officer may provide for the removal of such
vehicle to the nearest garage or other place of safety.
(ORC 4511.67)  (Amending Ordinance)
   (C)   Whenever, in the opinion of the Mayor, there is an actual or
threatened local emergency, such as fire, riot, flood, other acts of God,
common disaster or acts of the enemy, the Mayor may require the removal of
motor vehicles parked upon the affected streets of the city. The Mayor shall
inform the public of the aforementioned conditions through the reasonable and
usual methods of communication. Actual notification to the owners or operators
of the vehicles is not required. If the owner or operator of the vehicle does
not remove it within a reasonable time, the vehicle may be impounded and
removed by order of the Police Department.
§ 452.03  PROHIBITED STANDING OR PARKING PLACES.
   No person shall stand or park a vehicle, except when necessary to avoid
conflict with other traffic or to comply with the provisions of this title, or
while obeying the directions of a police officer or a traffic-control device,
in any of the following places:
   (A)   On a sidewalk, except a bicycle;
   (B)   In front of a public or private driveway;
   (C)   Within an intersection;
   (D)   On the same side of the street as a fire hydrant;
   (E)   On a crosswalk;
   (F)   Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
   (G)   Within 30 feet of, and upon the approach to, any flashing beacon, stop
sign, or traffic-control device;
   (H)   Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of
points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a
different length is indicated by a traffic-control device;
   (I)   Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
   (J)   Within 20 feet of a driveway entrance to any fire station and, on the
side of the street opposite the entrance to any fire station, within 75 feet of
the entrance when it is properly posted with signs;
   (K)   Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when such
standing or parking would obstruct traffic;
   (L)   Alongside any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a
street;
   (M)   Upon any bridge or elevated structure upon a highway, or within a
highway tunnel;
   (N)   At any place where signs prohibit stopping;
   (O)   Within one foot of another parked vehicle;
   (P)   On the roadway portion of a freeway, expressway, or thruway.
   (Q)   In a cul-de-sac;
   (R)   On a street lawn area or the curb of a street;
   (S)   On any public street or thoroughfare of the city between 3:00 a.m.
and  6:00 a.m.;
   (T)   In a residential district where prohibited pursuant to §
1268.02 of the Planning and Zoning Code.
(Ord. 50-86, passed 5-19-1986; Ord. 86-87, passed 8-31-1987; Ord. 88-188,
passed 12-5-1988)
§ 452.04  MANNER OF PARALLEL AND ANGLE PARKING; HANDICAPPED PERSONS.
   (A)   Every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there is an
adjacent curb shall be stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of the
vehicle parallel with and not more than 12 inches from the right- hand curb,
unless it is impossible to approach so close to the curb; in such case the stop
shall be made as close to the curb as possible and only for the time necessary
to discharge and receive passengers or to load or unload merchandise.  Local
authorities by ordinance may permit angle parking on any roadway under their
jurisdiction, except that angle parking shall not be permitted on a state route
within the municipality unless an unoccupied roadway width of not less than 25
feet is available for free-moving traffic.
   (B)   Local authorities by ordinance may permit parking of vehicles with the
left-hand wheels adjacent to and within 12 inches of the left-hand curb of a
one-way roadway.
   (C)   (1)   (a)   Except as provided in division (C)(1)(b) of this section,
no vehicle shall be stopped or parked on a road or highway with the vehicle
facing in a direction other than the direction of travel on that side of the
road or highway.
         (b)   The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle into an
angled parking space so that when the motorcycle is parked it is facing in a
direction other than the direction of travel on the side of the road or
highway.
      (2)   The operator of a motorcycle may back the motorcycle into a parking
space that is located on the side of, and parallel to, a road or highway. The
motorcycle may face any direction when so parked. Not more than two motorcycles
at a time shall be parked in a parking space as described in this division (C)
(2) of this section irrespective of whether or not the space is metered.
   (D)   Notwithstanding any statute or any rule, regulation, resolution, or
ordinance, air compressors, tractors, trucks, and other equipment, while being
used in the construction, reconstruction, installation, repair, or removal of
facilities near, on, over, or under a street or highway, may stop, stand, or
park where necessary in order to perform such work, provided a flagperson is on
duty or warning signs or lights are displayed as may be prescribed by the
Director of Transportation.
   (E)   Special parking locations and privileges for persons with disabilities
that limit or impair the ability to walk, also known as handicapped parking
spaces or disability parking spaces, shall be provided and designated by all
political subdivisions and by the state and all agencies and instrumentalities
thereof at all offices and facilities where parking is provided, whether owned,
rented, or leased, and at all publicly owned parking garages.  The locations
shall be designated through the posting of an elevated sign, whether
permanently affixed or movable, imprinted with the international symbol of
access and shall be reasonably close to exits, entrances, elevators, and
ramps.  All elevated signs posted in accordance with this division and Ohio
R.C. 3781.111(C) shall be mounted on a fixed or movable post, and the distance
from the ground to the bottom edge of the sign shall measure not less than five
feet.  If a new sign or a replacement sign designating a special parking
location is posted on or after October 14, 1999, there also shall be affixed
upon the surface of that sign or affixed next to the designating sign a notice
that states the fine applicable for the offense of parking a motor vehicle in
the special designated parking location if the motor vehicle is not legally
entitled to be parked in that location.
   (F)   (1)   (a)   No person shall stop, stand, or park any motor vehicle at
special parking locations provided under division (E) of this section, or at
special clearly marked parking locations provided in or on privately owned
parking lots, parking garages, or other parking areas and designated in
accordance with that division, unless one of the following applies:
            1.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of
a person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is
displaying a valid removable windshield placard or special license plates; or
            2.   The motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of
a handicapped person and is displaying a parking card or special handicapped
license plates.
         (b)   Any motor vehicle that is parked in a special marked parking
location in violation of division (F)(1)(a)1. or (F)(1)(a)2. of this section
may be towed or otherwise removed from the parking location by the law
enforcement agency of the municipality.  A motor vehicle that is so towed or
removed shall not be released to its owner until the owner presents proof of
ownership of the motor vehicle and pays all towing and storage fees normally
imposed by the municipality for towing and storing motor vehicles.  If the
motor vehicle is a leased vehicle, it shall not be released to the lessee until
the lessee presents proof that the person is the lessee of the motor vehicle
and pays all towing and storage fees normally imposed by the municipality for
towing and storing motor vehicles.
         (c)   If a person is charged with a violation  of division (F)(1)(a)1.
or (F)(1)(a)2. of this section, it is an affirmative defense to the charge that
the person suffered an injury not more than 72 hours prior to the time the
person was issued the ticket or citation and that, because of the injury, the
person meets at least one of the criteria contained in Ohio R.C. 4503.44(A)(1).
      (2)   No person shall stop, stand, or park any motor vehicle in an area
that is commonly known as an access aisle, which area is marked by diagonal
stripes and is located immediately adjacent to a special parking location
provided under division (E) of this section or at a special clearly marked
parking location provided in or on a privately owned parking lot, parking
garage, or other parking area and designated in accordance with that division.
   (G)   When a motor vehicle is being operated by or for the transport of a
person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to walk and is
displaying a removable windshield placard or a temporary removable windshield
placard or special license plates, or when a motor vehicle is being operated by
or for the transport of a handicapped person, and is displaying a parking card
or special handicapped license plates, the motor vehicle is permitted to park
for a period of two hours in excess of the legal parking period permitted by
local authorities, except where local ordinances or police rules provide
otherwise or where the vehicle is parked in such a manner as to be clearly a
traffic hazard.
   (H)   No owner of an office, facility, or parking garage where special
parking locations are required to be designated in accordance with division (E)
of this section shall fail to properly mark the special parking locations in
accordance with that division or fail to maintain the markings of the special
locations, including the erection and maintenance of the fixed or movable
signs.
   (I)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to require a person or
organization to apply for a removable windshield placard or special license
plates if the parking card or special license plates issued to the person or
organization under prior law have not expired or been surrendered or revoked.
   (J)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Handicapped person” means any person who has lost the use of one
or both legs or one or both arms, who is blind, deaf, or so severely
handicapped as to be unable to move without the aid of crutches or a
wheelchair, or whose mobility is restricted by a permanent cardiovascular,
pulmonary, or other handicapping condition.
      (2)   “Person with a disability that limits or impairs the ability to
walk” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4503.44.
      (3)   “Special license plates” and “removable windshield placard” mean
any license plates or removable windshield placard or temporary removable
windshield placard issued under Ohio R.C. 4503.41 or 4503.44, and also mean any
substantially equivalent license plates or removable windshield placard or
temporary removable windshield placard issued by a state, district, country, or
sovereignty.
(ORC 4511.69)
   (K)   Upon street or other public ways or places where angle parking is
permitted, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than at the
angle to the curb or edge of the roadway as is indicated by appropriate signs
or markings.
§ 452.05  WILLFULLY LEAVING VEHICLES ON PRIVATE OR PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   (A)   Private Property.  No person shall park any motor vehicle, truck,
trailer, bus or other vehicle upon the private lands of another without the
owner’s consent.
   (B)   Disabled Vehicles on Public Property.
      (1)   No person, being the owner or having possession or control of a
vehicle, shall park or permit such vehicle to remain parked on any street in
the city for a period in excess of forty-eight hours while the vehicle is in a
disabled condition.
      (2)   As used in this division, “disabled” means having a flat tire or
such a mechanical defect that the vehicle cannot be operated under its own
power or on public streets in compliance with statutory requirements.
   (C)   Overnight Parking on Public Property.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in §
452.14, no person shall park a vehicle on either side of a street, lane, trail,
boulevard, road or other public thoroughfare, with the exception of state
highways, between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless permission
therefor is received from the senior police officer on duty.
      (2)   Repeated violation of this division shall result in the towing of
the offending vehicle to a place of storage at the expense of the owner of the
vehicle.
(Ord. 18-68, passed 4-29-1968; Ord. 15-83, passed 3-21-1983)
§ 452.055  PARKING PROHIBITIONS ON PRIVATE PROPERTY; PRIVATE TOW-AWAY ZONES.
   (A)   (1)   The Sheriff or Chief of Police, upon complaint of any person
adversely affected, may order into storage any motor vehicle, other than an
abandoned junk motor vehicle as defined in R.C. § 4513.63, that has been left
on private residential or private agricultural property for at least four hours
without the permission of the person having the right to the possession of the
property. The Sheriff or Chief of Police, upon complaint of a repair garage or
place of storage, may order into storage any motor vehicle, other than an
abandoned junk motor vehicle, that has been left at the garage or place of
storage for a longer period than that agreed upon. When ordering a motor
vehicle into storage pursuant to this division, the Sheriff or Chief of Police
may arrange for the removal of the motor vehicle by a towing service and shall
designate a storage facility.
      (2)   A towing service towing a motor vehicle under division (A)(1) of
this section shall remove the motor vehicle in accordance with that division.
The towing service shall deliver the motor vehicle to the location designated
by the Sheriff or Chief of Police not more than two hours after the time it is
removed from the private property, unless the towing service is unable to
deliver the motor vehicle within two hours due to an uncontrollable force,
natural disaster, or other event that is not within the power of the towing
service.
      (3)   Subject to division (B) of this section, the owner of a motor
vehicle that has been removed pursuant to this division may recover the vehicle
only in accordance with division (D) of this section.
      (4)   As used in this section, “private residential property” means
private property on which is located one or more structures that are used as a
home, residence, or sleeping place by one or more persons, if no more than
three separate households are maintained in the structure or structures. The
phrase does not include any private property on which is located one or more
structures that are used as a home, residence, or sleeping place by two or more
persons, if more than three separate households are maintained in the structure
or structures.
   (B)   (1)   If the owner or operator of a motor vehicle that has been
ordered into storage pursuant to division (A)(1) of this section arrives after
the motor vehicle has been prepared for removal, but prior to its actual
removal from the property, the towing service shall give the owner or operator
oral or written notification at the time of such arrival that the vehicle owner
or operator may pay a fee of not more than one- half of the fee for the removal
of the motor vehicle established by the Public Utilities Commission in rules
adopted under R.C. § 4921.25, in order to obtain release of the motor vehicle.
However, if the vehicle is within a municipal corporation and the municipal
corporation has established a vehicle removal fee, the towing service shall
give the owner or operator oral or written notification that the owner or
operator may pay not more than one-half of that fee to obtain release of the
motor vehicle. That fee may be paid by use of a major credit card unless the
towing service uses a mobile credit card processor and mobile service is not
available at the time of the transaction.
      (2)   Upon payment of the applicable fee, the towing service shall give
the vehicle owner or operator a receipt showing both the full amount normally
assessed and the actual amount received and shall release the motor vehicle to
the owner or operator. Upon its release, the owner or operator immediately
shall move it so that it is not on the private residential or private
agricultural property without the permission of the person having the right to
possession of the property, or is not at the garage or place of storage without
the permission of the owner, whichever is applicable.
   (C)   (1)   The Sheriff and Chief of Police shall maintain a record of motor
vehicles that the Sheriff or Chief of Police orders into storage pursuant to
division (A)(1) of this section. The record shall include an entry for each
such motor vehicle that identifies the motor vehicle’s license number, make,
model, and color, the location from which it was removed, the date and time of
its removal, the telephone number of the person from whom it may be recovered,
and the address of the place to which it has been taken and from which it may
be recovered. The Sheriff or Chief of Police shall provide any information in
the record that pertains to a particular motor vehicle to any person who,
either in person or pursuant to a telephone call, identifies self as the owner
or operator of the motor vehicle and requests information pertaining to its
location.
      (2)   Any person who registers a complaint that is the basis of the
Sheriff’s or Police Chief’s order for the removal and storage of a motor
vehicle under division (A)(1) of this section shall provide the identity of the
law enforcement agency with which the complaint was registered to any person
who identifies self as the owner or operator of the motor vehicle and requests
information pertaining to its location.
   (D)   (1)   The owner or lienholder of a motor vehicle that is ordered into
storage pursuant to division (A)(1) of this section may reclaim it upon both of
the following:
         (a)   Payment of all applicable fees established by the Public
Utilities Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25 or, if the vehicle
was towed within a municipal corporation that has established fees for vehicle
removal and storage, payment of all applicable fees established by the
municipal corporation.
         (b)   Presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by a
certificate of title to the motor vehicle, a certificate of registration for
the motor vehicle, or a lease agreement.
      (2)   When the owner of a vehicle towed under this section retrieves the
vehicle, the towing service or storage facility in possession of the vehicle
shall give the owner written notice that if the owner disputes that the motor
vehicle was lawfully towed, the owner may be able to file a civil action under
R.C. § 4513.611.
      (3)   Upon presentation of proof of ownership as required under division
(D)(1)(b) of this section, the owner of a motor vehicle that is ordered into
storage under division (A)(1) of this section may retrieve any personal items
from the motor vehicle without retrieving the vehicle and without paying any
fee. However, a towing service or storage facility may charge an after-hours
retrieval fee established by the Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted
under R.C. § 4921.25 if the owner retrieves the personal items after hours,
unless the towing service or storage facility fails to provide the notice
required under R.C. § 4513.69(B)(3), if applicable. The owner of a motor
vehicle shall not do either of the following:
         (a)   Retrieve any personal item that has been determined by the
Sheriff or Chief of Police, as applicable, to be necessary to a criminal
investigation;
         (b)   Retrieve any personal item from a vehicle if it would endanger
the safety of the owner, unless the owner agrees to sign a waiver of liability.
      (4)   For purposes of division (D)(3) of this section, “personal items”
do not include any items that are attached to the motor vehicle.
      (5)   If a motor vehicle that is ordered into storage pursuant to
division (A)(1) of this section remains unclaimed by the owner for 30 days, the
procedures established by R.C. §§ 4513.61 and 4513.62 apply.
   (E)   (1)   No person shall remove, or cause the removal of, any motor
vehicle from any private residential or private agricultural property other
than in accordance with division (A)(1) of this section or R.C. §§ 4513.61 to
4513.65.
      (2)   No towing service or storage facility shall fail to comply with the
requirements of this section.
   (F)   This section does not apply to any private residential or private
agricultural property that is established as a private tow-away zone in
accordance with division (H) of this section or R.C. § 4513.601.
   (G)   Whoever violates division (E) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(ORC 4513.60)
   (H)   Private Tow-away Zones.
      (1)   The owner of a private property may establish a private tow-away
zone, but may do so only if all of the following conditions are satisfied:
         (a)   The owner of the private property posts on the property a sign,
that is at least 18 inches by 24 inches in size, that is visible from all
entrances to the property, and that includes all of the following information:
            1.   A statement that the property is a tow-away zone;
            2.   A description of persons authorized to park on the property.
If the property is a residential property, the owner of the private property
may include on the sign a statement that only tenants and guests may park in
the private tow-away zone, subject to the terms of the property owner. If the
property is a commercial property, the owner of the private property may
include on the sign a statement that only customers may park in the private
tow-away zone. In all cases, if it is not apparent which persons may park in
the private tow-away zone, the owner of the private property shall include on
the sign the address of the property on which the private tow-away zone is
located or the name of the business that is located on the property designated
as a private tow-away zone.
            3.   If the private tow-away zone is not enforceable at all times,
the times during which the parking restrictions are enforced;
            4.   The telephone number and the address of the place from which a
towed vehicle may be recovered at any time during the day or night;
            5.   A statement that the failure to recover a towed vehicle may
result in the loss of title to the vehicle as provided in R.C. § 4505.101(B).
            6.   In order to comply with the requirements of division (H)(1)(a)
of this section, the owner of a private property may modify an existing sign by
affixing to the existing sign stickers or an addendum in lieu of replacing the
sign.
         (b)   A towing service ensures that a vehicle towed under this
division (H) is taken to a location from which it may be recovered that
complies with all of the following:
            1.   It is located within 25 linear miles of the location of the
private tow-away zone, unless it is not practicable to take the vehicle to a
place of storage within 25 linear miles.
            2.   It is well-lighted.
            3.   It is on or within a reasonable distance of a regularly
scheduled route of one or more modes of public transportation, if any public
transportation is available in the municipal corporation or township in which
the private tow-away zone is located.
      (2)   (a)   If a vehicle is parked on private property that is
established as a private tow-away zone in accordance with division (H)(1) of
this section, without the consent of the owner of the private property or in
violation of any posted parking condition or regulation, the owner of the
private property may cause the removal of the vehicle by a towing service. The
towing service shall remove the vehicle in accordance with this division (H).
The vehicle owner and the operator of the vehicle are considered to have
consented to the removal and storage of the vehicle, to the payment of the
applicable fees established by the Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted
under R.C. § 4921.25, and to the right of a towing service to obtain title to
the vehicle if it remains unclaimed as provided in R.C. § 4505.101. The owner
or lienholder of a vehicle that has been removed under this division (H),
subject to division (H)(3) of this section, may recover the vehicle in
accordance with division (H)(7) of this section.
         (b)   If a municipal corporation requires tow trucks and tow truck
operators to be licensed, no owner of a private property located within the
municipal corporation shall cause the removal and storage of any vehicle
pursuant to division (H)(2) of this section by an unlicensed tow truck or
unlicensed tow truck operator.
         (c)   No towing service shall remove a vehicle from a private tow-away
zone except pursuant to a written contract for the removal of vehicles entered
into with the owner of the private property on which the private tow-away zone
is located.
      (3)   If the owner or operator of a vehicle that is being removed under
authority of division (H)(2) of this section arrives after the vehicle has been
prepared for removal, but prior to its actual removal from the property, the
towing service shall give the vehicle owner or operator oral or written
notification at the time of such arrival that the vehicle owner or operator may
pay a fee of not more than one-half of the fee for the removal of the vehicle
established by the Public Utilities Commission in rules adopted under R.C. §
4921.25 in order to obtain release of the vehicle. That fee may be paid by use
of a major credit card unless the towing service uses a mobile credit card
processor and mobile service is not available at the time of the transaction.
Upon payment of that fee, the towing service shall give the vehicle owner or
operator a receipt showing both the full amount normally assessed and the
actual amount received and shall release the vehicle to the owner or operator.
Upon its release, the owner or operator immediately shall move the vehicle so
that the vehicle is not parked on the private property established as a private
tow-away zone without the consent of the owner of the private property or in
violation of any posted parking condition or regulation.
      (4)   (a)   Prior to towing a vehicle under division (H)(2) of this
section, a towing service shall make all reasonable efforts to take as many
photographs as necessary to evidence that the vehicle is clearly parked on
private property in violation of a private tow-away zone established under
division (H)(1) of this section. The towing service shall record the time and
date of the photographs taken under this division (H). The towing service shall
retain the photographs and the record of the time and date, in electronic or
printed form, for at least 30 days after the date on which the vehicle is
recovered by the owner or lienholder or at least two years after the date on
which the vehicle was towed, whichever is earlier.
         (b)   A towing service shall deliver a vehicle towed under division
(H)(2) of this section to the location from which it may be recovered not more
than two hours after the time it was removed from the private tow-away zone,
unless the towing service is unable to deliver the motor vehicle within two
hours due to an uncontrollable force, natural disaster, or other event that is
not within the power of the towing service.
      (5)   (a)   If an owner of a private property that is established as a
private tow-away zone in accordance with division (H)(1) of this section causes
the removal of a vehicle from that property by a towing service under division
(H)(2) of this section, the towing service, within two hours of removing the
vehicle, shall provide notice to the Sheriff or the Police Department
concerning all of the following:
            1.   The vehicle’s license number, make, model, and color;
            2.   The location from which the vehicle was removed;
            3.   The date and time the vehicle was removed;
            4.   The telephone number of the person from whom the vehicle may
be recovered;
            5.   The address of the place from which the vehicle may be
recovered.
         (b)   The Sheriff and Chief of Police shall maintain a record of any
vehicle removed from private property in the Sheriff’s or Police Chief’s
jurisdiction that is established as a private tow-away zone of which the
Sheriff or Police Chief has received notice under this division (H). The record
shall include all information submitted by the towing service. The Sheriff or
Police Chief shall provide any information in the record that pertains to a
particular vehicle to a person who, either in person or pursuant to a telephone
call, identifies self as the owner, operator, or lienholder of the vehicle and
requests information pertaining to the vehicle.
      (6)   (a)   When a vehicle is removed from private property in accordance
with this division (H), within three business days of the removal, the towing
service or storage facility from which the vehicle may be recovered shall cause
a search to be made of the records of the Bureau of Motor Vehicles to ascertain
the identity of the owner and any lienholder of the motor vehicle. The
Registrar of Motor Vehicles shall ensure that such information is provided in a
timely manner. Subject to division (H)(6)(d) of this section, the towing
service or storage facility shall send notice to the vehicle owner and any
known lienholder as follows:
            1.   Within five business days after the Registrar of Motor
Vehicles provides the identity of the owner and any lienholder of the motor
vehicle, if the vehicle remains unclaimed, to the owner’s and lienholder’s last
known address by certified or express mail with return receipt requested or by
a commercial carrier service utilizing any form of delivery requiring a signed
receipt;
            2.   If the vehicle remains unclaimed 30 days after the first
notice is sent, in the manner required under division (H)(6)(a)1. of this
section;
            3.   If the vehicle remains unclaimed 45 days after the first
notice is sent, in the manner required under division (H)(6)(a)1. of this
section.
         (b)   Sixty days after any notice sent pursuant to division (H)(6)(a)
of this section is received, as evidenced by a receipt signed by any person, or
the towing service or storage facility has been notified that delivery was not
possible, the towing service or storage facility, if authorized under R.C. §
4505.101(B), may initiate the process for obtaining a certificate of title to
the motor vehicle as provided in that section.
         (c)   A towing service or storage facility that does not receive a
signed receipt of notice, or a notification that delivery was not possible,
shall not obtain, and shall not attempt to obtain, a certificate of title to
the motor vehicle under R.C. § 4505.101(B).
         (d)   With respect to a vehicle concerning which a towing service or
storage facility is not eligible to obtain title under R.C. § 4505.101, the
towing service or storage facility need only comply with the initial notice
required under division (H)(6)(a)1. of this section.
      (7)   (a)   The owner or lienholder of a vehicle that is removed under
division (H)(2) of this section may reclaim it upon both of the following:
            1.   Presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced by
a certificate of title to the vehicle, a certificate of registration for the
motor vehicle, or a lease agreement;
            2.   Payment of the following fees:
               a.   All applicable fees established by the Public Utilities
Commission in rules adopted under R.C. § 4921.25, except that the lienholder of
a vehicle may retrieve the vehicle without paying any storage fee for the
period of time that the vehicle was in the possession of the towing service or
storage facility prior to the date the lienholder received the notice sent
under division (H)(6)(a)1. of this section;
               b.   If notice has been sent to the owner and lienholder as
described in division (H)(6) of this section, a processing fee of $25.
         (b)   A towing service or storage facility in possession of a vehicle
that is removed under authority of division (H)(2) of this section shall show
the vehicle owner, operator, or lienholder who contests the removal of the
vehicle all photographs taken under division (H)(4) of this section. Upon
request, the towing service or storage facility shall provide a copy of all
photographs in the medium in which the photographs are stored, whether paper,
electronic, or otherwise.
         (c)   When the owner of a vehicle towed under this section retrieves
the vehicle, the towing service or storage facility in possession of the
vehicle shall give the owner written notice that if the owner disputes that the
motor vehicle was lawfully towed, the owner may be able to file a civil action
under R.C. § 4513.611.
         (d)   Upon presentation of proof of ownership, which may be evidenced
by a certificate of title to the vehicle, a certificate of registration for the
motor vehicle, or a lease agreement, the owner of a vehicle that is removed
under authority of division (H)(2) of this section may retrieve any personal
items from the vehicle without retrieving the vehicle and without paying any
fee. The owner of the vehicle shall not retrieve any personal items from a
vehicle if it would endanger the safety of the owner, unless the owner agrees
to sign a waiver of liability. For purposes of division (H)(7)(d) of this
section, “personal items” do not include any items that are attached to the
vehicle.
      (8)   No person shall remove, or cause the removal of, any vehicle from
private property that is established as a private tow-away zone under this
division (H) or store such a vehicle other than in accordance with this
division (H), or otherwise fail to comply with any applicable requirement of
this division (H).
      (9)   This section does not affect or limit the operation of divisions
(A) through (G) of this section, R.C. § 4513.60 or R.C. §§ 4513.61 to 4613.65
as they relate to property other than private property that is established as a
private tow-away zone under division (H)(1) of this section.
      (10)   Whoever violates division (H)(8) of this section is guilty of a
minor misdemeanor.
      (11)   As used in this section, “owner of a private property” or “owner
of the private property” includes, with respect to a private property, any of
the following:
         (a)   Any person who holds title to the property;
         (b)   Any person who is a lessee or sublessee with respect to a lease
or sublease agreement for the property;
         (c)   A person who is authorized to manage the property;
         (d)   A duly authorized agent of any person listed in divisions (H)
(11)(a) to (H)(11)(c) of this section.
(ORC 4513.601)
   (I)   If an owner of private property posts on the property in a conspicuous
manner a prohibition against parking on the property or conditions and
regulations under which parking is permitted, no person shall do either of the
following:
      (1)   Park a vehicle on the property without the owner’s consent;
      (2)   Park a vehicle on the property in violation of any condition or
regulation posted by the owner.
   (J)   Whoever violates division (I) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor.
(ORC 4511.681)
§ 452.06  UNATTENDED VEHICLES; DUTY TO LOCK IGNITION, REMOVE KEY, SET BRAKE,
ETC.
   (A)   (1)   No person driving or in charge of a motor vehicle shall permit
it to stand unattended without first stopping the engine, locking the ignition,
removing the key from the ignition, effectively setting the parking brake, and,
when the motor vehicle is standing upon any grade, turning the front wheels to
the curb or side of the highway.
      (2)   The requirements of this section relating to the stopping of the
engine, locking of the ignition, and removing the key from the ignition of a
motor vehicle do not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   A motor vehicle that is parked on residential property;
         (b)   A motor vehicle that is locked, regardless of where it is
parked;
         (c)   An emergency vehicle; or
         (d)   A public safety vehicle.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates this
section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense,
the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one
predicate motor vehicle or traffic offense, whoever violates this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If, within one year of the
offense, the offender previously has been convicted of two or more predicate
motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever violates this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4511.661)
§ 452.07  OPENING DOORS ON SIDE AVAILABLE TO TRAFFIC.
   No person shall open the door of a vehicle on the side available to moving
traffic unless and until it is reasonably safe to do so, and can be done
without interfering with the movement of other traffic, nor shall any person
leave a door open on the side of a vehicle available to moving traffic for a
period of time longer than necessary to load or unload passengers.
(ORC 4511.70)
§ 452.08  SELLING, WASHING OR REPAIRING VEHICLE UPON ROADWAY.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle upon any roadway for the
principal purpose of:
      (1)   Displaying such vehicle for sale; or
      (2)   Washing, greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs
necessitated by an emergency.
   (B)   No person shall operate or park a vehicle one any street for the
primary purpose of advertising.
§ 452.09  TRUCK LOADING ZONES.
   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of
time, other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and
loading of materials, in any place marked as a truck loading zone during hours
when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall
the stop for loading and unloading of materials exceed 30 minutes.
§ 452.10  BUS STOPS AND TAXICAB STANDS.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a
bus stop, or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand, when any such stop or
stand has been officially designated and appropriately posted, except that the
driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of,
and while actually engaged in, loading or unloading passengers when such
stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about
to enter such zone, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes, if
such stopping is not prohibited therein by posted signs.
   (B)   No operator of a bus shall stop, stand or park such vehicle upon any
street or other public way at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading
passengers or their baggage other than at a bus stop so designated and posted
as such, except in case of an emergency.
   (C)   No operator of a bus shall fail to enter a bus stop on a street or
other public way in such a manner that the bus when stopped to load or unload
passengers or baggage is in a position with the right front wheel of such
vehicle not further than 18 inches from the curb and the bus approximately
parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular
traffic.
   (D)   No operator of a taxicab shall stand or park such vehicle upon any
street or other public way at any place other than in a taxicab stand so
designated and posted as such. This provision shall not prevent the operator of
a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or
parking provisions at any place for the purpose of, and while actually engaged
in, the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers.
§ 452.11  PARKING IN ALLEYS AND NARROW STREETS; EXCEPTIONS.
   (A)   No person shall stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a street, other
than an alley, in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available
less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular
traffic, except that a driver may stop temporarily during the actual loading or
unloading of passengers or when directed to by a police officer or traffic
control signal.
   (B)   Except as otherwise provided by law, no person shall stop, stand or
park a vehicle within an alley except while actually loading and unloading, and
then only for a period not to exceed 30 minutes.
§ 452.12  PARKING AND STORAGE OF CAMPING AND RECREATIONAL EQUIPMENT/TRAILERS/
BOAT TRAILERS/WORK TRAILERS.
   (A)   As used in this section, “camping and recreational equipment” means
and includes recreational vehicles, which are defined as vehicle-type
structures, primarily designed as temporary living quarters for recreation,
camping or travel use, which either have their own motive power or are mounted
on or drawn by another vehicle which is self-powered. With allowances for
engineering variances, the basic entities are:
      (1)   A “travel trailer,” which is a vehicular portable structure,
mounted on wheels, of such a size or weight as not to require special highway
movement permits when drawn by a stock passenger automobile, and primarily
designed and constructed to provide temporary living quarters for recreation,
camping or travel use;
      (2)   A “camping trailer,” which is a vehicular portable structure
mounted on wheels, constructed with collapsible partial side walls of fabric,
plastic or other pliable material for folding compactly while being drawn by
another vehicle, and, when unfolded at the site or location, providing
temporary living quarters, and whose primary design is for recreation, camping
or travel use;
      (3)   A “truck camper,” which is a portable structure, designed to be
loaded onto or affixed to the bed or chassis of a truck, constructed to provide
temporary living quarters for recreation, camping or travel use;
      (4)   A “motor home,” which is a structure built on and made an integral
part of a self- propelled motor vehicle chassis, other than a passenger car
chassis, primarily designed to provide temporary living quarters for
recreation, camping and travel use; and
      (5)   “Boats” and “boat trailers,” which include boats, floats and rafts,
plus the normal equipment to transport the same on a highway.
      (6)   "Trailers" and "work trailers" used for transporting construction
or recreational equipment.
   (B)   Any owner of camping and recreational equipment may park or store such
equipment subject to the following conditions:
      (1)   At no time shall such parked or stored camping and recreational
equipment be occupied or used for living, sleeping or housekeeping purposes,
nor shall it have fixed connections to electricity, water, gas or sanitary
sewer facilities.
      (2)   If the camping and recreational equipment and trailers are parked
or stored outside of a garage, it shall be parked or stored to the rear of the
front building line of the lot, and not closer than ten feet from side or rear
lot lines and on a paved surface.
      (3)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (B)(2) of this section,
camping and recreational equipment and trailers may be parked anywhere on the
premises for loading or unloading purposes.
      (4)   All camping and recreational equipment and trailers must be kept in
good repair and carry a current year license and/or registration.
(Ord. 83-73, passed 12-17-1973; Ord. 24-2020, passed 7-6-2020)
§ 452.13  SNOW EMERGENCY.
   (A)   Whenever, during any period of 24 hours or less, snow falls to a depth
of two inches or more within the city, more particularly on any streets that
are determined from time to time to require the enforcement of this section, an
emergency is declared to exist.
   (B)   Whenever such an emergency exists, the Mayor or the Director of Public
Safety shall request the cooperation of the local press and radio and
television stations to announce the emergency and the time that the emergency
parking regulations will become effective. Such emergency parking regulations
shall become effective no sooner than one hour after the first announcement.
Such announcement by two local radio stations, or two local television
stations, or in a daily newspaper of general circulation in the city, shall
constitute notice to the general public of the existence of the emergency. The
emergency shall continue until an announcement by the Mayor or the Director of
Public Safety that snow-plowing operations have been completed, which
announcement shall be made in the same manner as outlined above.
   (C)   All owners and operators of motor vehicles shall have full
responsibility to determine existing weather conditions and to comply with the
emergency parking regulations.
   (D)   During the period of emergency, the Director of Public Safety may
prohibit the parking of any vehicle upon any or all of the city streets. No
person, during such period of emergency, shall park or cause to be parked, or
permit to remain parked, or abandon or leave unattended, any vehicle upon such
specified streets. However, vehicles may be parked for a period of not longer
than three minutes for the loading or unloading of passengers, or thirty
minutes for actual loading or unloading of property or goods, provided that no
other ordinance restricting parking as to place or time is violated thereby.
   (E)   Any motor vehicle parked in violation of this section may be impounded
or towed away by the police or under the authority of the Police Department, at
the cost and expense of the owner of the vehicle.
§ 452.14  NIGHT PARKING OF COMMERCIAL VEHICLES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   No person shall park a school bus, commercial tractor, agricultural tractor,
truck of more than one-ton capacity, bus, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer or
moving van on any street within the residential districts of the municipality
between one hour after sunset and one hour before sunrise.
§ 452.15  MOTOR CARRIERS.
   A motor carrier and its agents and employees shall not park any motor
vehicle used in the business of such motor carrier on any street in the city,
except for a period of time not exceeding three minutes while actually
discharging or taking on passengers, or for a period of time not exceeding ten
minutes while engaged in receiving or discharging goods, wares or merchandise.
§ 452.16  DETACHED TRAILERS.
   No person shall stand or park upon a street any commercial trailer which is
detached from the tractor or other means of locomotion, except for the minimum
period required in the usual course of business for making delivery of or
loading merchandise for delivery.
§ 452.17  SPECIAL RESTRICTIONS FOR BROADVIEW ROAD, ROYALTON ROAD AND INTERSTATE
77.
   No person shall park a school bus, commercial tractor, agricultural tractor,
truck of more than one-ton capacity, bus, trailer, semitrailer, pole trailer or
moving van on the street, berm or public right-of-way adjacent to Broadview
Road, East Royalton Road, West Royalton Road and Interstate Route 77.
(Ord. 80-78, passed 10-16-1978)
§ 452.18  REGISTERED OWNER PRIMA FACIE LIABLE FOR UNLAWFUL PARKING.
   In any hearing on a charge of illegally parking a motor vehicle, testimony
that a vehicle bearing a certain license plate was found unlawfully parked as
prohibited by the provisions of this Traffic Code, and further testimony that
the record of the Ohio Registrar of Motor Vehicles shows that the license plate
was issued to the defendant, shall be prima facie evidence that the vehicle
which was unlawfully parked, was so parked by the defendant. A certified
registration copy, showing such fact, from the Registrar shall be proof of such
ownership.
§ 452.19  WAIVER.
   Any person charged with a violation of any provision of this chapter for
which payment of a prescribed fine may be made, may pay such sum in the manner
prescribed on the issued traffic ticket. Such payment shall be deemed a plea of
guilty, waiver of court appearance and acknowledgment of conviction of the
alleged offense and may be accepted in full satisfaction of the prescribed
penalty for such alleged violation.  Payment of the prescribed fine need not be
accepted when laws prescribe that a certain number of such offenses shall
require court appearance.
§ 452.20  SIGNS AT CITY LIMITS.
   The Mayor is hereby authorized to post a notice at every entry to the city
limits now containing signage which shall read as follows:
   (A)   “Parking prohibited on all streets and thoroughfares between 3:00 a.m.
and  6:00 a.m.” and
   (B)   “Parking prohibited on city streets during snow emergency.”
(Ord. 50-86, passed 5-19-1986)
§ 452.21  PARKING DURING BUILDING CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   The Mayor is hereby authorized, at his or her discretion, to establish
the temporary banning of parking as needed to expedite the completion of any
construction in the city, which construction has been duly authorized pursuant
to law.
   (B)   Any temporary parking ban established hereunder shall not exceed in
duration the period of time necessary to complete construction under the
appropriate construction agreement.
(Ord. 35-87, passed 4-6-1987)
§ 452.22  PARKING FOR SPECIAL EVENTS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any provision contained in §§
452.01 et seq. to the contrary, the Mayor is hereby authorized, at his or her
sole discretion, upon proper application, to permit temporary parking of motor
vehicles in any zoning district on a temporary basis for special events.
   (B)   As used herein, the term “special event” means an event of three weeks
or less in duration, open to the general public with or without admission, and
benefitting the general public in some manner. Within the scope of the
definition contained herein, the Mayor shall exercise his or her reasonable
discretion in determining what constitutes a “special event.”
   (C)   (1)   Application for a permit pursuant to this section shall be made
by the operator of the special event. The application shall describe in detail
all areas for which the applicant is requesting a parking permit. The
application shall state the period of time during which the permit shall be
enforced. In the event that the applicant requests permission for parking on
lands owned by a person or persons other than the applicant, the application
shall be signed by the owner or owners of such lands and such signature shall
verify that the owner or owners have approved of the proposed parking.
      (2)   The application shall be reviewed by the Police Department prior to
approval or disapproval by the Mayor, and the Police Department shall indicate
its recommendation along with any specific recommendations for traffic control
as may be necessary. The cost for traffic control shall be paid by the operator
of the special event.
   (D)   After the application has been reviewed by the Police Department as
stated herein, the Mayor shall either approve the permit, disapprove the
permit, or approve the permit with specific conditions. The applicant shall
strictly comply with any and all conditions contained therein.
(Ord. 44-91, passed 6-17-1991)
§ 452.23  PARKING ON MARKET PLACE WEST WITHIN 300 FEET OF ROYALTON ROAD.
   Parking on Market Place West is hereby prohibited.
(Ord. 141-00, passed 9-5-2000; Ord. 39-04, passed 4-5-2004)
§ 452.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
404.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
TITLE TEN:  BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES AND SNOWMOBILES
   
CHAP. 474.   BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES GENERALLY.
   
CHAP. 476.   SNOWMOBILES, OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLES AND ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLES.
CHAPTER 474:  BICYCLES AND MOTORCYCLES GENERALLY
Section
474.01   Code application to bicycles
474.02   Riding upon seats; carrying packages; motorcycle handle bars; helmets
and glasses
474.03   Attaching bicycles, motorcycles to other vehicles
474.04   Riding on right side of roadway; riding abreast
474.05   Lights, signal devices, brakes on bicycles
474.07   Safe riding regulations for bicycles
474.08   Parking; locks
474.09   Parent’s responsibility
474.10   Impounding of bicycles
474.11   Operation of motorized bicycles
474.12   Electric bicycles
474.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Bicycle defined, see §
402.05
   Bicycles prohibited on freeways, see §
412.05
   Motorcycle brakes, see §
438.19
   Motorcycle defined, see §
402.21
   Motorcycle operator’s license required, see §
436.01
   Motorcycle headlight, see §
438.03
   Off-highway motorcycles, see
Chapter 476
   Operation of vehicles on bicycle paths, see §
432.40
§ 474.01  CODE APPLICATION TO BICYCLES.
   (A)   The provisions of this Traffic Code which are applicable to bicycles
and electric bicycles apply whenever a bicycle and electric bicycle is operated
upon any highway or upon any path set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (D) of this section, a bicycle operator
or electric bicycle operator who violates any provisions of this Traffic Code
described in division (A) of this section that is applicable to bicycles or
electric bicycles may be issued a ticket, citation, or summons by a law
enforcement officer for the violation in the same manner as the operator of a
motor vehicle would be cited for the same violation. A person who commits any
such violation while operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall not have any
points assessed against the person’s driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, or probationary license under Ohio R.C.
4510.036.
   (C)   Except as provided in division (D) of this section, in the case of a
violation of any provision of this Traffic Code described in division (A) of
this section by a bicycle operator, electric bicycle operator, or motor vehicle
operator the trier of fact finds that the violation by the motor vehicle
operator endangered the lives of bicycle riders or electric bicycle riders at
the time of the violation, the court, notwithstanding any provision of the Ohio
Revised Code to the contrary, may require the bicycle operator, electric
bicycle operator, or motor vehicle operator to take and successfully complete a
bicycling skills course approved by the court in addition to or in lieu of any
penalty otherwise prescribed by this Traffic Code or the Ohio Revised Code for
that violation.
   (D)   Divisions (B) and (C) of this section do not apply to violations of
Ohio R.C. 4511.19, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(ORC 4511.52)
   (E)   Every person operating a bicycle shall obey the instructions of
official traffic control devices and signals applicable to vehicles, unless
otherwise directed by a police officer.
§ 474.02  RIDING UPON SEATS; CARRYING PACKAGES; MOTORCYCLE HANDLE BARS; HELMETS
AND GLASSES.
   (A)   For purposes of this section, “snowmobile” has the same meaning as
given that term in Ohio R.C. 4519.01.
   (B)   (1)   No person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall ride
other than upon or astride the permanent and regular seat attached thereto or
carry any other person upon the bicycle or electric bicycle other than upon a
firmly attached and regular seat thereon, and no person shall ride upon a
bicycle or electric bicycle other than upon such a firmly attached and regular
seat.
      (2)   No person operating a motorcycle shall ride other than upon or
astride the permanent and regular seat or saddle attached thereto, or carry any
other person upon the motorcycle other than upon a firmly attached and regular
seat or saddle thereon, and no person shall ride upon a motorcycle other than
upon such a firmly attached and regular seat or saddle.
      (3)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a
saddle other than while sitting astride the saddle, facing forward, with one
leg on each side of the motorcycle.
      (4)   No person shall ride upon a motorcycle that is equipped with a seat
other than while sitting upon the seat.
      (5)   No person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle shall carry any
package, bundle or article that prevents the driver from keeping at least one
hand upon the handlebars.
      (6)   No bicycle, electric bicycle, or motorcycle shall be used to carry
more persons at one time than the number for which it is designed and equipped.
No motorcycle shall be operated on a highway when the handlebars rise higher
than the shoulders of the operator when the operator is seated in the
operator’s seat or saddle.
   (C)   (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(3) of this section, no person
shall operate or be a passenger on a snowmobile or motorcycle without using
safety glasses or other protective eye device. Except as provided in division
(C)(3) of this section, no person who is under the age of 18 years, or who
holds a motorcycle operator’s endorsement or license bearing a “novice”
designation that is currently in effect as provided in Ohio R.C. 4507.13, shall
operate a motorcycle on a highway, or be a passenger on a motorcycle, unless
wearing a protective helmet on the person’s head, and no other person shall be
a passenger on a motorcycle operated by such a person unless similarly wearing
a protective helmet. The helmet, safety glasses, or other protective eye device
shall conform with rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety. The
provisions of this paragraph or a violation thereof shall not be used in the
trial of any civil action.
      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (C)(3) of this section, no
person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary instruction permit and
temporary instruction permit identification card issued by the Registrar of
Motor Vehicles pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4507.05 unless the person, at the time of
such operation, is wearing on the person’s head a protective helmet that
conforms with rules adopted by the Ohio Director of Public Safety.
         (b)   No person shall operate a motorcycle with a valid temporary
instruction permit and temporary instruction permit identification card issued
by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4507.05 in any of the
following circumstances:
            1.   At any time when lighted lights are required by Ohio R.C.
4513.03(A)(1);
            2.   While carrying a passenger;
            3.   On any limited access highway.
      (3)   Divisions (C)(1) and (C)(2)(a) of this section do not apply to a
person who operates or is a passenger in an autocycle or cab-enclosed
motorcycle when the occupant compartment top is in place enclosing the
occupants.
   (D)   Nothing in this section shall be construed as prohibiting the carrying
of a child in a seat or trailer that is designed for carrying children and is
firmly attached to the bicycle or electric bicycle.
(ORC 4511.53)
§ 474.03  ATTACHING BICYCLES, MOTORCYCLES TO OTHER VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person riding upon any bicycle, electric bicycle, coaster, roller
skates, sled, skateboard, or toy vehicle shall attach the same or himself or
herself to any vehicle upon a roadway.
   (B)   No operator shall knowingly permit any person riding upon any bicycle,
electric bicycle, coaster, roller skates, sled, skateboard, or toy vehicle to
attach the same or himself or herself to any vehicle while it is moving upon a
roadway.
   (C)   This section does not apply to towing a disabled vehicle.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.54)
§ 474.04  RIDING ON RIGHT SIDE OF ROADWAY; RIDING ABREAST.
   (A)   Every person operating a bicycle or electric bicycle upon a roadway
shall ride as near to the right side of the roadway as practicable obeying all
traffic rules applicable to vehicles and exercising due care when passing a
standing vehicle or one proceeding in the same direction.
   (B)   Persons riding bicycles, electric bicycles, or motorcycles upon a
roadway shall ride not more than two abreast in a single lane, except on paths
or parts of roadways set aside for the exclusive use of bicycles, electric
bicycles, or motorcycles.
   (C)   This section does not require a person operating a bicycle or electric
bicycle to ride at the edge of the roadway when it is unreasonable or unsafe to
do so. Conditions that may require riding away from the edge of the roadway
include when necessary to avoid fixed or moving objects, parked or moving
vehicles, surface hazards, or if it otherwise is unsafe or impracticable to do
so, including if the lane is too narrow for the bicycle or electric bicycle and
an overtaking vehicle to travel safely side by side within the lane.
   (D)   If the offender commits the offense while distracted and the
distracting activity is a contributing factor to the commission of the offense,
the offender is subject to the additional fine established under §
404.99(C).
(ORC 4511.55)
§ 474.05  LIGHTS, SIGNAL DEVICES, BRAKES ON BICYCLES.
   (A)   Every bicycle or electric bicycle when in use at the times specified
in Ohio R.C. 4513.03 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance shall be
equipped with the following:
      (1)   A lamp mounted on the front of either the bicycle or electric
bicycle or the operator that shall emit a white light visible from a distance
of at least 500 feet to the front and 300 feet to the sides. A generator-
powered lamp that emits light only when the bicycle or electric bicycle is
moving may be used to meet this requirement.
      (2)   A red reflector on the rear that shall be visible from all
distances from 100 feet to 600 feet to the rear when directly in front of
lawful lower beams of head lamps on a motor vehicle;
      (3)   A lamp emitting either flashing or steady red light visible from a
distance of 500 feet to the rear shall be used in addition to the red
reflector. If the red lamp performs as a reflector in that it is visible as
specified in division (A)(2) of this section, the red lamp may serve as the
reflector and a separate reflector is not required.
   (B)   Additional lamps and reflectors may be used in addition to those
required under division (A) of this section, except that red lamps and red
reflectors shall not be used on the front of the bicycle or electric bicycle
and white lamps and white reflectors shall not be used on the rear of the
bicycle or electric bicycle.
   (C)   A bicycle or electric bicycle may be equipped with a device capable of
giving an audible signal, except that a bicycle or electric bicycle shall not
be equipped with nor shall any person use upon a bicycle or electric bicycle
any siren or whistle.
   (D)   Every bicycle and electric bicycle shall be equipped with an adequate
brake when used on a street or highway.
(ORC 4511.56)
§ 474.07  SAFE RIDING REGULATIONS FOR BICYCLES.
   (A)   Whenever a person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk or street, such
person shall yield the right-of- way to any pedestrian and shall give an
audible signal before attempting to overtake and pass a pedestrian or another
bicycle. This audible signal must be given only by bell or other warning device
capable of giving an audible signal and shall be given at such a distance and
in such a manner as not to startle the person being overtaken and passed.
   (B)   No person shall ride a bicycle across or through any intersection
involving a through street. Such intersections are to be crossed by walking the
bicycle across or through the intersection.
   (C)   Whenever a person is riding a bicycle upon a sidewalk, the person,
before overtaking and passing a blind person carrying a white or metallic cane,
shall dismount and overtake or pass on foot.
   (D)   When a bicycle is operated on the street, the operator shall give hand
signals before turning, changing lanes or stopping. Such signals shall conform
with Ohio R.C. 4511.40, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (E)   Every rider of a bicycle shall exercise due care to avoid colliding
with any pedestrian or any vehicle upon any roadway, sidewalk or bicycle path,
or endangering the life, limb or property of any person while in the lawful use
of the streets, sidewalks or any other private or public property.
   (F)   No person shall operate a bicycle at a speed greater than is
reasonable and proper under the conditions then existing.
   (G)   The operator of a bicycle emerging from or turning into an alley,
driveway or building shall, upon approaching a sidewalk or the sidewalk area
extending across any alley, driveway or building, yield the right- of-way to
all pedestrians approaching on such sidewalk area. Upon entering the street,
such operator shall yield the right-of-way to all vehicles approaching on such
street.
   (H)   No person shall engage in trick riding or operate a bicycle without
both hands upon the handle grips except when necessary to give the hand signals
required herein.
§ 474.08  PARKING; LOCKS.
   (A)   No person shall park a bicycle upon a sidewalk in such a manner as to
interfere with pedestrian traffic or damage the property of another.
   (B)   No person shall park a bicycle upon a roadway in such a manner as to
interfere with vehicular traffic.
   (C)   No bicycle shall remain unlocked when parked upon any public way or
place.
§ 474.09  PARENT’S RESPONSIBILITY.
   No parent, guardian or other person having the custody or control of any
person under eighteen years of age, shall willfully permit such minor person to
operate any bicycle which is not equipped as provided in this Traffic Code, or
knowingly permit the operation of such bicycle on any street or public place by
such minor in violation of any of the provisions of this Traffic Code.
§ 474.10  IMPOUNDING OF BICYCLES.
   (A)   Any police officer may impound the bicycle of any rider under eighteen
years of age for any violation of the provisions of this Traffic Code.  The
bicycle shall not be released except to a parent, guardian or other person
having the custody and control of such minor, and upon order of the Police
Chief or any person designated by the Chief. 
   (B)   It shall be the duty of the police officer or the person in charge of
records, to keep, in an appropriate book or file, the names and addresses of
all owners of bicycles that are impounded, the name and address of the violator
if he or she is not the owner, and the frame or serial number of the bicycle,
together with the nature and circumstances of each violation and the length of
time declared by the Chief of Police that the bicycle is to be impounded, as
well as the disposition of each case.
§ 474.11  OPERATION OF MOTORIZED BICYCLES.
   (A)   No person shall operate a motorized bicycle upon a highway or any
public or private property used by the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking, unless all of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The person is 14 or 15 years of age and holds a valid probationary
motorized bicycle license issued after the person has passed the test provided
for in this section, or the person is 16 years of age or older and holds either
a valid commercial driver’s license issued under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4506 or a
driver’s license issued under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507 or a valid motorized
bicycle license issued after the person has passed the test provided for in
this section, except that if a person is 16 years of age, has a valid
probationary motorized bicycle license and desires a motorized bicycle license,
the person is not required to comply with the testing requirements provided for
in this section.
      (2)   The motorized bicycle is equipped in accordance with the rules
adopted under division (B) of this section and is in proper working order.
      (3)   The person, if under 18 years of age, is wearing a protective
helmet on the person’s head with the chin strap properly fastened and the
motorized bicycle is equipped with a rearview mirror.
      (4)   The person operates the motorized bicycle when practicable within
three feet of the right edge of the roadway obeying all traffic rules
applicable to vehicles.
   (B)   The Director of Public Safety, subject to Ohio R.C. Chapter 119, shall
adopt and promulgate rules concerning protective helmets, the equipment of
motorized bicycles, and the testing and qualifications of persons who do not
hold a valid driver’s or commercial driver’s license.  The test shall be as
near as
practicable to the examination required for a motorcycle operator’s endorsement
under Ohio R.C. 4507.11.  The test shall also require the operator to give an
actual demonstration of the operator’s ability to operate and control a
motorized bicycle by driving one under the supervision of an examining officer.
   (C)   Every motorized bicycle license expires on the birthday of the
applicant in the fourth year after the date it is issued, but in no event shall
any motorized bicycle license be issued for a period longer than four years.
   (D)   No person operating a motorized bicycle shall carry another person
upon the motorized bicycle.
   (E)   The protective helmet and rearview mirror required by division (A)(3)
of this section shall, on and after January 1, 1985, conform with rules adopted
by the Director under division (B) of this section.
(ORC 4511.521)
   (F)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section shall be
punished as provided in §
404.99, in addition to the suspension of the probationary motorized bicycle
license for violations of divisions (A) and (D) of this section, as provided in
Ohio R.C. 4510.34.
§ 474.12  ELECTRIC BICYCLES.
   (A)   (1)   On and after January 1, 2020, manufacturers and distributors of
electric bicycles shall permanently affix a label, in a prominent location, to
each electric bicycle. The label shall specify whether the electric bicycle is
a class 1, class 2, or class 3 electric bicycle, the top assisted speed that
the electric bicycle is capable of reaching, and the motor wattage of the
electric bicycle.
      (2)   No person shall modify an electric bicycle in a manner that changes
the top assisted speed that the electric bicycle is capable of reaching unless
the person also modifies the label required under division (A)(1) of this
section to reflect the modification.
   (B)   (1)   The manufacturer of an electric bicycle shall ensure that the
electric bicycle complies with the equipment and manufacturing requirements for
bicycles established by the consumer product safety commission under 16 C.F.R.
§§ 1512 et seq.
      (2)   The manufacturer shall manufacture all class 1 electric bicycles
and class 3 electric bicycles so that when the rider ceases pedaling the
electric motor ceases to provide assistance. The manufacturer shall manufacture
all class 2 electric bicycles so that when the rider applies the brakes or
releases or activates a switch or similar mechanism the electric motor ceases
to provide assistance.
      (3)   All class 3 electric bicycles shall be equipped with a speedometer
that displays the speed of the electric bicycle in miles per hour.
   (C)   (1)   The operation of a class 1 electric bicycle and a class 2
electric bicycle is permitted on a path set aside for the exclusive use of
bicycles or on a shared-use path, unless the county, township, municipal
corporation, other local authority, or state agency as defined in R.C. § 1.60
with control over the path by resolution, ordinance, or rule prohibits the use
of a class 1 electric bicycle or class 2 electric bicycle on such a path.
      (2)   No person shall operate a class 3 electric bicycle on a path set
aside for the exclusive use of bicycles or a shared-use path unless that path
is within or adjacent to a highway or the county, township, municipal
corporation, or local authority, or state agency as defined in R.C. § 1.60 with
control over the path by resolution, ordinance, or rule authorizes the use of a
class 3 electric bicycle on such a path.
      (3)   No person shall operate a class 1 electric bicycle, a class 2
electric bicycle, or a class 3 electric bicycle on a path that is intended to
be used primarily for mountain biking, hiking, equestrian use, or other similar
uses, or any other single track or natural surface trail that has historically
been reserved for non-motorized use, unless the county, township, municipal
corporation, other local authority, or state agency as defined in R.C. § 1.60
with control over the path by resolution, ordinance, or rule authorizes the use
of a class 1 electric bicycle, a class 2 electric bicycle, or a class 3
electric bicycle on such a path.
   (D)   (1)   No person under 16 years of age shall operate a class 3 electric
bicycle; however, a person under 16 years of age may ride as a passenger on a
class 3 electric bicycle that is designed to accommodate passengers.
      (2)   No person shall operate or be a passenger on a class 3 electric
bicycle unless the person is wearing a protective helmet that meets the
standards established by the Consumer Product Safety Commission or the American
Society for Testing and Materials.
   (E)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever operates
an electric bicycle in a manner that is prohibited under division (C) of this
section and whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of a minor
misdemeanor. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to one predicate motor vehicle or traffic
offense, whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth
degree. If, within one year of the offense, the offender previously has been
convicted of two or more predicate motor vehicle or traffic offenses, whoever
violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (2)   The offenses established under division (E)(1) of this section are
strict liability offenses and strict liability is a culpable mental state for
purposes of R.C. § 2901.20. The designation of these offenses as strict
liability offenses shall not be construed to imply that any other offense, for
which there is no specified degree of culpability, is not a strict liability
offense.
(R.C. § 4511.522)
§ 474.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
404.99 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 476:  SNOWMOBILES, OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLES
AND ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLES
Section
476.01   Definitions
476.02   Equipment
476.03   Code application; prohibited operation
476.04   Permitted operation
476.05   Licensing requirements of operator
476.06   Accident reports
476.07   Local control within police power
476.08   Registration of vehicles
476.09   Operation of off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle without
certificate of title; failure to surrender
476.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Bicycles and motorcycles generally, see
Chapter 474
   Operation of off-the-road vehicles, peace disturbances, see §
618.11
   Operation on bicycle paths, see §
432.39
   Required usage of helmets and safety glasses, see §
474.02
   Street or highway defined, see §
402.44
Statutory reference:
   Power of court to impound registration certificates for certain violations,
see Ohio R.C. 4519.47
§ 476.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   “All-purpose vehicle.”  Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for
cross-country travel on land and water, or on more than one type of terrain,
and steered by wheels or caterpillar treads, or any combination thereof,
including vehicles that operate on a cushion of air, vehicles commonly known as
all- terrain vehicles, all season vehicles, mini-bikes and trail bikes. The
term does not include a utility vehicle as defined in Ohio R.C. 4501.01 or any
vehicle principally used in playing golf, any motor vehicle or aircraft
required to be registered under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4503 or Ohio R.C. Chapter
4561, and any vehicle excepted from definition as a motor vehicle by Ohio R.C.
4501.01(B).
   “Dealer.”  Any person or firm engaged in the business of manufacturing or
selling snowmobiles, off- highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles at
wholesale or retail, or who rents, leases or otherwise furnishes snowmobiles,
off-highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles for hire.
   “Electronic” and “electronic record.”  Have the same meanings as in Ohio
R.C. 4501.01.
   “Electronic dealer.” A dealer whom the Registrar of Motor Vehicles
designates under Ohio R.C. 4519.511.
   “Interstate highway.”  Any part of the interstate system of highways as
defined in division (E), 90 Stat. 431 (1976), 23 U.S.C. 103, as amended.
   “Limited access highway” or “freeway.”  Have the same meanings as in Ohio
R.C. 5511.02.
   “Mini-truck.” A vehicle that has four wheels, is propelled by an electric
motor with a rated power of 7,500 watts or less or an internal combustion
engine with a piston displacement capacity of 660 cubic centimeters or less,
has a total dry weight of 900 to 2,200 pounds, contains an enclosed cabin and a
seat for the vehicle operator, resembles a pickup truck or van with a cargo
area or bed located at the rear of the vehicle, and was not originally
manufactured to meet federal motor vehicle safety standards.
   “Off-highway motorcycle.”  Every motorcycle, as defined in Ohio R.C.
4511.01, that is designed to be operated primarily on lands other than a street
or highway.
   “Operator.”  Any person who operates or is in actual physical control of a
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle.
   “Owner.”  Any person or firm, other than a lienholder or dealer, having
title to a snowmobile, off- highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle, or
other right to the possession thereof.
   “Proof of financial responsibility.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
4509.01.
   “Snowmobile.”  Any self-propelled vehicle designed primarily for use on snow
or ice, and steered by skis, runners or caterpillar treads.
   “State highway” and “state route.” Have the same meanings as in R.C. §
4511.01.
   “Street” or “highway.”  Have the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
(ORC 4519.01)
§ 476.02  EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   In addition to any rules or regulations promulgated by the Ohio
Director of Public Safety pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4519.20 and Ohio R.C. Chapter
119, equipment of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all-purpose
vehicles shall include but not necessarily be limited to requirements for the
following items of equipment:
      (1)   At least one headlight having a minimum candlepower of sufficient
intensity to reveal persons and objects at a distance of at least 100 feet
ahead under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness;
      (2)   At least one red tail light having a minimum candlepower of
sufficient intensity to be plainly visible from a distance of 500 feet to the
rear under normal atmospheric conditions during hours of darkness;
      (3)   Every snowmobile, while traveling on packed snow, shall be capable
of carrying a driver who weighs 175 pounds or more, and, while carrying such
driver, be capable of stopping in no more than 40 feet from an initial steady
speed of 20 miles per hour, or locking its traction belt; and
      (4)   A muffler system capable of precluding the emission of excessive
smoke or exhaust fumes, and of limiting the engine noise of vehicles.  On
snowmobiles manufactured after January 1, 1973, such requirement shall include
sound dampening equipment such that noise does not exceed 82 decibels on the
“A” scale at 50 feet as measured according to SAE J192 (September 1970).
   (B)   No person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or
all-purpose vehicle in violation of this section, except that equipment
specified in division (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this section shall not be required
on snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, or all-purpose vehicles operated
during the daylight hours.
(ORC 4519.20)
§ 476.03  CODE APPLICATION; PROHIBITED OPERATION.
   (A)   The applicable provisions of this traffic code apply to the operation
of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all-purpose vehicles, except that
no person shall operate a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose
vehicle as follows:
      (1)   On any state highway, including a limited access highway or freeway
or the right-of-way thereof, except for emergency travel during such time and
in such manner as the Ohio Director of Public Safety designates or except as
authorized by R.C. § 4519.41(F);
      (2)   On any private property, or in any nursery or planting area,
without the permission of the owner or other person having the right to
possession of the property;
      (3)   On any land or waters controlled by the state, except at those
locations where a sign has been posted permitting the operation;
      (4)   On the tracks or right-of-way of any operating railroad;
      (5)   While transporting any firearm, bow or other implement for hunting
that is not unloaded and securely encased;
      (6)   For the purpose of chasing, pursuing, capturing or killing any
animal or wild fowl; or
      (7)   During the time from sunset to sunrise, unless displaying lighted
lights as required by R.C. § 4519.20 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section shall be fined not less than $50 nor
more than $500, or imprisoned not less than three nor more than 30 days, or
both.
(ORC 4519.40)
§ 476.04  PERMITTED OPERATION.
   Snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycles, and all-purpose vehicles may be
operated as follows:
   (A)   To make a crossing of a highway, other than a highway as designated in
Ohio  R.C. 4519.40(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
whenever the crossing can be made in safety and will not interfere with the
movement of vehicular traffic approaching from any direction on the highway,
and provided that the operator yields the right-of-way to any approaching
traffic that presents an immediate hazard;
   (B)   On highways in the county or township road systems whenever the local
authority having jurisdiction over such highways so permits;
   (C)   Off and alongside street or highway for limited distances from the
point of unloading from a conveyance to the point at which the snowmobile, off-
highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle is intended and authorized to be
operated;
   (D)   On the berm or shoulder of a highway, other than a highway as
designated in Ohio R.C. 4519.40(A)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, when the terrain permits such operation to be undertaken safely and
without the necessity of entering any traffic lane;
   (E)   On the berm or shoulder or a county or township road, while traveling
from one area of operation of the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-
purpose vehicle to another such area.
   (F)   For snowmobiles without metal studded tracks and all-purpose vehicles,
on state highways located on an island in Lake Erie, including limited access
highways and freeways, between the first day of November and the thirtieth day
of April, provided that all of the following conditions apply:
      (1)   The operator has a valid driver’s license as required under R.C. §
4519.44.
      (2)   The snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle is in compliance with rules
governing safety equipment adopted under R.C. § 4519.20.
      (3)   The owner of the snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle maintains proof
of financial responsibility for both on-road and off-road use of the snowmobile
or all-purpose vehicle.
      (4)   The operator obeys all traffic rules and regulations.
(ORC 4519.41)
§ 476.05  LICENSING REQUIREMENTS OF OPERATOR.
   (A)   No person who does not hold a valid, current motor vehicle driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, motorcycle operator’s endorsement or probationary
license, issued under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4506 or Ohio R.C. Chapter 4507 or a
valid, current driver’s license issued by another jurisdiction, shall operate a
snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle on any street or
highway in this municipality, on any portion of the right-of-way thereof, or on
any public land or waters.
   (B)   No person who is less than 16 years of age shall operate a snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle on any land or waters other than
private property or waters owned by or leased to the person’s parent or
guardian, unless accompanied by another person who is 18 years of age or older,
and who holds a license as provided in division (A) of this section, except
that the Ohio Department of Natural Resources may permit such operation on
state controlled land under its jurisdiction when such person is less than 16
years of age and is accompanied by a parent or guardian who is a licensed
driver 18 years of age or older.
(ORC 4519.44)
§ 476.06  ACCIDENT REPORTS.
   (A)   The operator of a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose
vehicle involved in any accident resulting in bodily injury to or death of any
person or damage to the property of any person in excess of $100 shall report
the accident within 48 hours to the Chief of Police, and within 30 days shall
forward a written report of the accident to the Ohio Registrar of Motor
Vehicles on a form prescribed by the Registrar.  If the operator is physically
incapable of making the reports and there is another participant in the
accident not so incapacitated, the participant shall make the reports.  In the
event there is no other participant, and the operator is other than the owner,
the owner, within the prescribed periods of time, shall make the reports.
   (B)   Any law enforcement officer or other person authorized by Ohio R.C.
4519.42 and 4519.43 who investigates or receives information of an accident
involving a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all- purpose vehicle shall
forward to the Registrar a written report of the accident within 48 hours.
(ORC 4519.46)
§ 476.07  LOCAL CONTROL WITHIN POLICE POWER.
   Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the municipality from
regulating the operation of snowmobiles, off-highway motorcycle, and all-
purpose vehicles on streets and highways and other public property under
municipal jurisdiction, and within the reasonable exercise of the police power,
except that no registration or licensing of any snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle required to be registered or titled under
Ohio R.C. Chapter 4519 shall be required.
(ORC 4519.48)
§ 476.08  REGISTRATION OF VEHICLES.
   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (B), (C) and (D) of this section,
no person shall operate any snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose
vehicle within this municipality unless the snowmobile,  off-highway
motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle is registered and numbered in accordance
with Ohio R.C. 4519.03 and 4519.04.
      (2)   Except as provided in R.C. § 4511.215 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, no registration is required for a mini-truck that is
operated within this state. A mini-truck may be operated only in accordance
with R.C. § 4511.215 and R.C. § 4519.401, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
   (B)   (1)   No registration is required for a snowmobile or off-highway
motorcycle that is operated exclusively upon lands owned by the owner of the
snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle, or on lands to which the owner of the
snowmobile or off-highway motorcycle has a contractual right.
      (2)   No registration is required for an all-purpose vehicle that is used
primarily for agricultural purposes when the owner qualifies for the current
agricultural use valuation tax credit, unless it is to be used on any public
land, trail, or right-of-way on a farm as a farm implement.
      (3)   Any all-purpose vehicle exempted from registration under division
(B)(2) of this section and operated for agricultural purposes may use public
roads and rights-of-way when traveling from one farm field to another, when
such use does not violate Ohio R.C. 4519.41.
      (4)   No registration is required for a snowmobile or all-purpose vehicle
that is operated on a state highway as authorized by R.C. § 4519.41(F).
   (C)   No registration is required for a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle,
or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this state by a resident of another
state whenever that state has in effect a registration law similar to Ohio R.C.
Chapter 4519 and the snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle
is properly registered under that state’s law. Any snowmobile, off-highway
motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this state by a resident
of a state not having a registration law similar to Ohio R.C. Chapter 4519
shall comply with Ohio R.C. 4519.09.
   (D)   No registration is required for a snowmobile, off-highway motorcycle,
or all-purpose vehicle owned and used in this municipality by the United
States, another state or a political subdivision  thereof, but the snowmobile,
off-highway motorcycle, or all-purpose vehicle shall display the name of the
owner thereon.
   (E)   The owner or operator of any all-purpose vehicle operated or used upon
the waters in this municipality shall comply with Ohio R.C. Chapter 1547 and
Ohio R.C. Chapter 1548 relative to the operation of watercraft.
(ORC 4519.02)
Statutory reference:
   Destruction or disposal of vehicle; transfer of ownership; change of
address; loss of certificate, see Ohio R.C. 4519.05
   Registration of emergency vehicles, see Ohio R.C. 4519.08
   Registration procedure, see Ohio R.C. 4519.03
   Temporary license placards and fees, see Ohio R.C. 4519.10
   Temporary operating permit for certain nonresidents, see Ohio R.C. 4519.09
§ 476.09  OPERATION OF OFF-HIGHWAY MOTORCYCLE OR ALL-PURPOSE VEHICLE WITHOUT
CERTIFICATE OF TITLE; FAILURE TO SURRENDER.
   No person shall do any of the following:
   (A)   Operate in this state an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle
without having a certificate of title for the off-highway motorcycle or all-
purpose vehicle if such a certificate is required by Ohio R.C. Chapter 4519 to
be issued for the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle, or, if a
physical certificate of title has not been issued for it, operate an off-
highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle knowing that the ownership
information related to the motorcycle or vehicle has not been entered into the
automated title processing system by a Clerk of a Court of Common Pleas.
   (B)   Operate in this municipality an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle is a certificate of title to the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle has been issued and then has been canceled.
   (C)   Fail to surrender any certificate of title upon cancellation of it by
the Registrar of Motor Vehicles and notice of the cancellation as prescribed in
Ohio R.C. Chapter 4519.
   (D)   Fail to surrender the certificate of title to a Clerk of a Court of
Common Pleas as provided in Ohio R.C. Chapter 4519, in case of the destruction
or dismantling of, or change in, the off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose
vehicle described in the certificate of title.
   (E)   Violate any provision of Ohio R.C. 4519.51 to 4519.70 for which no
penalty is otherwise provided or any lawful rules adopted pursuant to those
sections.
   (F)   Operate in this state an off-highway motorcycle or all-purpose vehicle
knowing that the certificate of title to or ownership of the motorcycle or
vehicle as otherwise reflected in the automated title processing system has
been canceled.
(ORC 4519.66)
§ 476.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
404.99 for general Traffic Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
PART VI: GENERAL OFFENSES
   
CHAP. 606.   GENERAL PROVISIONS; ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
   
CHAP. 612.   ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
   
CHAP. 618.   ANIMALS
   
CHAP. 620.   COSTS OF EMERGENCY ACTION
   
CHAP. 624.   DRUGS
   
CHAP. 630.   GAMBLING
   
CHAP. 636.   OFFENSES RELATING TO PERSONS
   
CHAP. 642.   OFFENSES RELATING TO PROPERTY
   
CHAP. 648.   PEACE DISTURBANCES
   
CHAP. 660.   SAFETY, SANITATION AND HEALTH
   
CHAP. 666.   SEX RELATED OFFENSES
   
CHAP. 672.   WEAPONS AND EXPLOSIVES
   
CHAP. 678.   WEED CONTROL/NUISANCE ABATEMENT
CHAPTER 606:  GENERAL PROVISIONS; ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section
606.01   Definitions
606.02   Culpable mental states
606.03   Classification of offenses
606.04   Offenses defined
606.05   Rules of construction
606.055   Criminal law jurisdiction
606.06   Limitation on criminal prosecutions
606.07   Requirements for criminal liability; voluntary intoxication
606.08   Organizational criminal liability
606.09   Personal accountability for organizational conduct
606.10   Falsification
606.105   False report of child abuse or neglect
606.11   Compounding a crime
606.12   Failure to report a crime or death
606.13   Failure to aid a law enforcement officer
606.14   Obstructing official business
606.15   Obstructing justice
606.16   Resisting arrest
606.165   Compliance with lawful order of police officer; fleeing
606.17   Having an unlawful interest in a public contract
606.18   Soliciting or receiving improper compensation
606.19   Dereliction of duty
606.20   Interfering with civil rights
606.21   Attempts
606.22   Complicity
606.23   Detention of shoplifters and those committing motion picture piracy;
protection of institutional property
606.24   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by Police
Department
606.25   Impersonating an officer
606.26   Display of law enforcement agency emblem
606.27   Reimbursement of expenses of confinement
606.28   Contraband in city jail
606.29   Using sham legal process
606.30   Failure to disclose personal information
606.31   Misuse of 9-1-1 system
606.32   Self defense: limitations on duty to retreat prior to using force
606.99   Penalty; suspension of driver’s license
Cross-reference:
   Declaratory judgment in sex related offenses, see §
666.15
   Injunction and abatement of nuisance in sex related offenses, see §
666.16
   Justifiable use of force to suppress riot, see §
648.03
   License or permit to possess dangerous ordnance, see §
672.05
   Making false alarms, see §
648.08
   Misconduct at an emergency, see §
648.06
   Rabies quarantine, see §
618.11
   Registration of dogs, see §
618.08
   Rules of evidence in sex related offenses, see §
666.10
Statutory reference:
   Arrest without warrant for misdemeanor, see Ohio R.C. 2935.03
   Burden and degree of proof, see Ohio R.C. 2901.05
   Criminal law prosecution, see Ohio R.C. 2901.11
   Criteria for probation; conditions of probation, see Ohio R.C. 2951.02
   Definition of “imprisoned”, see Ohio R.C. 1.05
   Degree of offense; charge and verdict; prior conviction, see Ohio R.C.
2945.75
   Discharge for delay in trial, see Ohio R.C. 2945.73
   Disposition of unclaimed, abandoned and junk motor vehicles, see Ohio R.C.
737.32, 4513.61 et seq.
   Extension of time for hearing or trial, see Ohio R.C. 2945.72
   Payment of costs and expenses on change of venue, Ohio R.C. 2931.31
   Procedure on affidavit or complaint; withdrawal of unexecuted warrants, see
Ohio R.C. 2935.10
   Procedure on change of venue, see Ohio R.C. 2931.29
   Registration of sex offenders in cities and counties, see Ohio R.C. 2950.01
et seq.
   Right of trial by jury, see Ohio R.C. 2945.17
   Satisfaction of fine; credit for time served, see Ohio R.C. 2947.14
   Statute of limitations for income tax violations, see Ohio R.C. 718.06
   Time within which hearing or trial must be held, see Ohio R.C. 2945.71
   Transfer of prisoner on change of venue, see Ohio R.C. 2931.30
   Treatment of drug dependent persons in lieu of conviction, see Ohio R.C.
2951.041
   Venue, see Ohio R.C. 2901.12, 2931.29 et seq.
§ 606.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   “Campaign committee,” “contribution,” “legislative campaign fund,”
“political action committee,” “political contributing entity,” and “political
party.”  Have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 3517.01.
   “Contraband.”  Any property that is illegal for a person to acquire or
possess under a statute, ordinance, or rule, or that a trier of fact lawfully
determines to be illegal to possess by reason of the property’s involvement in
an offense. “Contraband” includes, but is not limited to, all of the following:
      (1)   Any controlled substance, as defined in Ohio R.C. 3719.01, or any
device or paraphernalia related thereto;
      (2)   Any unlawful gambling device or paraphernalia;
      (3)   Any dangerous ordnance or obscene material.
   “Deadly force.”  Any force that carries a substantial risk that it will
proximately result in the death of any person.
   “Detention.”  Arrest; confinement in any vehicle subsequent to an arrest;
confinement in any public or private facility for custody of persons charged
with or convicted of crime in this state or another state or under the laws of
the United States or alleged or found to be a delinquent child or unruly child
in this state or another state or under the laws of the United States;
hospitalization, institutionalization, or confinement in any public or private
facility that is ordered pursuant to or under the authority of Ohio R.C.
2945.37, 2945.371, 2945.38, 2945.39, 2945.40, 2945.401 or 2945.402; confinement
in any vehicle for transportation to or from any facility of any of those
natures; detention for extradition or deportation; except as provided in this
division, supervision by any employee of any facility of any of those natures
that is incidental to hospitalization, institutionalization, or confinement in
the facility but that occurs outside the facility; supervision by an employee
of the Department of Rehabilitation and Correction of a person on any type of
release from a state correctional institution; or confinement in any vehicle,
airplane, or place while being returned from outside of this state into this
state by a private person or entity pursuant to a contract entered into under
Ohio R.C. 311.29(E) or Ohio R.C. 5149.03(B).  For a person confined in a county
jail who participates in a county jail industry program pursuant to Ohio R.C.
5147.30, “detention” includes time spent at an assigned work site and going to
and from the work site.
   “Detention facility.”  Any public or private place used for the confinement
of a person charged with or convicted of any crime in this state or another
state or under the laws of the United States or alleged or found to be a
delinquent child or an unruly child in this state or another state or under the
laws of the United States.
   “Force.”  Any violence, compulsion, or constraint physically exerted by any
means upon or against a person or thing.
   “Law enforcement officer.”  Any of the following:
      (1)   A sheriff, deputy sheriff, constable, police officer of a township
or joint police district, marshal, deputy marshal, municipal police officer,
member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority under
Ohio R.C. 3735.31(D) or state highway patrol trooper.
      (2)   An officer, agent, or employee of the state or any of its agencies,
instrumentalities, or political subdivisions, upon whom, by statute, a duty to
conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain laws is imposed and the
authority to arrest violators is conferred, within the limits of such statutory
duty and authority.
      (3)   The Mayor, in a capacity as chief conservator of the peace within
the municipality.
      (4)   A member of an auxiliary police force organized by the county,
township, or municipal law enforcement authorities, within the scope of the
member’s appointment or commission.
      (5)   A person lawfully called pursuant to Ohio R.C. 311.07 to aid a
sheriff in keeping the peace, for the purposes and during the time when the
person is called.
      (6)   A person appointed by a Mayor pursuant to Ohio R.C. 737.01 as a
special patrolling officer during a riot or emergency, for the purposes and
during the time when the person is appointed.
      (7)   A member of the organized militia of this state or the armed forces
of the United States, lawfully called to duty to aid civil authorities in
keeping the peace or protect against domestic violence.
      (8)   A prosecuting attorney, assistant prosecuting attorney, secret
service officer, or municipal prosecutor.
      (9)   A veterans’ home police officer appointed under Ohio R.C. 5907.02.
      (10)   A member of a police force employed by a regional transit
authority under Ohio R.C. 306.35(Y).
      (11)   A special police officer employed by a port authority under Ohio
R.C. 4582.04 or 4582.28.
      (12)   The House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms if the House of
Representatives Sergeant at Arms has arrest authority pursuant to Ohio R.C.
101.311(E)(1) and an Assistant House of Representatives Sergeant at Arms.
      (13)   The Senate Sergeant at Arms and an Assistant Senate Sergeant at
Arms.
      (14)   A special police officer employed by a municipal corporation at a
municipal airport, or other municipal air navigation facility, that has
scheduled operations, as defined in 14 C.F.R. 119.3, as amended, and that is
required to be under a security program and is governed by aviation security
rules of the Transportation Security Administration of the United States
Department of Transportation as provided in 49 C.F.R. Parts 1542 and 1544, as
amended.
   “Not guilty by reason of insanity.”  A person is “not guilty by reason of
insanity” relative to a charge of an offense only if the person proves, in the
manner specified in Ohio R.C. 2901.05, that at the time of the commission of
the offense, he or she did not know, as a result of a severe mental disease or
defect, the wrongfulness of his or her acts.
   “Offense of violence.”
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.11,
2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.15, 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22, 2905.01, 2905.02,
2905.11, 2905.32, 2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.05, 2909.02, 2909.03, 2909.24,
2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2917.01, 2917.02, 2917.03, 2917.31, 2919.25,
2921.03, 2921.04, 2921.34 or 2923.161, of division (A)(1) of R.C. § 2903.34, of
division (A)(1), (A)(2) or (A)(3) of R.C. § 2911.12, or of division (B)(1), (B)
(2), (B)(3) or (B)(4) of R.C. § 2919.22, or felonious sexual penetration in
violation of former R.C. § 2907.12;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States, substantially equivalent to
any section, division or offense listed in division (1) of this definition;
      (3)   An offense, other than a traffic offense, under an existing or
former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or of the United
States, committed purposely or knowingly, and involving physical harm to
persons or a risk of serious physical harm to persons;
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing, any
offense under division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.
   “Official proceeding.”  Any proceeding before a legislative, judicial,
administrative, or other governmental agency or official authorized to take
evidence under oath, and includes any proceeding before a referee, hearing
examiner, commissioner, notary, or other person taking testimony or a
deposition in connection with an official proceeding.
   “Party official.”  Any person who holds an elective or appointive post in a
political party in the United States or this state, by virtue of which he or
she directs, conducts, or participates in directing or conducting party affairs
at any level of responsibility.
   “Person.”
      (1)   (a)   Subject to division (2) of this definition, as used in any
section contained in this General Offenses Code that sets forth a criminal
offense, “person” includes all of the following:
            1.   An individual, corporation, business trust, estate, trust,
partnership and association.
            2.   An unborn human who is viable.
         (b)   As used in any section contained in this General Offenses Code
that does not set forth a criminal offense, “person” includes an individual,
corporation, business trust, estate, partnership and association.
         (c)   As used in division (1)(a)2. of this definition, “unborn human”
means an individual organism of the species Homo sapiens from fertilization
until live birth.  “Viable” means the stage of development of a human fetus at
which there is a realistic probability of maintaining and nourishing of a life
outside the womb with or without temporary artificial life-sustaining support.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (1)(a) of this definition, in no case
shall the portion of the definition of the term “person” that is set forth in
division (1)(a)2. of this definition be applied or construed in any section
contained in this General Offenses Code that sets forth a criminal offense in
any of the following manners:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (2)(a) of this
definition, in a manner so that the offense prohibits or is construed as
prohibiting any pregnant woman or her physician from performing an abortion
with the consent of the pregnant woman, with the consent of the pregnant woman
implied by law in a medical emergency, or with the approval of one otherwise
authorized by law to consent to medical treatment on behalf of the pregnant
woman.  An abortion that violates the conditions described in the immediately
preceding sentence may be punished as a violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.01,
2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04, 2903.05, 2903.06, 2903.08, 2903.11, 2903.12,
2903.13, 2903.14, 2903.21 or 2903.22, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, as applicable.  An abortion that does not violate the conditions
described in the second immediately preceding sentence but that does violate
Ohio R.C. 2919.12, 2919.13(B), 2919.15, 2919.151, 2919.17 or 2919.18, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, may be punished as a violation of
such section, as applicable.  Consent is sufficient under this division if it
is of the type otherwise adequate to permit medical treatment to the pregnant
woman, even if it does not comply with Ohio R.C. 2919.12.
         (b)   In a manner so that the offense is applied or is construed as
applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman that occurs while
she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the following:
            1.   Her delivery of a stillborn baby.
            2.   Her causing, in any other manner, the death in utero of a
viable, unborn human that she is carrying.
            3.   Her causing the death of her child who is born alive but who
dies from one or more injuries that are sustained while the child is a viable,
unborn human.
            4.   Her causing her child who is born alive to sustain one or more
injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human.
            5.   Her causing, threatening to cause, or attempting to cause, in
any other manner, an injury, illness, or other psychological illness or
condition, regardless of its duration or gravity, to a viable, unborn human
that she is carrying.
   “Physical harm to persons.”  Any injury, illness, or other physiological
impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.
   “Physical harm to property.”  Any tangible or intangible damage to property
that, in any degree, results in loss to its value or interferes with its use or
enjoyment.  “Physical harm to property” does not include wear and tear
occasioned by normal use.
   “Privilege.”  An immunity, license, or right conferred by law, or bestowed
by express or implied grant, or arising out of status, position, office, or
relationship, or growing out of necessity.
   “Property.”
      (1)   Any property, real or personal, tangible or intangible, and any
interest or license in that property.  “Property” includes, but is not limited
to, cable television service, other telecommunications service,
telecommunications devices, information service, computers, data, computer
software, financial instruments associated with computers, other documents
associated with computers, or copies of the documents, whether in machine or
human-readable form, trade secrets, trademarks, copyrights, patents, and
property protected by a trademark, copyright or patent.  “Financial instruments
associated with computers” include, but are not limited to, checks, drafts,
warrants, money orders, notes of indebtedness, certificates of deposit, letters
of credit, bills of credit or debit cards, financial transaction authorization
mechanisms, marketable securities, or any computer system representations of
any of them.
      (2)   As used in this definition, “trade secret” has the same meaning as
in Ohio R.C. 1333.61, and “telecommunications service” and “information
service” have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.
      (3)   As used in this definition and in the definition of “contraband” in
this section, “cable television service,” “computer,” “computer network,”
“computer software,” “computer system,” “data,” and “telecommunications device”
have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.
   “Provider agreement.”  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
   “Public official.”  Any elected or appointed officer, employee, or agent of
the state or any political subdivision thereof, whether in a temporary or
permanent capacity, and includes but is not limited to legislators, judges, and
law enforcement officers. The term does not include an employee, officer, or
governor-appointed member of the board of directors of the nonprofit
corporation formed under R.C. § 187.01.
   “Public servant.”
      (1)   Any of the following:
         (a)   Any public official.
         (b)   Any person performing ad hoc a governmental function, including
but not limited to a juror, member of a temporary commission, master,
arbitrator, advisor or consultant.
         (c)   A person who is a candidate for public office, whether or not he
or she is elected or appointed to the office for which he or she is a
candidate. A person is a candidate for purposes of this division if he or she
has been nominated according to law for election or appointment to public
office, or if he or she has filed a petition or petitions as required by law to
have his or her name placed on the ballot in a primary, general or special
election, or if he or she campaigns as a write-in candidate in any primary,
general or special election.
      (2)   The term does not include an employee, officer, or governor-
appointed member of the board of directors of the nonprofit corporation formed
under R.C. § 187.01.
   “Risk.”  A significant possibility, as contrasted with a remote possibility,
that a certain result may occur or that certain circumstances may exist.
   “School,” “school building,” and “school premises.”  Have the same meanings
as in Ohio R.C. 2925.01.
   “School activity.”  Any activity held under the auspices of a board of
education of a city, local, exempted village, joint vocational, or cooperative
education school district; a governing authority of a community school
established under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3314; a governing board of an educational
service center; or the governing body of a nonpublic school for which the State
Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under Ohio R.C. 3301.07.
   “School bus.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
   “School safety zone.”  Consists of a school, school building, school
premises, school activity, and school bus.
   “Serious physical harm to persons.”  Any of the following:
      (1)   Any mental illness or condition of such gravity as would normally
require hospitalization or prolonged psychiatric treatment;
      (2)   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death;
      (3)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent incapacity, whether
partial or total, or that involves some temporary, substantial incapacity;
      (4)   Any physical harm that involves some permanent disfigurement, or
that involves some temporary, serious disfigurement;
      (5)   Any physical harm that involves acute pain of such duration as to
result in substantial suffering, or that involves any degree of prolonged or
intractable pain.
   “Serious physical harm to property.”  Any physical harm to property that
does either of the following:
      (1)   Results in substantial loss to the value of the property, or
requires a substantial amount of time, effort, or money to repair or replace;
      (2)   Temporarily prevents the use or enjoyment of the property, or
substantially interferes with its use or enjoyment for an extended period of
time.
   “Substantial risk.”  A strong possibility, as contrasted with a remote or
significant possibility, that a certain result may occur or that certain
circumstances may exist.
   “Valuable thing” or “valuable benefit.”  Includes, but is not limited to, a
contribution.  This inclusion does not indicate or imply that a contribution
was not included in those terms before September 17, 1986.
(ORC 2901.01, 2921.01)
§ 606.02  CULPABLE MENTAL STATES.
   (A)   A person acts purposely when it is the person’s specific intention to
cause a certain result, or, when the gist of the offense is a prohibition
against conduct of a certain nature, regardless of what the offender intends to
accomplish thereby, it is the offender’s specific intention to engage in
conduct of that nature.
   (B)   A person acts knowingly, regardless of purpose, when the person is
aware that the person’s conduct will probably cause a certain result or will
probably be of a certain nature. A person has knowledge of circumstances when
the person is aware that such circumstances probably exist. When knowledge of
the existence of a particular fact is an element of an offense, such knowledge
is established if a person subjectively believes that there is a high
probability of its existence and fails to make inquiry or acts with a conscious
purpose to avoid learning the fact.
   (C)   A person acts recklessly when, with heedless indifference to the
consequences, the person disregards a substantial and unjustifiable risk that
the person’s conduct is likely to cause a certain result or is likely to be of
a certain nature. A person is reckless with respect to circumstances when, with
heedless indifference to the consequences, the person disregards a substantial
and unjustifiable risk that such circumstances are likely to exist.
   (D)   A person acts negligently when, because of a substantial lapse from
due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that the person’s
conduct may cause a certain result or may be of a certain nature.  A person is
negligent with respect to circumstances when, because of a substantial lapse
from due care, the person fails to perceive or avoid a risk that such
circumstances may exist.
   (E)   When the section defining an offense provides that negligence suffices
to establish an element thereof, then recklessness, knowledge, or purpose is
also sufficient culpability for such element.  When recklessness suffices to
establish an element of an offense, then knowledge or purpose is also
sufficient culpability for such element.  When knowledge suffices to establish
an element of an offense, then purpose is also sufficient culpability for such
element.
(ORC 2901.22)
§ 606.03  CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENSES.
   As used in this General Offenses Code:
   (A)   Offenses include misdemeanors of the first, second, third, and fourth
degree, minor misdemeanors, and offenses not specifically classified.
   (B)   Regardless of the penalty that may be imposed, any offense
specifically classified as a misdemeanor is a misdemeanor.
   (C)   Any offense not specifically classified is a misdemeanor if
imprisonment for not more than one year may be imposed as a penalty.
   (D)   Any offense not specifically classified is a minor misdemeanor if the
only penalty that may be imposed is one of the following:
      (1)   For an offense  committed prior to January 1, 2004, a fine not
exceeding $100;
      (2)   For an offense committed on or after January 1, 2004, a fine not
exceeding $150, community service under Ohio R.C. 2929.27(D), or a financial
sanction other than a fine under Ohio R.C. 2929.28.
(ORC 2901.02)
§ 606.04  OFFENSES DEFINED.
   (A)   No conduct constitutes a criminal offense against the municipality
unless it is defined as an offense in this General Offenses Code.
   (B)   An offense is defined when one or more sections of this General
Offenses Code state a positive prohibition or enjoin a specific duty, and
provide a penalty for violation of such prohibition or failure to meet such
duty.
   (C)   This section does not affect the power of a court to punish for
contempt or to employ any sanction authorized by law to enforce an order, civil
judgment or decree.
(ORC 2901.03)
§ 606.05  RULES OF CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C) or (D) of this section,
sections of this General Offenses Code defining offenses or penalties shall be
strictly construed against the municipality and liberally construed in favor of
the accused.
   (B)   Rules of criminal procedure and sections of this General Offenses Code
providing for criminal procedure shall be construed so as to effect the fair,
impartial, speedy, and sure administration of justice.
   (C)   Any provision of a section of this General Offenses Code that refers
to a previous conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of a section of
this General Offenses Code, the Ohio Revised Code or a division of a section of
this General Offenses Code or the Ohio Revised Code shall be construed to also
refer to a previous conviction of or plea of guilty to a substantially
equivalent offense under an existing or former law of this municipality, state,
another state, or the United States or under an existing or former municipal
ordinance.
   (D)   Any provision of this Code that refers to a section, or to a division
of a section, of this Code that defines or specifies a criminal offense shall
be construed to also refer to an existing or former law of this state, another
state, or the United States, to an existing or former municipal ordinance, or
to an existing or former division of any such existing or former law or
ordinance that defines or specifies, or that defined or specified, a
substantially equivalent offense.
(ORC 2901.04)
§ 606.055  CRIMINAL LAW JURISDICTION.
   (A)   A person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in this
municipality if any of the following occur:
      (1)   The person commits an offense under the laws of this municipality,
any element of which takes place in this municipality;
      (2)   While in this municipality, the person attempts to commit, or is
guilty of complicity in the commission of, an offense in another jurisdiction,
which offense is an offense under both the laws of this municipality and the
other jurisdiction, or, while in this municipality, the person conspires to
commit an offense in another jurisdiction, which offense is an offense under
both the laws of this municipality and the other jurisdiction, and a
substantial overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy is undertaken in this
municipality by the person or another person involved in the conspiracy,
subsequent to the person’s entrance into the conspiracy. In any case in which a
person attempts to commit, is guilty of complicity in the commission of, or
conspires to commit an offense in another jurisdiction as described in this
division, the person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in this
municipality for the attempt, complicity, or conspiracy, and for any resulting
offense that is committed or completed in the other jurisdiction;
      (3)   While out of this municipality, the person conspires or attempts to
commit, or is guilty of complicity in the commission of, an offense in this
municipality;
      (4)   While out of this municipality, the person omits to perform a legal
duty imposed by the laws of this municipality, which omission affects a
legitimate interest of the municipality in protecting, governing or regulating
any person, property, thing, transaction, or activity in this municipality;
      (5)   While out of this municipality, the person unlawfully takes or
retains property and subsequently brings any of the unlawfully taken or
retained property into this municipality;
      (6)   While out of this municipality, the person unlawfully takes or
entices another person and subsequently brings the other person into this
municipality;
      (7)   The person, by means of a computer, computer system, computer
network, telecommunication, telecommunications device, telecommunications
service, or information service, causes or knowingly permits any writing, data,
image or other telecommunication to be disseminated or transmitted into this
municipality in violation of the law of this state or municipality.
   (B)   In homicide, the element referred to in division (A)(1) of this
section includes the act that causes death, the physical contact that causes
death, the death itself, or any other element that is set forth in the offense
in question. If any part of the body of a homicide victim is found in this
municipality, the death is presumed to have occurred within this municipality.
   (C)   (1)   This municipality includes the land and water within its
boundaries and the air space above that land and water, with respect to which
this municipality has either exclusive or concurrent legislative jurisdiction. 
Where the boundary between this municipality and another jurisdiction is
disputed, the disputed territory is conclusively presumed to be within this
municipality for purposes of this section.
      (2)   The courts of common pleas of Adams, Athens, Belmont, Brown,
Clermont, Columbiana, Gallia, Hamilton, Jefferson, Lawrence, Meigs, Monroe,
Scioto, and Washington counties have jurisdiction beyond the north or northwest
shore of the Ohio River extending to the opposite shore line, between the
extended boundary lines of any adjacent counties or adjacent state. Each of
those courts of common pleas has concurrent jurisdiction on the Ohio River with
any adjacent court of common pleas that borders on that river and with any
court of Kentucky or of West Virginia that borders on the Ohio River and that
has jurisdiction on the Ohio River under the law of Kentucky or the law of West
Virginia, whichever is applicable, or under federal law.
   (D)   When an offense is committed under the laws of this municipality, and
it appears beyond a reasonable doubt that the offense or any element of the
offense took place either in this municipality or in another jurisdiction or
jurisdictions, but it cannot reasonably be determined in which it took place,
the offense or element is conclusively presumed to have taken place in this
municipality for purposes of this section.
   (E)   When a person is subject to criminal prosecution and punishment in
this municipality for an offense committed or completed outside this
municipality, the person is subject to all specifications for that offense that
would be applicable if the offense had been committed within this municipality.
   (F)   Any act, conduct, or element that is a basis of a person being subject
under this section to criminal prosecution and punishment in this municipality
need not be committed personally by the person as long as it is committed by
another person who is in complicity or conspiracy with the person.
   (G)   This section shall be liberally construed, consistent with
constitutional limitations, to allow this municipality the broadest possible
jurisdiction over offenses and persons committing offenses in, or affecting,
this municipality.
   (H)   For purposes of division (A)(2) of this section, an overt act is
substantial when it is of a character that manifests a purpose on the part of
the actor that the object of the conspiracy should be completed.
   (I)   As used in this section, “computer,” “computer system,” “computer
network,” “information service,” “telecommunication,” “telecommunications
device,” “telecommunications service,” “data” and “writing” have the same
meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.
(ORC 2901.11)
§ 606.06  LIMITATION ON CRIMINAL PROSECUTIONS.
   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(2), (A)(3) or (A)(4) of this
section or as otherwise provided in this section, a prosecution shall be barred
unless it is commenced within the following periods after an offense is
committed:
         (a)   For a felony, six years;
         (b)   For a misdemeanor other than a minor misdemeanor, two years;
         (c)   For a minor misdemeanor, six months.
      (2)   There is no period of limitation for the prosecution of a violation
of Ohio R.C. 2903.01 or Ohio R.C. 2903.02.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (B) to (J) of this
section, a prosecution of any of the following offenses shall be barred unless
it is commenced within 20 years after the offense is committed:
         (a)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.03, 2903.04, 2905.01, 2905.32,
2907.02, 2907.03, 2907.04, 2907.05, 2907.21, 2909.02, 2909.22, 2909.23,
2909.24, 2909.26, 2909.27, 2909.28, 2909.29, 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11,
2911.12, or 2917.02, a violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.11 or 2903.12 if the victim
is a peace officer, a violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.13 that is a felony, or a
violation of former Ohio R.C. 2907.12.
         (b)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing a violation set forth in division (A)(3)(a) of this section.
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (D) to (L) of this
section, a prosecution of a violation of Ohio R.C. 2907.02 or 2907.03 or a
conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in committing a
violation of either section shall be barred unless it is commenced within 25
years after the offense is committed.
   (B)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2) of this section,
if the period of limitation provided in division (A)(1) or (A)(3) of this
section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for an offense of which an
element is fraud or breach of fiduciary duty within one year after discovery of
the offense either by an aggrieved person or by the aggrieved person’s legal
representative who is not a party to the offense.
      (2)   If the period of limitation provided in division (A)(1) or (A)(3)
of this section has expired, prosecution for a violation of Ohio R.C. 2913.49
shall be commenced within five years after discovery of the offense either by
an aggrieved person or the aggrieved person’s legal representative who is not a
party to the offense.
   (C)   (1)   If the period of limitation provided in division (A)(1) or (A)
(3) of this section has expired, prosecution shall be commenced for the
following offenses during the following specified periods of time:
         (a)   For an offense involving misconduct in office by a public
servant at any time while the accused remains a public servant, or within two
years thereafter;
         (b)   For an offense by a person who is not a public servant but whose
offense is directly related to the misconduct in office of a public servant, at
any time while that public servant remains a public servant, or within two
years thereafter.
      (2)   As used in this division:
         (a)   The phrase “offense is directly related to the misconduct in
office of a public servant” includes, but is not limited to, a violation of
Ohio R.C. 101.71, 101.91, 121.61 or 2921.13, 102.03(F) or (H), 2921.02(A),
2921.43(A) or (B), or 3517.13(F) or (G), that is directly related to an offense
involving misconduct in office of a public servant, or a violation of any
municipal ordinance substantially equivalent to those Ohio Revised Code
sections listed in this division (C)(2)(a)
         (b)   “Public servant” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2921.01.
   (D)   (1)   If a DNA record made in connection with the criminal
investigation of the commission of a violation of Ohio R.C. 2907.02 or 2907.03
is determined to match another DNA record that is of an identifiable person and
if the time of the determination is later than 25 years after the offense is
committed, prosecution of that person for a violation of the section may be
commenced within five years after the determination is complete.
      (2)   If a DNA record made in connection with the criminal investigation
of the commission of a violation of Ohio R.C. 2907.02 or 2907.03 is determined
to match another DNA record that is of an identifiable person and if the time
of the determination is within 25 years after the offense is committed,
prosecution of that person for a violation of the section may be commenced
within the longer of 25 years after the offense is committed or five years
after the determination is complete.
      (3)   As used in this division, “DNA record” has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 109.573.
   (E)   An offense is committed when every element of the offense occurs.  In
the case of an offense of which an element is a continuing course of conduct,
the period of limitation does not begin to run until such course of conduct or
the accused’s accountability for it terminates, whichever occurs first.
   (F)   A prosecution is commenced on the date an indictment is returned or an
information filed, or on the date a lawful arrest without a warrant is made, or
on the date a warrant, summons, citation, or other process is issued, whichever
occurs first.  A prosecution is not commenced by the return of an indictment or
the filing of an information unless reasonable diligence is exercised to issue
and execute process on the same.  A prosecution is not commenced upon issuance
of a warrant, summons, citation, or other process unless reasonable diligence
is exercised to execute the same.
   (G)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the corpus
delicti remains undiscovered.
   (H)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time when the
accused purposely avoids prosecution.  Proof that the accused departed this
municipality or conceals the accused’s identity or whereabouts is prima facie
evidence of the accused’s purpose to avoid prosecution.
   (I)   The period of limitation shall not run during any time a prosecution
against the accused based on the same conduct is pending in this state, even
though the indictment, information, or process that commenced the prosecution
is quashed or the proceedings on the indictment, information, or process are
set aside or reversed on appeal.
   (J)   The period of limitation for a violation of this Part 6 or Title XXIX
of the Ohio Revised Code that involves a physical or mental wound, injury,
disability, or condition of a nature that reasonably indicates abuse or neglect
of a child under 18 years of age or of a child with a developmental disability
or physical impairment under 21 years of age shall not begin to run until
either of the following occurs:
      (1)   The victim of the offense reaches the age of majority.
      (2)   A public children services agency, or a municipal or county peace
officer that is not the parent or guardian of the child, in the county in which
the child resides or in which the abuse or neglect is occurring or has occurred
has been notified that abuse or neglect is known, suspected, or believed to
have occurred.
   (K)   As used in this section, “peace officer” has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 2935.01.
   (L)   The amendments to divisions (A) and (D) of this section apply to a
violation of Ohio R.C. 2907.02 or 2907.03 committed on and after July 16, 2015,
and apply to a violation of either of those sections committed prior to July
16, 2015, if prosecution for that violation was not barred under this section
as it existed on July 15, 2015.
(ORC 2901.13)
§ 606.07  REQUIREMENTS FOR CRIMINAL LIABILITY; VOLUNTARY INTOXICATION.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section, a person is not
guilty of an offense unless both of the following apply:
      (1)   The person’s liability is based on conduct that includes either a
voluntary act, or an omission to perform an act or duty that the person is
capable of performing;
      (2)   The person has the requisite degree of culpability for each element
as to which a culpable mental state is specified by the language defining the
offense.
   (B)   When the language defining an offense does not specify any degree of
culpability, and plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict criminal
liability for the conduct described in the section, then culpability is not
required for a person to be guilty of the offense. The fact that one division
of a section plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict liability for an
offense defined in that division does not by itself plainly indicate a purpose
to impose strict criminal liability for an offense defined in other divisions
of the section that do not specify a degree of culpability.
   (C)   (1)   When language defining an element of an offense that is related
to knowledge or intent or to which mens rea could fairly be applied neither
specifies culpability nor plainly indicates a purpose to impose strict
liability, the element of the offense is established only if a person acts
recklessly.
      (2)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to offenses defined
in R.C. Title XLV.
      (3)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not relieve the prosecution of
the burden of proving the culpable mental state required by any definition
incorporated into the offense.
   (D)   Voluntary intoxication may not be taken into consideration in
determining the existence of a mental state that is an element of a criminal
offense.  Voluntary intoxication does not relieve a person of a duty to act if
failure to act constitutes a criminal offense.  Evidence that a person was
voluntarily intoxicated may be admissible to show whether or not the person was
physically capable of performing the act with which the person is charged.
   (E)   As used in this section:
      “Culpability.”  Purpose, knowledge, recklessness, or negligence, as
defined in Ohio R.C. 2901.22.
      “Intoxication.”  Includes but is not limited to intoxication resulting
from the ingestion of alcohol, a drug, or alcohol and a drug.
      “Involuntary acts.”  Reflexes, convulsions, body movements during
unconsciousness or sleep, and body movements that are not otherwise a product
of the actor’s volition are involuntary acts.
      “Possession.”  A voluntary act if the possessor knowingly procured or
received the thing possessed, or was aware of the possessor’s control of the
thing possessed for a sufficient time to have ended possession.
(ORC 2901.21)
§ 606.08  ORGANIZATIONAL CRIMINAL LIABILITY.
   (A)   An organization may be convicted of an offense under any of the
following circumstances:
      (1)   The offense is a minor misdemeanor committed by an officer, agent,
or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the scope of
the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s office or employment, except that if the
section defining the offense designates the officers, agents, or employees for
whose conduct the organization is accountable or the circumstances under which
it is accountable, those such provisions shall apply.
      (2)   A purpose to impose organizational liability plainly appears in the
section defining the offense, and the offense is committed by an officer,
agent, or employee of the organization acting in its behalf and within the
scope of the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s office or employment, except
that if the section defining the offense designates the officers, agents, or
employees for whose conduct the organization is accountable or the
circumstances under which it is accountable, those provisions shall apply.
      (3)   The offense consists of an omission to discharge a specific duty
imposed by law on the organization.
      (4)   If, acting with the kind of culpability otherwise required for the
commission of the offense, its commission was authorized, requested, commanded,
tolerated, or performed by the board of directors, trustees, partners, or by a
high managerial officer, agent, or employee acting in behalf of the
organization and within the scope of such a board’s or person’s office or
employment.
   (B)   If strict liability is imposed for the commission of an offense, a
purpose to impose organizational liability shall be presumed, unless the
contrary plainly appears.
   (C)   In a prosecution of an organization for an offense other than one for
which strict liability is imposed, it is a defense that the high managerial
officer, agent, or employee having supervisory responsibility over the subject
matter of the offense exercised due diligence to prevent its commission.  This
defense is not available if it plainly appears inconsistent with the purpose of
the section defining the offense.
   (D)   As used in this section, “organization” means a corporation for profit
or not for profit, partnership, limited partnership, joint venture,
unincorporated nonprofit association, estate, trust, or other commercial or
legal entity.  “Organization” does not include an entity organized as or by a
governmental agency for the execution of a governmental program.
(ORC 2901.23)
§ 606.09  PERSONAL ACCOUNTABILITY FOR ORGANIZATIONAL CONDUCT.
   (A)   An officer, agent, or employee of an organization, as defined in Ohio
R.C. 2901.23, may be prosecuted for an offense committed by such organization,
if he or she acts with the kind of culpability required for the commission of
the offense, and any of the following apply:
      (1)   In the name of the organization or in its behalf, he or she engages
in conduct constituting the offense, or causes another to engage in such
conduct, or tolerates such conduct when it is of a type for which he or she has
direct responsibility;
      (2)   He or she has primary responsibility to discharge a duty imposed on
the organization by law, and such duty is not discharged.
   (B)   When a person is convicted of an offense by reason of this section, he
or she is subject to the same penalty as if he or she had acted in his or her
own behalf.
(ORC 2901.24)
§ 606.10  FALSIFICATION.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make a false statement, or knowingly swear
or affirm the truth of a false statement previously made, when any of the
following applies:
      (1)   The statement is made in any official proceeding.
      (2)   The statement is made with purpose to incriminate another.
      (3)   The statement is made with purpose to mislead a public official in
performing his or her official function.
      (4)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the payment of
unemployment compensation; Ohio Works First; prevention, retention and
contingency benefits and services; disability financial assistance; retirement
benefits or health care coverage from a state retirement system; economic
development assistance as defined in Ohio R.C. 9.66; or other benefits
administered by a governmental agency or paid out of a public treasury.
      (5)   The statement is made with purpose to secure the issuance by a
governmental agency of a license, permit, authorization, certificate,
registration, release, or provider agreement.
      (6)   The statement is sworn or affirmed before a notary public or
another person empowered to administer oaths.
      (7)   The statement is in writing on or in connection with a report or
return that is required or authorized by law.
      (8)   The statement is in writing, and is made with purpose to induce
another to extend credit to or employ the offender, or to confer any degree,
diploma, certificate of attainment, award of excellence, or honor on the
offender, or to extend to or bestow upon the offender any other valuable
benefit or distinction, when the person to whom the statement is directed
relies upon it to his or her detriment.
      (9)   The statement is made with purpose to commit or facilitate the
commission of a theft offense.
      (10)   The statement is knowingly made to a probate court in connection
with any action, proceeding, or other matter within its jurisdiction, either
orally or in a written document, including, but not limited to, an application,
petition, complaint, or other pleading, or an inventory, account, or report.
      (11)   The statement is made on an account, form, record, stamp, label or
other writing that is required by law.
      (12)   The statement is made in connection with the purchase of a
firearm, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2923.11, and in conjunction with the
furnishing to the seller of the firearm of a fictitious or altered driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit, a fictitious or altered identification
card, or any other document that contains false information about the
purchaser’s identity.
      (13)   The statement is made in a document or instrument of writing that
purports to be a judgment, lien, or claim of indebtedness and is filed or
recorded with the Secretary of State, a county recorder, or the clerk of a
court of record.
      (14)   The statement is made in an application filed with a county
sheriff pursuant to R.C. § 2923.125 in order to obtain or renew a concealed
handgun license or is made in an affidavit submitted to a county sheriff to
obtain a concealed handgun license on a temporary emergency basis under R.C. §
2923.1213.
      (15)   The statement is required under Ohio R.C. 5743.71 in connection
with the person’s purchase of cigarettes or tobacco products in a delivery
sale.
   (B)   No person, in connection with the purchase of a firearm as defined in
Ohio R.C. 2923.11, shall knowingly furnish to the seller of the firearm a
fictitious or altered driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit, a
fictitious or altered identification card, or any other document that contains
false information about the purchaser’s identity.
   (C)   No person, in an attempt to obtain a concealed handgun license under
Ohio R.C. 2923.125, shall knowingly present to a sheriff a fictitious or
altered document that purports to be certification of the person’s competence
in handling a handgun as described in division (B)(3) of that section.
   (D)   It is no defense to a charge under division (A)(6) of this section
that the oath or affirmation was administered or taken in an irregular manner.
   (E)   If contradictory statements relating to the same fact are made by the
offender within the period of the statute of limitations for falsification, it
is not necessary for the prosecution to prove which statement was false, but
only that one or the other was false.
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7),
(8), (10), (11), (13) or (15) of this section is guilty of falsification. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division, falsification is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(9) of this section is guilty of
falsification in a theft offense.  Except as otherwise provided in this
division, falsification in a theft offense is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.  If the value of the property or services stolen is $1,000 or more,
falsification in a theft offense is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (A)(12) or (B) of this section is guilty
of falsification to purchase a firearm, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (A)(14) or (C) of this section is guilty
of falsification to obtain a concealed handgun license, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section in removal
proceedings under Ohio R.C. 319.26, 321.37, 507.13 or 733.78 is guilty of
falsification regarding a removal proceeding, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(ORC 2921.13)
   (G)   (1)   No person who has knowingly failed to maintain proof of
financial responsibility in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4509.101 shall produce
any document or present to a peace officer an electronic wireless
communications device that is displaying any text or images with the purpose to
mislead a peace officer upon the request of a peace officer for proof of
financial responsibility made in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4509.101(D)(2).
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (G) is guilty of falsification, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 4509.102)
Statutory reference:
   Civil liability for violations of this section, see Ohio R.C. 2921.13(G)
§ 606.105  FALSE REPORT OF CHILD ABUSE OR NEGLECT.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make or cause another person to make a false
report under Ohio R.C. 2151.421(B) alleging that any person has committed an
act or omission that resulted in a child being an abused child as defined in
Ohio R.C. 2151.031 or a neglected child as defined in Ohio R.C. 2151.03.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or causing a false
report of child abuse or child neglect, a misdemeanor of the first degree. The
penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
(ORC 2921.14)
§ 606.11  COMPOUNDING A CRIME.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly demand, accept, or agree to accept anything
of value in consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon a pending
criminal prosecution.
   (B)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section when both
of the following apply:
      (1)   The pending prosecution involved is for a violation of Ohio R.C.
2913.02, 2913.11, 2913.21(B)(2), or 2913.47, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, of which the actor under this section was the victim.
      (2)   The thing of value demanded, accepted, or agreed to be accepted, in
consideration of abandoning or agreeing to abandon the prosecution, did not
exceed an amount that the actor reasonably believed due him or her as
restitution for the loss caused him or her by the offense.
   (C)   When a prosecuting witness abandons or agrees to abandon a prosecution
under division (B) of this section, the abandonment or agreement in no way
binds the state to abandoning the prosecution.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of compounding a crime, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
(ORC 2921.21)
§ 606.12  FAILURE TO REPORT A CRIME OR DEATH.
   (A)   (1)   Except as provided in division (A)(2) of this section, no
person, knowing that a felony has been or is being committed, shall knowingly
fail to report the information to law enforcement authorities.
      (2)   No person, knowing that a violation of Ohio R.C. 2913.04(B) has
been or is being committed or that the person has received information derived
from such a violation, shall knowingly fail to report the violation to law
enforcement authorities.
   (B)   Except for conditions that are within the scope of division (e) of
this section, no person giving aid to a sick or injured person shall
negligently fail to report to law enforcement authorities any gunshot or stab
wound treated or observed by the person, or any serious physical harm to
persons that the person knows or has reasonable cause to believe resulted from
an offense of violence.
   (C)   No person who discovers the body or acquires the first knowledge of
the death of a person shall fail to report the death immediately to a physician
or advanced practice registered nurse whom the person knows to be treating the
deceased for a condition from which death at such time would not be unexpected,
or to a law enforcement officer, an ambulance service, an emergency squad, or
the coroner in a political subdivision in which the body is discovered, the
death is believed to have occurred, or knowledge concerning the death is
obtained. For purposes of this division, “advanced practice registered nurse”
does not include a certified registered nurse anesthetist.
   (D)   No person shall fail to provide upon request of the person to whom a
report required by division (C) of this section was made, or to any law
enforcement officer who has reasonable cause to assert the authority to
investigate the circumstances surrounding the death, any facts within his or
her knowledge that may have a bearing on the investigation of the death.
   (E)   (1)   As used in this section, “burn injury” means any of the
following:
         (a)   Second or third degree burns;
         (b)   Any burns to the upper respiratory tract or laryngeal edema due
to the inhalation of super- heated air;
         (c)   Any burn injury or wound that may result in death; or
         (d)   Any physical harm caused by or as the result of the use of
fireworks, novelties and trick noisemakers, and wire sparklers, as each is
defined by R.C. § 3743.01.
      (2)   No physician, nurse physician assistant, or limited practitioner
who, outside a hospital, sanitarium, or other medical facility, attends or
treats a person who has sustained a burn injury inflicted by an explosion or
other incendiary device, or that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a
violent, malicious, or criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury
immediately to the local arson bureau, if there is such a bureau in the
jurisdiction in which the person is attended or treated, or otherwise to local
law enforcement authorities.
      (3)   No manager, superintendent, or other person in charge of a
hospital, sanitarium, or other medical facility in which a person is attended
or treated for any burn injury inflicted by an explosion or other incendiary
device, or that shows evidence of having been inflicted in a violent,
malicious, or criminal manner, shall fail to report the burn injury immediately
to the local arson bureau, if there is such a bureau in the jurisdiction in
which the person is attended or treated, or otherwise to local law enforcement
authorities.
      (4)   No person who is required to report any burn injury under division
(E)(2) or (3) of this section shall fail to file, within three working days
after attending or treating the victim, a written report of the burn injury
with the office of the State Fire Marshal.  The report shall be made on a form
provided by the State Fire Marshal.
      (5)   Anyone participating in the making of reports under division (e) of
this section or anyone participating in a judicial proceeding resulting from
the reports is immune from any civil or criminal liability that otherwise might
be incurred or imposed as a result of such actions. Notwithstanding R.C. §
4731.22, the physician-patient relationship or advanced practice registered
nurse-patient relationship is not a ground for excluding evidence regarding a
person’s burn injury or the cause of the burn injury in any judicial proceeding
resulting from a report submitted under division (e) of this section.
   (F)   (1)   Any doctor of medicine or osteopathic medicine, hospital intern
or resident, nurse, psychologist, social worker, independent social worker,
social work assistant, licensed professional clinical counselor, licensed
professional counselor, independent marriage and family therapist, or marriage
and family therapist who knows or has reasonable cause to believe that a
patient or client has been the victim of domestic violence, as defined in R.C.
§ 3113.31, shall note that knowledge or belief and the basis for it in the
patient’s or client’s records.
      (2)   Notwithstanding R.C. § 4731.22, the physician-patient privilege or
advanced practice registered nurse-patient privilege shall not be a ground for
excluding any information regarding the report containing the knowledge or
belief noted under division (f)(1) of this section, and the information may be
admitted as evidence in accordance with the Rules of Evidence.
   (G)   Division (A) or (D) of this section does not require disclosure of
information, when any of the following applies:
      (1)   The information is privileged by reason of the relationship between
attorney and client; physician and patient; advanced practice registered nurse
and patient; licensed psychologist or licensed school psychologist and client;
licensed professional clinical counselor, licensed professional counselor,
independent social worker, social worker, independent marriage and family
therapist, or marriage and family therapist and client; member of the clergy,
rabbi, minister, or priest and any person communicating information
confidentially to the member of the clergy, rabbi, minister, or priest for a
religious counseling purpose of a professional character; husband and wife; or
a communications assistant and those who are a party to a telecommunications
relay service call.
      (2)   The information would tend to incriminate a member of the actor’s
immediate family.
      (3)   Disclosure of the information would amount to revealing a news
source, privileged under Ohio R.C. 2739.04 or 2739.12.
      (4)   Disclosure of the information would amount to disclosure by a
member of the ordained clergy of an organized religious body of a confidential
communication made to him or her in his or her capacity as such by a person
seeking his or her aid or counsel.
      (5)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the
actor in the course of his or her duties in connection with a bona fide program
of treatment or services for drug dependent persons or persons in danger of
drug dependence, which program is maintained or conducted by a hospital,
clinic, person, agency or community addiction services provider whose alcohol
and drug addiction services are certified pursuant to R.C. § 5119.36.
      (6)   Disclosure would amount to revealing information acquired by the
actor in the course of his or her duties in connection with a bona fide program
for providing counseling services to victims of crimes that are violations of
Ohio R.C. 2907.02 or 2907.05, or to victims of felonious sexual penetration in
violation of former Ohio R.C. 2907.12.  As used in this division, “counseling
services” include services provided in an informal setting by a person who, by
education or experience, is competent to provide such services.
   (H)   No disclosure of information pursuant to this section gives rise to
any liability or recrimination for a breach of privilege or confidence.
(ORC 2921.22)
   (I)   Whoever violates division (a) or (b) of this section is guilty of
failure to report a crime. Violation of division (a)(1) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. Violation of division (a)(2) or (b) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (J)   Whoever violates division (c) or (d) of this section is guilty of
failure to report knowledge of a death, a misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
   (K)   (1)   Whoever negligently violates division (e) of this section is
guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
      (2)   Whoever knowingly violates division (e) of this section is guilty
of a misdemeanor of the second degree.
   (L)   As used in this section, “nurse” includes an advanced practice
registered nurse, registered nurse, and licensed practical nurse.
§ 606.13  FAILURE TO AID A LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
   No person shall negligently fail or refuse to aid a law enforcement officer,
when called upon for assistance in preventing or halting the commission of an
offense, or in apprehending or detaining an offender, when the aid can be given
without a substantial risk of physical harm to the person giving it.
(ORC 2921.23)
§ 606.14  OBSTRUCTING OFFICIAL BUSINESS.
   No person, without privilege to do so and with purpose to prevent, obstruct,
or delay the performance by a public official of any authorized act within the
public official’s official capacity, shall do any act that hampers or impedes a
public official in the performance of the public official’s lawful duties.
(ORC 2921.31)
§ 606.15  OBSTRUCTING JUSTICE.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to hinder the discovery, apprehension,
prosecution, conviction, or punishment of another for crime, or to assist
another to benefit from the commission of a crime, and no person, with purpose
to hinder the discovery, apprehension, prosecution, adjudication as a
delinquent child, or disposition of a child for an act that if committed by an
adult would be a crime or to assist a child to benefit from the commission of
an act that if committed by an adult would be a crime, shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Harbor or conceal the other person or child.
      (2)   Provide the other person or child with money, transportation, a
weapon, a disguise, or other means of avoiding discovery or apprehension.
      (3)   Warn the other person or child of impending discovery or
apprehension.
      (4)   Destroy or conceal physical evidence of the crime or act, or induce
any person to withhold testimony or information or to elude legal process
summoning him or her to testify or supply evidence.
      (5)   Communicate false information to any person.
      (6)   Prevent or obstruct any person, by means of force, intimidation, or
deception, from performing any act to aid in the discovery, apprehension, or
prosecution of the other person or child.
   (B)   A person may be prosecuted for, and may be convicted of or adjudicated
a delinquent child for committing, a violation of division (A) of this section
regardless of whether the person or child aided ultimately is apprehended for,
is charged with, is convicted of, pleads guilty to, or is adjudicated a
delinquent child for committing the crime or act the person or child aided
committed.  The crime or act the person or child aided committed shall be used
under division (C) of this section in determining the penalty for violation of
division (A) of this section, regardless of whether the person or child aided
ultimately is apprehended for, is charge with, is convicted of, pleads guilty
to, or is adjudicated a delinquent child for committing the crime or act the
person or child aided committed.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of obstructing justice.
      (1)   If the crime committed by the person aided is a misdemeanor or if
the act committed by the child aided would be a misdemeanor if committed by an
adult, obstructing justice is a misdemeanor of the same degree as the crime
committed by the person aided or a misdemeanor of the same degree that the act
committed by the child aided would be if committed by an adult.
      (2)   If the crime committed by the person aided is a felony or if the
act committed by the child aided would be a felony if committed by an adult, or
if the crime or act committed by the person or child aided is an act of
terrorism, obstructing justice is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (D)   As used in this section:
      “Act of terrorism” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2909.21.
      “Adult” and “child” have the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2151.011.
      “Delinquent child” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2152.02.
(ORC 2921.32)
§ 606.16  RESISTING ARREST.
   (A)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of himself, herself or another.
   (B)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of the person or another person and, during the course of or as a
result of the resistance or interference, cause physical harm to a law
enforcement officer.
   (C)   No person, recklessly or by force, shall resist or interfere with a
lawful arrest of the person or another person if either of the following
applies:
      (1)   The offender, during the course of or as a result of the resistance
or interference, recklessly causes physical harm to a law enforcement officer
by means of a deadly weapon; or
      (2)   The offender, during the course of the resistance or interference,
brandishes a deadly weapon.
   (D)   As used in this section, “deadly weapon” has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 2923.11.
(ORC 2921.33)
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of resisting arrest.  A
violation of division (A) or (B) is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  A
violation of division (C) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
Statutory reference:
   Unlawful taking of deadly weapon from law enforcement officer, felony, see
Ohio R.C. 2911.01
§ 606.165  COMPLIANCE WITH LAWFUL ORDER OF POLICE OFFICER; FLEEING.
   (A)   No person shall fail to comply with any lawful order or direction of
any police officer invested with authority to direct, control, or regulate
traffic.
   (B)   No person shall operate a motor vehicle so as willfully to elude or
flee a police officer after receiving a visible or audible signal from a police
officer to bring the person’s motor vehicle to a stop.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to comply
with an order or signal of a police officer.
      (2)   A violation of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
      (3)   Except as provided in divisions (C)(4) and (5) of this section, a
violation of division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (4)   Except as provided in division (C)(5) of this section, a violation
of division (B) of this section is a felony and shall be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if the jury or judge as trier of fact finds by proof
beyond a reasonable doubt that in committing the offense, the offender was
fleeing immediately after the commission of a felony.
      (5)   (a)   A violation of division (B) of this section is a felony and
shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the jury or judge as trier
of fact finds any of the following by proof beyond a reasonable doubt:
            1.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender was a
proximate cause of serious physical harm to persons or property.
            2.   The operation of the motor vehicle by the offender caused a
substantial risk of serious physical harm to persons or property.
         (b)   If a police officer pursues an offender who is violating
division (B) of this section and division (C)(5)(a) of this section applies,
the sentencing court, in determining the seriousness of an offender’s conduct
for purposes of sentencing the offender for a violation of division (B) of this
section, shall consider, along with the factors set forth in Ohio R.C. 2929.12
and 2929.13 that are required to be considered, all of the following:
            1.   The duration of the pursuit;
            2.   The distance of the pursuit;
            3.   The rate of speed at which the offender operated the motor
vehicle during the pursuit;
            4.   Whether the offender failed to stop for traffic lights or stop
signs during the pursuit;
            5.   The number of traffic lights or stop signs for which the
offender failed to stop during the pursuit;
            6.   Whether the offender operated the motor vehicle during the
pursuit without lighted lights during a time when lighted lights are required;
            7.   Whether the offender committed a moving violation during the
pursuit;
            8.   The number of moving violations the offender committed during
the pursuit;
            9.   Any other relevant factors indicating that the offender’s
conduct is more serious than conduct normally constituting the offense.
   (D)   In addition to any other sanction imposed for a violation of division
(A) of this section or a misdemeanor violation of division (B) of this section,
the court shall impose a class five suspension from the range specified in R.C.
§ 4510.02(A)(5). If the offender previously has been found guilty of an offense
under this section or under R.C. § 2921.331 or any other substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, in addition to any other sanction imposed for
the offense, the court shall impose a class one suspension as described in R.C.
§ 4510.02(A)(1). The court may grant limited driving privileges to the offender
on a suspension imposed for a misdemeanor violation of this section as set
forth in R.C. § 4510.021. No judge shall suspend any portion of the suspension
under a class one suspension of an offender’s license, permit, or privilege
required by this division.
   (E)   As used in this section:
      “Moving violation” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2743.70.
      “Police officer” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
(ORC 2921.331(A) - (C), (E), (F))
§ 606.17  HAVING AN UNLAWFUL INTEREST IN A PUBLIC CONTRACT.
   (A)   No public official shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Authorize or employ the authority of the public official’s office
to secure authorization of any public contract in which the public official, a
member of the public official’s family, or any of the public official’s
business associates has an interest.
      (2)   Authorize or employ the authority or influence of the public
official’s office to secure the investment of public funds in any share, bond,
mortgage, or other security with respect to which the public official, a member
of the public official’s family, or any of the public official’s business
associates either has an interest, is an underwriter, or receives any
brokerage, origination, or servicing fees.
      (3)   During the public official’s term of office or within one year
thereafter, occupy any position of profit in the prosecution of a public
contract authorized by the public official or by a legislative body,
commission, or board of which the public official was a member at the time of
authorization, unless the contract was let by competitive bidding to the lowest
and best bidder.
      (4)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract
entered into by or for the use of the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality with which the public official is connected.
      (5)   Have an interest in the profits or benefits of a public contract
that is not let by competitive bidding when required by law, and that involves
more than $150.
   (B)   In the absence of bribery or a purpose to defraud, a public official,
member of a public official’s family, or any of a public official’s business
associates shall not be considered as having an interest in a public contract
or the investment of public funds, if all of the following apply:
      (1)   The interest of that person is limited to owning or controlling
shares of the corporation, or being a creditor of the corporation or other
organization, that is the contractor on the public contract involved, or that
is the issuer of the security in which public funds are invested.
      (2)   The shares owned or controlled by that person do not exceed 5% of
the outstanding shares of the corporation, and the amount due that person as
creditor does not exceed 5% of the total indebtedness of the corporation or
other organization.
      (3)   That person, prior to the time the public contract is entered into,
files with the political subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality
involved, an affidavit giving that person’s exact status in connection with the
corporation or other organization.
   (C)   This section does not apply to a public contract in which a public
official, member of a public official’s family, or one of a public official’s
business associates has an interest, when all of the following apply:
      (1)   The subject of the public contract is necessary supplies or
services for the political subdivision or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved.
      (2)   The supplies or services are unobtainable elsewhere for the same or
lower cost, or are being furnished to the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality as part of a continuing course of dealing established
prior to the public official’s becoming associated with the political
subdivision or governmental agency or instrumentality involved.
      (3)   The treatment accorded the political subdivision or governmental
agency or instrumentality is either preferential to or the same as that
accorded other customers or clients in similar transactions.
      (4)   The entire transaction is conducted at arm’s length, with full
knowledge by the political subdivision or governmental agency or
instrumentality involved, of the interest of the public official, member of the
public official’s family, or business associate, and the public official takes
no part in the deliberations or decision of the political subdivision or
governmental agency or instrumentality with respect to the public contract.
   (D)   Division (A)(4) of this section does not prohibit participation by a
public employee in any housing program funded by public monies if the public
employee otherwise qualifies for the program and does not use the authority or
influence of the public official’s office or employment to secure benefits from
the program and if the monies are to be used on the primary residence of the
public employee.  Such participation does not constitute an unlawful interest
in a public contract in violation of this section.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of having an unlawful interest
in a public contract.  Violation of division (A)(1) or (2) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  Violation of division (A)
(3), (4), or (5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. The
penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
   (F)   It is not a violation of this section for a prosecuting attorney to
appoint assistants and employees in accordance with Ohio R.C. 309.06 and
2921.421, or for a chief legal officer of a municipality or an official
designated as prosecutor in a municipality to appoint assistants and employees
in accordance with Ohio R.C. 733.621 and 2921.421, or for a township law
director appointed under Ohio R.C. 504.15 to appoint assistants and employees
in accordance with Ohio R.C. 504.151 and 2921.421.
   (G)   Any public contract in which a public official, a member of the public
official’s family, or any of the public official’s business associates has an
interest in violation of this section is void and unenforceable. Any contract
securing the investment of public funds in which a public official, a member of
the public official’s family, or any of the public official’s business
associates has an interest, is an underwriter, or receives any brokerage,
origination or servicing fees and that was entered into in violation of this
section is void and unenforceable.
   (H)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      “Chief legal officer” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 733.621.
      “Public contract” means any of the following:
         (a)   The purchase or acquisition, or a contract for the purchase or
acquisition, of property or services by or for the use of the state or any of
its political subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either,
including the employment of an individual by the state, any of its political
subdivisions, or any agency or instrumentality of either.
         (b)   A contract for the design, construction, alteration, repair, or
maintenance of any public property.
(ORC 2921.42)
§ 606.18  SOLICITING OR RECEIVING IMPROPER COMPENSATION.
   (A)   No public servant shall knowingly solicit or accept and no person
shall knowingly promise or give to a public servant either of the following:
      (1)   Any compensation, other than as allowed by Ohio R.C. 102.03(G),
(H), (I), or other provisions of law, to perform the public servant’s official
duties, to perform any other act or service in the public servant’s public
capacity, for the general performance of the duties of the public servant’s
public office or public employment, or as a supplement to the public servant’s
public compensation.
      (2)   Additional or greater fees or costs than are allowed by law to
perform the public servant’s official duties.
   (B)   No public servant for the public servant’s own personal or business
use and no person for the person’s own personal or business use or for the
personal or business use of a public servant or party official, shall solicit
or accept anything of value in consideration of either of the following:
      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining, or renewing the appointment of
any person to any public office, employment, or agency.
      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with
respect to compensation, duties, placement, location, promotion, or other
material aspects of employment.
   (C)   No person for the benefit of a political party, campaign committee,
legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political contributing
entity shall coerce any contribution in consideration of either of the
following:
      (1)   Appointing or securing, maintaining, or renewing the appointment of
any person to any public office, employment, or agency.
      (2)   Preferring, or maintaining the status of, any public employee with
respect to compensation, duties, placement, location, promotion, or other
material aspects of employment.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of soliciting improper
compensation, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (E)   A public servant who is convicted of a violation of this section is
disqualified from holding any public office, employment, or position of trust
in this state for a period of seven years from the date of conviction.
   (F)   Divisions (A), (B), and (C) of this section do not prohibit any person
from making voluntary contributions to a political party, campaign committee,
legislative campaign fund, political action committee or political contributing
entity or prohibit a political party, campaign committee, legislative campaign
fund, political action committee or political contributing entity from
accepting voluntary contributions.
(ORC 2921.43)
§ 606.19  DERELICTION OF DUTY.
   (A)   No law enforcement officer shall negligently do any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to serve a lawful warrant without delay.
      (2)   Fail to prevent or halt the commission of an offense or to
apprehend an offender, when it is in the law enforcement officer’s power to do
so alone or with available assistance.
   (B)   No law enforcement, ministerial, or judicial officer shall negligently
fail to perform a lawful duty in a criminal case or proceeding.
   (C)   No officer, having charge of a detention facility, shall negligently
do any of the following:
      (1)   Allow the detention facility to become littered or unsanitary.
      (2)   Fail to provide persons confined in the detention facility with
adequate food, clothing, bedding, shelter, and medical attention.
      (3)   Fail to control an unruly prisoner, or to prevent intimidation of
or physical harm to a prisoner by another.
      (4)   Allow a prisoner to escape.
      (5)   Fail to observe any lawful and reasonable regulation for the
management of the detention facility.
   (D)   No public official shall recklessly create a deficiency, incur a
liability, or expend a greater sum than is appropriated by the Council for the
use in any one year of the department, agency, or institution with which the
public official is connected.
   (E)   No public servant shall recklessly fail to perform a duty expressly
imposed by law with respect to the public servant’s office, or recklessly do
any act expressly forbidden by law with respect to the public servant’s office.
   (F)   Except as otherwise provided by law, a public servant who is a county
treasurer; county auditor; township fiscal officer; city auditor; city
treasurer; village fiscal officer; village clerk-treasurer; village clerk; in
the case of a municipal corporation having a charter that designates an officer
who, by virtue of the charter, has duties and functions similar to those of the
city or village officers referred to in this section, the officer so designated
by the charter; school district treasurer; fiscal officer of a community school
established under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3314; treasurer of a science, technology,
engineering, and mathematics school established under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3326;
or fiscal officer of a college-preparatory boarding school established under
Ohio R.C. Chapter 3328 and is convicted of or pleads guilty to dereliction of
duty is disqualified from holding any public office, employment, or position of
trust in this state for four years following the date of conviction or of entry
of the plea, and is not entitled to hold any public office until any repayment
or restitution required by the court is satisfied.
   (G)   As used in this section, “public servant” includes the following:
      (1)   An officer or employee of a contractor as defined in Ohio R.C.
9.08;
      (2)   A fiscal officer employed by the operator of a community school
established under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3314 or by the operator of a college-
preparatory boarding school established under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3328.
(ORC 2921.44)
   (H)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of dereliction of duty, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
§ 606.20  INTERFERING WITH CIVIL RIGHTS.
   (A)   No public servant, under color of his or her office, employment, or
authority, shall knowingly deprive, conspire or attempt to deprive any person
of a constitutional or statutory right.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interfering with civil
rights, a misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as provided in
§
202.99.
(ORC 2921.45)
§ 606.21  ATTEMPTS.
   (A)   No person, purposely or knowingly, and when purpose or knowledge is
sufficient culpability for the commission of an offense, shall engage in
conduct that, if successful, would constitute or result in the offense.
   (B)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that, in retrospect,
commission of the offense that was the object of the attempt was either
factually or legally impossible under the attendant circumstances, if that
offense could have been committed had the attendant circumstances been as the
actor believed them to be.
   (C)   No person who is convicted of committing a specific offense, of
complicity in the commission of an offense, or of conspiracy to commit an
offense, shall be convicted of an attempt to commit the same offense in
violation of this section.
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that the
actor abandoned his or her effort to commit the offense or otherwise prevented
its commission, under circumstances manifesting a complete and voluntary
renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.
   (E)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Drug abuse offense” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2925.01.
      (2)   “Motor vehicle” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
(ORC 2923.02)
   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of an attempt to commit an
offense.  An attempt to commit aggravated murder, murder, or an offense for
which the maximum penalty is imprisonment for life is a felony of the first
degree, to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. An attempt to commit a
drug abuse offense for which the penalty is determined by the amount or number
of unit doses of the controlled substance involved in the drug abuse offense is
an offense of the same degree as the drug abuse offense attempted would be if
that drug abuse offense had been committed and had involved an amount or number
of unit doses of the controlled substance that is within the next lower range
of controlled substance amounts than was involved in the attempt. An attempt to
commit any other offense is an offense of the next lesser degree than the
offense attempted.  In the case of an attempt to commit an offense other than a
violation of Ohio R.C. Chapter 3734 that is not specifically classified, an
attempt is a misdemeanor of the first degree if the offense attempted is a
felony or a misdemeanor.  In the case of an attempt to commit a violation of
any provision of Ohio R.C. Chapter 3734, other than Ohio R.C. 3734.18, that
relates to hazardous wastes, an attempt is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.  An attempt to commit a minor misdemeanor, or to engage
in conspiracy, is not an offense under this section.  The penalty shall be as
provided in §
202.99.
§ 606.22  COMPLICITY.
   (A)   No person, acting with the kind of culpability required for the
commission of an offense, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Solicit or procure another to commit the offense;
      (2)   Aid or abet another in committing the offense;
      (3)   Conspire with another to commit the offense in violation of Ohio
R.C. 2923.01;
      (4)   Cause an innocent or irresponsible person to commit the offense.
   (B)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that no person with
whom the accused was in complicity has been convicted as a principal offender.
   (C)   No person shall be convicted of complicity under this section unless
an offense is actually committed, but a person may be convicted of complicity
in an attempt to commit an offense in violation of Ohio R.C. 2923.02 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (D)   If an alleged accomplice of the defendant testifies against the
defendant in a case in which the defendant is charged with complicity in the
commission of or an attempt to commit an offense, an attempt to commit an
offense, or an offense, the court shall charge the jury in accordance with Ohio
R.C. 2923.03(D).
   (E)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that,
prior to the commission of or attempt to commit the offense, the actor
terminated his or her complicity, under circumstances manifesting a complete
and voluntary renunciation of his or her criminal purpose.
   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of complicity in the
commission of an offense, and shall be prosecuted and punished as if he or she
were a principal offender.  A charge of complicity may be stated in terms of
this section, or in terms of the principal offense.
(ORC 2923.03)
§ 606.23  DETENTION OF SHOPLIFTERS AND THOSE COMMITTING MOTION PICTURE PIRACY;
PROTECTION OF INSTITUTIONAL PROPERTY.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply.
      “Archival institution.”  Any public or private building, structure, or
shelter in which are stored historical documents, devices, records,
manuscripts, or items of public interest, which historical materials are stored
to preserve the materials or the information in the materials, to disseminate
the information contained in the materials, or to make the materials available
for public inspection or for inspection by certain persons who have a
particular interest in, use for, or knowledge concerning the materials.
      “Audiovisual recording function” and “facility.” Have the same meaning as
in Ohio R.C. 2913.07.
      “Museum.”  Any public or private nonprofit institution that is
permanently organized for primarily educational or aesthetic purposes, owns or
borrows objects or items of public interest, and cares for and exhibits to the
public the objects or items.
      “Pretrial diversion program.”  Means a rehabilitative, educational
program designed to reduce recidivism and promote personal responsibility that
is at least four hours in length and that has been approved by any court in
this state.
   (B)   A merchant, or an employee or agent of a merchant, who has probable
cause to believe that things offered for sale by a mercantile establishment
have been unlawfully taken by a person, may, for the purposes set forth in
division (D) below, detain the person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable
length of time within the mercantile establishment or its immediate vicinity.
   (C)   Any officer, employee, or agent of a library, museum, or archival
institution may, for the purposes set forth in division (D) below or for the
purpose of conducting a reasonable investigation of a belief that the person
has acted in a manner described in divisions (C)(1) and (2) below, detain a
person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of time within, or in the
immediate vicinity of, the library, museum, or archival institution, if the
officer, employee, or agent has probable cause to believe that the person has:
      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly moved, defaced, damaged,
destroyed, or otherwise improperly tampered with property owned by or in the
custody of the library, museum, or archival institution; or
      (2)   With purpose to deprive the library, museum, or archival
institution of property owned by it or in its custody, knowingly obtained or
exerted control over the property without the consent of the owner or person
authorized to give consent, beyond the scope of the express or implied consent
of the owner or person authorized to give consent, by deception, or by threat.
   (D)   An officer, agent, or employee of a library, museum, or archival
institution pursuant to division (C) above or a merchant or an employee or
agent of a merchant pursuant to division (B) above may detain another person
for any of the following purposes:
      (1)   To recover the property that is the subject of the unlawful taking,
criminal mischief, or theft;
      (2)   To cause an arrest to be made by a peace officer;
      (3)   To obtain a warrant of arrest;
      (4)   To offer the person, if the person is suspected of the unlawful
taking, criminal mischief, or theft and notwithstanding any other provision of
this Code or the Ohio Revised Code, an opportunity to complete a pretrial
diversion program and to inform the person of the other legal remedies
available to the library, museum, archival institution, or merchant.
   (E)   The owner or lessee of a facility in which a motion picture is being
shown, or the owner’s or lessee’s employee or agent, who has probable cause to
believe that a person is or has been operating an audiovisual recording
function of a device in violation of Ohio R.C. 2917.07 may, for the purpose of
causing an arrest to be made by a peace officer or of obtaining an arrest
warrant, detain the person in a reasonable manner for a reasonable length of
time within the facility or its immediate vicinity.
   (F)   The officer, agent, or employee of the library, museum, or archival
institution, the merchant or an employee or agent of a merchant, or the owner,
lessee, employee, or agent of the facility acting under divisions (B), (C) or
(E) above shall not search the person detained, search or seize any property
belonging to the person detained without the person’s consent, or use undue
restraint upon the person detained.
   (G)   Any peace officer may arrest without a warrant any person that the
officer has probable cause to believe has committed any act described in
divisions (C)(1) or (2) above, that the officer has probable cause to believe
has committed an unlawful taking in a mercantile establishment, or that the
officer has reasonable cause to believe has committed an act prohibited by Ohio
R.C. 2913.07.  An arrest under this division shall be made within a reasonable
time after the commission of the act or unlawful taking.
(ORC 2935.041)
§ 606.24  DISPOSITION OF UNCLAIMED OR FORFEITED PROPERTY HELD BY POLICE
DEPARTMENT.
   (A)   Safekeeping of Property in Custody.
      (1)   (a)   Any property that has been lost, abandoned, stolen, seized
pursuant to a search warrant, or otherwise lawfully seized or forfeited and
that is in the custody of the Police Department shall be kept safely by the
Police Department, pending the time it no longer is needed as evidence or for
another lawful purpose, and shall be disposed of pursuant to this section or
Ohio R.C. 2981.12 and 2981.13.
         (b)   This section does not apply to the custody and disposal of any
of the following:
            1.   Vehicles subject to forfeiture under Ohio R.C. Title 45,
except as provided in division (B)(1)(f) of this section;
            2.   Abandoned junk motor vehicles or other property of negligible
value;
            3.   Property held by a department of rehabilitation and correction
institution that is unclaimed, that does not have an identified owner, that the
owner agrees to dispose of, or that is identified by the department as having
little value;
            4.   Animals taken, and devices used in unlawfully taking animals,
under Ohio R.C. 1531.20;
            5.   Controlled substances sold by a peace officer in the
performance of the officer’s official duties under Ohio R.C. 3719.141;
            6.   Property recovered by a township law enforcement agency under
Ohio R.C. 505.105 to 505.109;
            7.   Property held and disposed of under an ordinance of the
municipality or under Ohio R.C. 737.29 to 737.33, except that if the
municipality has received notice of a citizens’ reward program as provided in
division (B)(5) of this section and disposes of property under an ordinance
shall pay 25% of any moneys acquired from any sale or auction to the citizens’
reward program.
      (2)   (a)   The Police Department shall adopt and comply with a written
internal control policy that does all of the following:
            1.   Provides for keeping detailed records as to the amount of
property acquired by the Police Department and the date property was acquired;
            2.   Provides for keeping detailed records of the disposition of
the property, which shall include, but not be limited to, both of the
following:
               a.   The manner in which it was disposed, the date of
disposition, detailed financial records concerning any property sold, and the
name of any person who received the property. The record shall not identify or
enable identification of the individual officer who seized any item of
property.
               b.   An itemized list of the specific expenditures made with
amounts that are gained from the sale of the property and that are retained by
the agency, including the specific amount expended on each expenditure, except
that the policy shall not provide for or permit the identification of any
specific expenditure that is made in an ongoing investigation.
            3.   Complies with Ohio R.C. 2981.13 if the Police Department has a
law enforcement trust fund or similar fund created under that section.
         (b)   The records kept under the internal control policy shall be open
to public inspection during the Police Department’s regular business hours. The
policy adopted under this section and each report received by the Attorney
General is a public record open for inspection under Ohio R.C. 149.43.
      (3)   The Police Department, with custody of property to be disposed of
under this section or Ohio R.C. 2981.12 or 2981.13, shall make a reasonable
effort to locate persons entitled to possession of the property, to notify them
of when and where it may be claimed, and to return the property to them at the
earliest possible time. In the absence of evidence identifying persons entitled
to possession, it is sufficient notice to advertise in a newspaper of general
circulation in the county and to briefly describe the nature of the property in
custody and inviting persons to view and establish their right to it.
      (4)   As used in this section:
         “Citizens’ reward program” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 9.92.
         “Law enforcement agency” includes correctional institutions.
         “Township law enforcement agency” means an organized police department
of a township, a township police district, a joint police district, or the
office of a township constable.
(ORC 2981.11)
   (B)   Disposition of Unclaimed or Forfeited Property.
      (1)   Unclaimed or forfeited property in the custody of the Police
Department, other than property described in division (A)(1)(b) of this
section, shall be disposed of by order of any court of record that has
territorial jurisdiction over the municipality, as follows:
         (a)   Drugs shall be disposed of pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3719.11 or
placed in the custody of the Secretary of the Treasury of the United States for
disposal or use for medical or scientific purposes under applicable federal
law.
         (b)   Firearms and dangerous ordnance suitable for police work may be
given to a law enforcement agency for that purpose. Firearms suitable for
sporting use or as museum pieces or collectors’ items may be sold at public
auction pursuant to division (B)(2) of this section. The Police Department may
sell other firearms and dangerous ordnance to a federally licensed firearms
dealer in a manner that the court considers proper. The Police Department shall
destroy any firearms or dangerous ordnance not given to a law enforcement
agency or sold or shall send them to the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation for destruction by the Bureau.
         (c)   Obscene materials shall be destroyed.
         (d)   Beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol seized from a person who
does not hold a permit issued under Ohio R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303 or
otherwise forfeited to the state for an offense under Ohio R.C. 4301.45 or Ohio
R.C. 4301.53 shall be sold by the Division of Liquor Control if the Division
determines that it is fit for sale or shall be placed in the custody of the
Investigations Unit in the Ohio Department of Public Safety and be used for
training relating to law enforcement activities. The Ohio Department of Public
Safety, with the assistance of the Division of Liquor Control, shall adopt
rules in accordance with Ohio R.C. Chapter 119 to provide for the distribution
to state or local law enforcement agencies upon their request. If any tax
imposed under Ohio R.C. Title 43 has not been paid in relation to the beer,
intoxicating liquor, or alcohol, any moneys acquired from the sale shall first
be used to pay the tax. All other money collected under this division (B)(1)(d)
shall be paid into the State Treasury. Any beer, intoxicating liquor, or
alcohol that the Division determines to be unfit for sale shall be destroyed.
         (e)   Money received by an inmate of a correctional institution from
an unauthorized source or in an unauthorized manner shall be returned to the
sender, if known, or deposited in the inmates’ industrial and entertainment
fund of the institution if the sender is not known.
         (f)   1.   Any mobile instrumentality forfeited under Ohio R.C.
Chapter 2981 may be given to the law enforcement agency that initially seized
the mobile instrumentality for use in performing its duties, if the agency
wants the mobile instrumentality. The agency shall take the mobile
instrumentality subject to any security interest or lien on the mobile
instrumentality.
            2.   Vehicles and vehicle parts forfeited under Ohio R.C. 4549.61
to 4549.63 may be given to a law enforcement agency for use in performing its
duties. Those parts may be incorporated into any other official vehicle. Parts
that do not bear vehicle identification numbers or derivatives of them may be
sold or disposed of as provided by rules of the Director of Public Safety.
Parts from which a vehicle identification number or derivative of it has been
removed, defaced, covered, altered, or destroyed and that are not suitable for
police work or incorporation into an official vehicle shall be destroyed and
sold as junk or scrap.
         (g)   Computers, computer networks, computer systems, and computer
software suitable for police work may be given to a law enforcement agency for
that purpose or disposed of under division (B)(2) of this section.
         (h)   Money seized in connection with a violation of R.C. § 2905.32,
2907.21, or 2907.22 shall be deposited in the Victims of Human Trafficking Fund
created by R.C. § 5101.87.
      (2)   Unclaimed or forfeited property that is not described in division
(B)(1) of this section or division (A)(1)(b) of this section, with court
approval, may be used by the law enforcement agency in possession of it. If it
is not used by the agency, it may be sold without appraisal at a public auction
to the highest bidder for cash or disposed of in another manner that the court
considers proper.
      (3)   Except as provided in divisions (B)(1) and (B)(5) of this section
and after compliance with division (B)(4) of this section when applicable, any
moneys acquired from the sale of property disposed of pursuant to this section
shall be placed in the general revenue fund of the state, or the general fund
of the municipality.
      (4)   If the property was in the possession of the Police Department in
relation to a delinquent child proceeding in a juvenile court, 10% of any
moneys acquired from the sale of property disposed of under this section shall
be applied to one or more community addiction services providers, as defined in
Ohio R.C. 5119.01. A juvenile court shall not specify a services provider,
except as provided in this division, unless the services provider is in the
same county as the court or in a contiguous county. If no certified services
provider is located in any of those counties, the juvenile court may specify a
certified services provider anywhere in Ohio. The remaining 90% of the proceeds
or cash shall be applied as provided in division (B)(3) of this section.
      (5)   (a)   If the Board of County Commissioners recognizes a citizens’
reward program under Ohio R.C. 9.92, the Board shall notify the Police
Department of the recognition by filing a copy of its resolution conferring
that recognition with the Police Department. When the Board recognizes a
citizens’ reward program and the County includes a part, but not all, of the
territory of the municipality, the Board shall so notify the Police Department
of the recognition of the citizens’ reward program only if the County contains
the highest percentage of the municipality’s population.
         (b)   Upon being so notified, the Police Department shall pay 25% of
any forfeited proceeds or cash derived from each sale of property disposed of
pursuant to this section to the citizens’ reward program for use exclusively to
pay rewards. No part of the funds may be used to pay expenses associated with
the program. If a citizens’ reward program that operates in more than one
County or in another state in addition to this state receives funds under this
section, the funds shall be used to pay rewards only for tips and information
to law enforcement agencies concerning offenses committed in the County from
which the funds were received.
      (6)   Any property forfeited under Ohio R.C. Chapter 2981 not be used to
pay any fine imposed upon a person who is convicted of or pleads guilty to an
underlying criminal offense or a different offense arising out of the same
facts and circumstances.
      (7)   Any moneys acquired from the sale of personal effects, tools, or
other property seized because the personal effects, tools, or other property
were used in the commission of a violation of Ohio R.C. 2905.32, 2907.21, or
2907.22 or derived from the proceeds of the commission of a violation of R.C. §
2905.32, 2907.21, or 2907.22 and disposed of pursuant to this division (B)
shall be placed in the Victims of Human Trafficking Fund created by R.C. §
5101.87.
(ORC 2981.12)
   (C)   Disposition of Contraband, Proceeds, or Instrumentalities. Except as
otherwise provided in Ohio R.C. 2981.13, property ordered forfeited as
contraband, proceeds, or an instrumentality pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 2981
shall be disposed of, used, or sold pursuant to division (B) of this section or
Ohio R.C. 2981.12. If the property is to be sold under division (B) of this
section or Ohio R.C. 2981.12, the prosecutor shall cause notice of the proposed
sale to be given in accordance with law.
(ORC 2981.13(A))
Statutory reference:
   Forfeiture of property generally, see R.C. Chapter 2981
§ 606.25  IMPERSONATING AN OFFICER.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      “Federal law enforcement officer.” An employee of the United States who
serves in a position the duties of which are primarily the investigation,
apprehension, or detention of individuals suspected or convicted of offenses
under the criminal laws of the United States.
      “Impersonate.”  To act the part of, assume the identity of, wear the
uniform or any part of the uniform of, or display the identification of a
particular person or of a member of a class of persons with purpose to make
another person believe that the actor is that particular person or is a member
of that class of persons.
      “Investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2903.11.
      “Peace officer.”  A sheriff, deputy sheriff, marshal, deputy marshal,
member of the organized police department of a municipal corporation, or
township constable, who is employed by a political subdivision of this state; a
member of a police force employed by a metropolitan housing authority under
Ohio R.C. 3735.31(D); a member of a police force employed by a regional transit
authority under Ohio R.C. 306.35(Y); a state university law enforcement officer
appointed under Ohio R.C. 3345.04; a veterans’ home police officer appointed
under Ohio R.C. 5907.02; a special police officer employed by a port authority
under Ohio R.C. 4582.04 or 4582.28; an officer, agent, or employee of the state
or any of its agencies, instrumentalities, or political subdivisions, upon
whom, by statute, a duty to conserve the peace or to enforce all or certain
laws is imposed and the authority to arrest violators is conferred, within
limits of that statutory duty and authority; or a state highway patrol trooper
whose primary duties are to preserve the peace, to protect life and property,
and to enforce the laws, ordinances, or rules of the state or any of its
political subdivisions.
      “Private police officer.”  Any security guard, special police officer,
private detective, or other person who is privately employed in a police
capacity.
   (B)   No person shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer,
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation, or
federal law enforcement officer.
   (C)   No person, by impersonating a peace officer, private police officer,
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation, or
federal law enforcement officer, shall arrest or detain any person, search any
person, or search the property of any person.
   (D)   No person, with purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of an
offense, shall impersonate a peace officer, private police officer, federal law
enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of the municipality or the
state, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and
Investigation.
   (E)   No person shall commit a felony while impersonating a peace officer,
private police officer, federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or
employee of the municipality or of the state, or investigator of the Bureau of
Criminal Identification and Investigation.
   (F)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B) of this
section that the impersonation of the peace officer, private police officer,
federal law enforcement officer, an officer, agent or employee of the
municipality or of the state, or investigator of the Bureau of Criminal
Identification and Investigation  was for a lawful purpose.
   (G)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this
section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.  The penalty shall be
as provided in §
202.99. If the purpose of a violation of division (D) of this section is to
commit or facilitate the commission of a felony, a violation of division (D) is
a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  Whoever violates
division (E) of this section is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(ORC 2921.51)
§ 606.26  DISPLAY OF LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY EMBLEM.
   (A)   No person who is not entitled to do so shall knowingly display on a
motor vehicle the emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law
enforcement officers.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of the unlawful display of the
emblem of a law enforcement agency or an organization of law enforcement
officers, a first degree misdemeanor. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
(ORC 2913.441)
§ 606.27  REIMBURSEMENT OF EXPENSES OF CONFINEMENT.
   (A)   Any person convicted of an offense other than a minor misdemeanor and
who is thereafter confined in a workhouse, prison, station house or County jail
shall reimburse the city for its expenses incurred by reason of such
confinement, including, but not limited to, the expenses relating to the
provision of food, clothing and shelter.  The amount of reimbursement shall be
determined by a court of competent jurisdiction in an amount and in the manner
as provided by law. Subject to the discretion of the court, the court may
impose costs of confinement as a part of the sentence of the person convicted
and collect the costs of confinement at the time of sentencing or at such time
thereafter as the Court in its discretion may provide.
   (B)   The Director of Law is hereby authorized to institute an appropriate
civil action in the name of the city in a court of competent jurisdiction to
recover from the convict the reimbursement for the expenses of his or her
confinement in a workhouse, prison, station house or County jail as may be
determined by the court in the manner provided by law.
   (C)   All amounts recovered for reimbursement of expenses of confinement
shall be paid into the General Fund of the city.
   (D)   The per diem rate for reimbursement of expenses of confinement is
hereby set at $85.
(Ord. 86-84, passed 11-19-1984; Ord. 28-90, passed 3-19-1990)
§ 606.28  CONTRABAND IN CITY JAIL.
   (A)   No person shall introduce any contraband into the Broadview Heights
Jail or convey the same to any individual incarcerated therein by any means.
   (B)   For purposes of this section, “contraband” shall be defined as
provided in §
606.01.
(Ord. 3-95, passed 1-3-1995)
§ 606.29  USING SHAM LEGAL PROCESS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply:
      “Lawfully issued.”  Adopted, issued, or rendered in accordance with the
United States Constitution, the constitution of a state, and the applicable
statutes, rules, regulations and ordinances of the United States, a state, and
the political subdivisions of a state.
      “Political subdivisions.”  Municipal corporations, townships, counties,
school districts, and all other bodies corporate and politic that are organized
under state law and are responsible for governmental activities only in
geographical areas smaller than that of a state.
      “Sham legal process.”  An instrument that meets all of the following
conditions:
         (a)   It is not lawfully issued.
         (b)   It purports to do any of the following:
            1.   To be a summons, subpoena, judgment, or order of a court, a
law enforcement officer, or a legislative, executive or administrative body.
            2.   To assert jurisdiction over or determine the legal or
equitable status, rights, duties, powers, or privileges of any person or
property.
            3.   To require or authorize the search, seizure, indictment,
arrest, trial, or sentencing of any person or property.
         (c)   It is designed to make another person believe that it is
lawfully issued.
      “State.”  A state of the United States, including without limitation the
state legislature, the highest court of the state that has statewide
jurisdiction, the offices of all elected state officers, and all departments,
boards, offices, commissions, agencies, institutions, and other
instrumentalities of the state.  “State” does not include the political
subdivisions of the state.
   (B)   No person shall, knowing the sham legal process to be a sham legal
process, do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly issue, display, deliver, distribute, or otherwise use
sham legal process.
      (2)   Knowingly use sham legal process to arrest, detain, search or seize
any person or the property of another person.
      (3)   Knowingly commit or facilitate the commission of an offense using
sham legal process.
      (4)   Knowingly commit a felony by using sham legal process.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B)(1) or (2)
of this section that the use of sham legal process was for a lawful purpose.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of using sham legal process. 
A violation of division (B)(1) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.  A violation of division (B)(2) or (B)(3) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree, except that if the purpose of a violation of
division (B)(3) of this section is to commit or facilitate the commission of a
felony, a violation of division (B)(3) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.  A violation of division (B)(4) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. The penalty
shall be as provided in §
202.99.
(ORC 2921.52(A) - (D))
§ 606.30  FAILURE TO DISCLOSE PERSONAL INFORMATION.
   (A)   No person who is in a public place shall refuse to disclose the
person’s name, address, or date of birth, when requested by a law enforcement
officer who reasonably suspects either of the following:
      (1)   The person is committing, has committed, or is about to commit a
criminal offense.
      (2)   The person witnessed any of the following:
         (a)   An offense of violence that would constitute a felony under the
laws of this state;
         (b)   A felony offense that causes or results in, or creates a
substantial risk of, serious physical harm to another person or property;
         (c)   Any attempt or conspiracy to commit, or complicity in
committing, any offenses identified in division (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) of this
section;
         (d)   Any conduct reasonably indicating that any offense identified in
division (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) of this section or any attempt, conspiracy, or
complicity described in division (A)(2)(c) of this section has been, is being,
or is about to be committed.
   (B)   Nothing in division (A) of this section requires a person to answer
any questions beyond that person’s name, address, or date of birth. Nothing in
division (A) of this section authorizes a law enforcement officer to arrest a
person for not providing any information beyond the person’s name, address, or
date of birth or for refusing to describe the offense observed.
   (C)   It is not a violation of division (A) of this section to refuse to
answer a question that would reveal a person’s age or date of birth if age is
an element of the crime that the person is suspected of committing.
(ORC 2921.29)
   (D)   No person entering an airport, train station, port, or other similar
critical transportation infrastructure site shall refuse to show identification
when requested by a law enforcement officer when there is a threat to security
and the law enforcement officer is requiring identification of all persons
entering the site.
   (E)   A law enforcement officer may prevent any person who refuses to show
identification when asked under the circumstances described in division (E) of
this section from entering the critical transportation infrastructure site.
(ORC 2909.31)
   (F)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of failure to
disclose one’s personal information, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  The
penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99
§ 606.31  MISUSE OF 9-1-1 SYSTEM.
   (A)   As used in this section, “9-1-1 system” means a system through which
individuals can request emergency service using the telephone number 9-1-1.
(ORC 128.01(A))
   (B)   No person shall knowingly use the telephone number of a 9-1-1 system
established under Ohio R.C. Chapter 128 to report an emergency if the person
knows that no emergency exists.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly use a 9-1-1 system for a purpose other than
obtaining emergency service.
   (D)   No person shall disclose or use any information concerning telephone
numbers, addresses, or names obtained from the database that serves the public
safety answering point of a 9-1-1 system established under Ohio R.C. Chapter
128, except for any of the following purposes or under any of the following
circumstances:
      (1)   For the purpose of the 9-1-1 system;
      (2)   For the purpose of responding to an emergency call to an emergency
service provider;
      (3)   In the circumstance of the inadvertent disclosure of such
information due solely to technology of the wireless telephone network portion
of the 9-1-1 system not allowing access to the database to be restricted to 9-
1-1 specific answering lines at a public safety answering point;
      (4)   In the circumstance of access to a database being given by a
telephone company that is a wireless service provider to a public utility or
municipal utility in handling customer calls in times of public emergency or
service outages. The charge, terms, and conditions for the disclosure or use of
such information for the purpose of such access to a database shall be subject
to the jurisdiction of the Steering Committee;
      (5)   In the circumstance of access to a database given by a telephone
company that is a wireline service provider to a state and local government in
warning of a public emergency, as determined by the Steering Committee. The
charge, terms and conditions for the disclosure or use of that information for
the purpose of access to a database is subject to the jurisdiction of the
Steering Committee.
(ORC 128.32(E) - (G))
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense and a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
§ 606.32  SELF DEFENSE: LIMITATIONS ON DUTY TO RETREAT PRIOR TO USING FORCE.
   (A)   As used in this section, “residence” and “vehicle” have the same
meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2901.05.
   (B)   For purposes of any section of this Code that sets forth a criminal
offense, a person who lawfully is in that person’s residence has no duty to
retreat before using force in self defense, defense of another, or defense of
that person’s residence, and a person who lawfully is an occupant of that
person’s vehicle or who lawfully is an occupant in a vehicle owned by an
immediate family member of the person has no duty to retreat before using force
in self defense or defense of another.
(ORC 2901.09)
§ 606.99  PENALTY; SUSPENSION OF DRIVER’S LICENSE.
   Except as otherwise provided in Ohio R.C. 4510.07 or in any other provision
of the Revised Code, whenever an offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a
violation of any provision of this Code of Ordinances that is substantially
equivalent to a provision of the Revised Code, and a court is permitted or
required to suspend a person’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit for a violation of that provision, a court, in addition to any other
penalties authorized by law, may suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating privileges for the period
of time the court determines appropriate, but the period of suspension imposed
for the violation of the provision of this Code of Ordinances shall not exceed
the period of suspension that is permitted or required to be imposed for the
violation of the provision of the Revised Code to which the provision of this
Code of Ordinances is substantially equivalent.
(ORC 4510.05)
Editor’s note:
   See §
202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 612:  ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES
Section
612.01   Definitions
612.02   Sales to underage persons; prohibitions and misrepresentations
612.03   Sales to intoxicated persons
612.04   Consumption in motor vehicle
612.05   Permit required
612.06   Posting age and firearm warning signs
612.07   Open container prohibited
612.08   Hours of sale or consumption
612.09   Possession or use on city property
612.10   Conveying intoxicating liquor or cash onto grounds of detention
facilities or other specified governmental facilities
612.11   Sales of low-alcohol beverages to underage persons; prohibitions and
misrepresentations
612.12   Alcohol vaporizing devices prohibited
612.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Disorderly conduct while voluntarily intoxicated, see §
648.04
   Driving or physical control while intoxicated, see §
434.01
   Effect of voluntary intoxication on criminal liability, see §
606.06
   Using weapons while intoxicated, see §
672.03
Statutory reference:
   Liquor Control Law, see Ohio R.C. Chapter 4301
   Liquor permits, see Ohio R.C. Chapter 4303
   Local option, see Ohio R.C. 4303.29
   Suspension of alcohol sales during emergency, see Ohio R.C. 4301.251
§ 612.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   “Alcohol.”  Ethyl alcohol, whether rectified or diluted with water or not,
whatever its origin may be, and includes synthetic ethyl alcohol.  The term
does not include denatured alcohol and wood alcohol.
   “At retail.”  For use or consumption by the purchaser and not for resale.
   “Beer.”
      (1)   Includes all beverages brewed or fermented wholly or in part from
malt products and containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume.
      (2)   Beer, regardless of the percent of alcohol by volume, is not
intoxicating liquor for purposes of this code, the Ohio Revised Code, or any
rules adopted under it.
   “Cider.”  All liquids that are fit to use for beverage purposes that contain
0.5% of alcohol by volume, but not more than 6% of alcohol by weight that are
made through the normal alcoholic fermentation of the juice of sound, ripe
apples, including, without limitation, flavored, sparkling, or carbonated cider
and cider made from pure condensed apple must.
   “Club.”  A corporation or association of individuals organized in good faith
for social, recreational, benevolent, charitable, fraternal, political,
patriotic, or athletic purposes, which is the owner, lessor, or occupant of a
permanent building or part of a permanent building operated solely for such
purposes, membership in which entails the prepayment of regular dues, and
includes the place so operated.
   “Community facility.”  Means either of the following:
      (1)   Any convention, sports or entertainment facility or complex, or any
combination of these, that is used by or accessible to the general public and
that is owned or operated in whole or in part by the state, a state agency, or
a political subdivision of the state or that is leased from, or located on
property owned by or leased from, the state, a state agency, a political
subdivision of the state, or a convention facilities authority created pursuant
to Ohio R.C. 351.02;
      (2)   An area designated as a community entertainment district pursuant
to Ohio R.C. 4301.80.
   “Controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet.”  A closed container,
either refrigerated, in whole or in part, or nonrefrigerated, access to the
interior of which is restricted by means of a device that requires the use of a
key, magnetic card, or similar device and from which beer, intoxicating liquor,
other beverages, or food may be sold.
   “Hotel.”  The same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3731.01, subject to the
exceptions mentioned in Ohio R.C. 3731.03.
   “Intoxicating liquor” and “liquor.”  All liquids and compounds, other than
beer, containing 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume which are fit to use for
beverage purposes, from whatever source and by whatever process produced, by
whatever name called, and whether the same are medicated, proprietary, or
patented.  “Intoxicating liquor” and “liquor” include cider and alcohol, and
all solids and confections which contain 0.5% or more of alcohol by volume.
   “Low-alcohol beverage.”  Any brewed or fermented malt product or any product
made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits, or other agricultural
products that contains either no alcohol or less than 0.5% of alcohol by
volume.  The beverages described in this definition do not include a soft drink
such as root beer, birch beer, or ginger beer.
   “Manufacture.”  All processes by which beer or intoxicating liquor is
produced, whether by distillation, rectifying, fortifying, blending,
fermentation, brewing, or in any other manner.
   “Manufacturer.”  Any person engaged in the business of manufacturing beer or
intoxicating liquor.
   “Mixed beverages.”  Includes bottled and prepared cordials, cocktails,
highballs, and solids and confections that are obtained by mixing any type of
whiskey, neutral spirits, brandy, gin or other distilled spirits with, or over,
carbonated or plain water, pure juices from flowers and plants, and other
flavoring materials.  The completed product shall contain not less than 0.5% of
alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume.
   “Nightclub.”  A place habitually operated for profit, where food is served
for consumption on the premises, and one or more forms of amusement are
provided or permitted for a consideration that may be in the form of a cover
charge or may be included in the price of the food and beverages, or both,
purchased by patrons.
   “Person.”  Includes firms and corporations.
   “Pharmacy.”  An establishment as defined in Ohio R.C. 4729.01, that is under
the management or control of a licensed pharmacist in accordance with Ohio R.C.
4729.27.
   “Restaurant.”  A place located in a permanent building provided with space
and accommodations wherein, in consideration of the payment of money, hot meals
are habitually prepared, sold, and served at noon and evening, as the principal
business of the place.  The term does not include pharmacies, confectionery
stores, lunch stands, nightclubs, and filling stations.
   “Sale” and “sell.”  The exchange, barter, gift, offer for sale, sale,
distribution, and delivery of any kind, and the transfer of title or possession
of beer and intoxicating liquor either by constructive or actual delivery by
any means or devices whatever, including the sale of beer or intoxicating
liquor by means of a controlled access alcohol and beverage cabinet pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 4301.21.  Such terms do not include the mere solicitation of orders
for beer or intoxicating liquor from the holders of permits issued by the
Division of Liquor Control authorizing the sale of the beer or intoxicating
liquor, but no solicitor shall solicit any orders until the solicitor has been
registered with the Division pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4303.25.
   “Sales area or territory.” An exclusive geographic area or territory that is
assigned to a particular A or B permit holder and that either has one or more
political subdivisions as its boundaries or consists of an area of land with
readily identifiable geographic boundaries.  “Sales area or territory” does not
include, however, any particular retail location in an exclusive geographic
area or territory that had been assigned to another A or B permit holder before
April 9, 2001.
   “Sealed container.”  Any container having a capacity of not more than 128
fluid ounces, the opening of which is closed to prevent the entrance of air.
   “Spirituous liquor.”  All intoxicating liquors containing more than 21% of
alcohol by volume.
   “Vehicle.”  All means of transportation by land, by water, or by air, and
everything made use of in any way for such transportation.
   “Wholesale distributor” and “distributor.”  A person engaged in the business
of selling to retail dealers for purposes of resale.
   “Wine.”  All liquids fit to use for beverage purposes containing not less
than 0.5% of alcohol by volume and not more than 21% of alcohol by volume,
which is made from the fermented juices of grapes, fruits, or other
agricultural products.  Except as provided in Ohio R.C. 4301.01(B)(3), the term
does not include cider.
(ORC 4301.01, 4301.244)
§ 612.02  SALES TO UNDERAGE PERSONS; PROHIBITIONS AND MISREPRESENTATIONS.
   (A)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in Ohio R.C. Chapter
4301, no person shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor to an underage person,
shall buy beer or intoxicating liquor for an underage person, or shall furnish
it to an underage person unless given by a physician in the regular line of the
physician’s practice or given for established religious purposes or unless the
underage person is supervised by a parent, spouse who is not an underage
person, or legal guardian.  In proceedings before the Liquor Control
Commission, no permit holder, or no employee or agent of a permit holder,
charged with a violation of this division shall be charged, for the same
offense, with a violation of Ohio R.C. 4301.22(A)(1) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (B)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or private place
shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on the public place
while possessing or consuming beer or intoxicating liquor, unless the
intoxicating liquor or beer is given to the person possessing or consuming it
by that person’s parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal
guardian and the parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal
guardian is present at the time of the person’s possession or consumption of
the beer or intoxicating liquor.  An owner of a public or private place is not
liable for acts or omissions in violation of this division that are committed
by a lessee of that place, unless the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the
lessee’s acts or omissions.
   (C)   No person shall engage or use  accommodations at a hotel, inn, cabin,
campground, or restaurant when the person knows or has reason to know either of
the following:
      (1)   That beer or intoxicating liquor will be consumed by an underage
person on the premises of the accommodations that the person engages or uses,
unless the person engaging or using the accommodations is the spouse of the
underage person and who is not an underage person, or is the parent or legal
guardian of all of the underage persons, who consume beer or intoxicating
liquor on the premises and that person is on the premises at all times when
beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by an underage person.
      (2)   That a drug of abuse will be consumed on the premises of the
accommodations by any person, except a person who obtained the drug of abuse
pursuant to a prescription issued by a licensed health professionals authorized
to prescribe drugs and has the drug of abuse in the original container in which
it was dispensed to the person.
   (D)   (1)   No person is required to permit the engagement of accommodations
at any hotel, inn, cabin, or campground by an underage person or for an
underage person, if the person engaging the accommodations knows or has reason
to know that the underage person is intoxicated, or that the underage person
possesses any beer or intoxicating liquor and is not supervised by a parent,
spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian who is or will be
present at all times when the beer or intoxicating liquor is being consumed by
the underage person.
      (2)   No underage person shall knowingly engage or attempt to engage
accommodations at any hotel, inn, cabin, or campground by presenting
identification that falsely indicates that the underage person is 21 years of
age or older for the purpose of violating this section.
   (E)   (1)   No underage person shall knowingly order, pay for, share the
cost of, attempt to purchase, possess, or consume any beer or intoxicating
liquor in any public or private place.  No underage person shall knowingly be
under the influence of any beer or intoxicating liquor in any public place. 
The prohibitions set forth in this division against an underage person
knowingly possessing, consuming, or being under the influence of any beer or
intoxicating liquor shall not apply if the underage person is supervised by a
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, or the beer or
intoxicating liquor is given by a physician in the regular line of the
physician’s practice or given for established religious purposes.
      (2)   (a)   If a person is charged with violating division (E)(1) of this
section in a complaint filed under Ohio R.C. 2151.27, the court may order the
child into a diversion program specified by the court and hold the complaint in
abeyance pending successful completion of the diversion program.  A child is
ineligible to enter into a diversion program under this division if the child
previously has been diverted pursuant to this division.  If the child completes
the diversion program to the satisfaction of the court, the court shall dismiss
the complaint and order the child’s record in the case sealed under Ohio R.C.
2151.356 through 2151.358.  If the child fails to satisfactorily complete the
diversion program, the court shall proceed with the complaint.
         (b)   If a person is charged in a criminal complaint with violating
division (E)(1) of this section, Ohio R.C. 2935.36 shall apply to the offense,
except that a person is ineligible for diversion under that section if the
person previously has been diverted pursuant to divisions (E)(2)(a) or (E)(2)
(b) of this section.  If the person completes the diversion program to the
satisfaction of the court, the court shall dismiss the complaint and order the
record in the case sealed under Ohio R.C. 2953.52.  If the person fails to
satisfactorily complete the diversion program, the court shall proceed with the
complaint.
   (F)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian of
a minor shall knowingly permit the minor to violate this section or Ohio R.C.
4301.63, 4301.632, 4301.633, or 4301.634, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
   (G)   The operator of any hotel, inn, cabin, or campground shall make the
provisions of this section available in writing to any person engaging or using
accommodations at the hotel, inn, cabin, or campground.
   (H)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      “Drug of abuse” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3719.011.
      “Hotel” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3731.01.
      “Licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs” and
“prescription” have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4729.01.
      “Minor” means a person under the age of 18 years.
      “Underage person” means a person under the age of 21 years.
(ORC 4301.69)
   (I)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in Ohio R.C. Chapter
4301, no person under the age of 21 years shall purchase beer or intoxicating
liquor.
(ORC 4301.63)
   (J)   (EDITOR’S NOTE: Division (J) was repealed because substantially
equivalent state law, Ohio R.C. 4301.632, was repealed in 2002)
   (K)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in Ohio R.C. Chapter
4301, no person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to the name,
age, or other identification of any person under 21 years of age, for the
purpose of obtaining, or with the intent to obtain, beer or intoxicating liquor
for a person under 21 years of age, by purchase, or as a gift.
(ORC 4301.633)
   (L)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter or in Ohio R.C. Chapter
4301, no person under the age of 21 years shall knowingly show or give false
information concerning his or her name, age, or other identification for the
purpose of purchasing or otherwise obtaining beer or intoxicating liquor in any
place in this municipality where beer or intoxicating liquor is sold under a
permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control, or sold by the Division of
Liquor Control.
(ORC 4301.634)
   (M)   Whoever, being an adult, violates division (A), (B), (C), (D), (E),
(F), (G), (I) or (K) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree and shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
202.99.
   (N)   Whoever violates division (I) of this section shall be fined not less
than $25 nor more than $100.  The court imposing a fine for a violation of this
section may order that the fine be paid by the performance of public work at a
reasonable hourly rate established by the court.  The court shall designate the
time within which the public work shall be completed.
(ORC 4301.99(E))
   (O)   (EDITOR’S NOTE: Division (O) was repealed because the penalty for a
substantially equivalent state law, Ohio R.C. 4301.632, was repealed in 2002)
   (P)   (1)   Whoever violates division (L) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If, in committing a first violation of
division (L), the offender presented to the permit holder or his or her
employee or agent a false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a false
or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s
license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $250 and not
more than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more
than six months.
      (2)   On a second violation in which, for the second time, the offender
presented to the permit holder or his or her employee or agent a false,
fictitious, or altered identification card, a false or fictitious driver’s
license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s license issued by any
state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
first degree and shall be fined not less than $500 nor more than $1,000, and
may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than six months.  The
court also may impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operation privilege from
the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(7).
      (3)   On a third or subsequent violation in which, for the third or
subsequent time, the offender presented to the permit holder or his or her
employee or agent a false, fictitious, or altered identification card, a false
or fictitious driver’s license purportedly issued by any state, or a driver’s
license issued by any state that has been altered, the offender is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined not less than $500 nor more
than $1,000, and may be sentenced to a term of imprisonment of not more than
six months.  Except as provided in this division, the court also may impose a
class six suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or permit or nonresident operating privilege from  the range specified in Ohio
R.C. 4510.02(A)(6),  and the court may order that the suspension or denial
remain in effect until the offender attains the age of 21 years.  The court, in
lieu of suspending the offender’s temporary instruction permit, probationary
driver’s license, or driver’s license, instead may order the offender to
perform a determinate number of hours of community service, with the court
determining the actual number of hours and the nature of the community service
the offender shall perform.
(ORC 4301.99(F))
   (Q)   Whoever, being a minor, violates any of the provisions of this
section, shall be dealt with in accordance with Juvenile Court law and
procedure.
§ 612.03  SALES TO INTOXICATED PERSONS.
   (A)   No permit holder and no agent or employee of a permit holder shall
sell or furnish beer or intoxicating liquor to an intoxicated person.
(ORC 4301.22(B))
   (B)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
(ORC 4301.99(D), (H))
§ 612.04  CONSUMPTION IN MOTOR VEHICLE.
   No person shall consume any beer or intoxicating liquor in a motor vehicle. 
This section does not apply to persons described in Ohio R.C. 4301.62(D) or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
(ORC 4301.64)
§ 612.05  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person personally or by the person’s clerk, agent, or employee,
shall manufacture, manufacture for sale, offer, keep, or possess for sale,
furnish or sell, or solicit the purchase or sale of any beer or intoxicating
liquor in this state, or transport, import, or cause to be transported or
imported any beer, intoxicating liquor, or alcohol in or into this municipality
for delivery, use or sale, unless the person has fully  complied with Ohio R.C.
Chapters 4301 and 4303 or is the holder of a permit issued by the Division of
Liquor Control and in force at the time.
   (B)   No manufacturer, supplier, wholesale distributor, broker, or retailer
of beer or intoxicating liquor, or other person shall employ, retain, or
otherwise utilize any person in this state to act as an employee, agent,
solicitor, or salesperson, or act in any other representative capacity to sell,
solicit, take orders, or receive offers to purchase or expressions of interest
to purchase beer or intoxicating liquor from any person, at any location other
than a liquor permit premises, except as specifically authorized by Ohio R.C.
Chapter 4301 or Ohio R.C. Chapter 4303 or rules adopted thereunder. No
function, event, or party shall take place at any location other than a liquor
permit premises where any person acts in any manner to sell, solicit, take
orders, or receive offers to purchase or expressions of intent to purchase beer
or intoxicating liquor to or from any person, except as specifically authorized
by Ohio R.C. Chapter 4301 or Ohio R.C. Chapter 4303 or rules adopted
thereunder.
(ORC 4303.25)
§ 612.06  POSTING AGE AND FIREARM WARNING SIGNS.
   (A)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in Ohio R.C. 4301.691, every place
in this municipality where beer, intoxicating liquor, or any low-alcohol
beverage is sold for beverage purposes shall display at all times, in a
prominent place on the premises thereof, a printed card, which shall be
furnished by the Division of Liquor Control and which shall read substantially
as follows:
   WARNING TO PERSONS UNDER AGE
   If you are under the age of 21
Under the statutes of the state of Ohio, if you order, pay for, share the cost
of, or attempt to purchase, or possess or consume beer or intoxicating liquor
in any public place, or furnish false information as to name, age, or other
identification, you are subject to a fine of up to $1,000, or imprisonment up
to 6 months, or both.
   If you are under the age of 18
Under the statutes of the state of Ohio, if you order, pay for, share the cost
of, or attempt to purchase, or posses or consume, any type of beer or wine that
contains either no alcohol or less than one-half of one per cent of alcohol by
volume in any public place, or furnish false information as to the name, age,
or other identification, you are subject to a fine of up to $250 or to
imprisonment up to 30 days, or both.
      (2)   No person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution or any
proceedings before the Department or the Liquor Control Commission for failing
to display this card.  No permit issued by the Department shall be suspended,
revoked, or canceled because of the failure of the permit holder to display
this card.
   (B)   (1)   Every place in this municipality for which a D permit has been
issued under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4303 shall be issued a printed card by the
Division of Liquor Control that shall read substantially as follows:
   WARNING
   If you are carrying a firearm
Under the statutes of Ohio, if you possess a firearm in any room in which
liquor is being dispensed in premises for which a D permit has been issued
under Chapter 4303 of the Revised Code, you may be guilty of a felony and may
be subjected to a prison term of up to one year.
      (2)   No person shall be subject to any criminal prosecution or any
proceedings before the Division of Liquor Control or the Liquor Control
Commission for failing to display this card.  No permit issued by the
Department shall be suspended, revoked, or canceled because of the failure of
the permit holder to display this card.
(ORC 4301.637)
§ 612.07  OPEN CONTAINER PROHIBITED.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      “Chauffeured limousine” means a vehicle registered under Ohio R.C.
4503.24.
      “Street,” “highway,” and “motor vehicle” have the same meanings as in
Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
   (B)   No person shall have in the person’s possession an opened container of
beer or intoxicating liquor in any of the following circumstances:
      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(1)(e) of this section, in a
state liquor store;
      (2)   Except as provided in division (C) of this section, on the premises
of the holder of any permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control;
      (3)   In any other public place;
      (4)   Except as provided in division (D) or (E) of this section, while
operating or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on any street, highway,
or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking;
      (5)   Except as provided in division (D) or (E) of this section, while
being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on any street, highway, or other
public or private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel
or parking.
   (C)   (1)   A person may have in the person’s possession an opened container
of any of the following:
         (a)   Beer or intoxicating liquor that has been lawfully purchased for
consumption on the premises where bought from the holder of an A-1-A, A-2, A-
2f, A-3a, D-1, D-2, D-3, D-3a, D-4, D-4a, D-5, D-5a, D-5b, D-5c, D-5d, D-5e, D-
5f, D-5g, D-5h, D-5i, D-5j, D-5k, D-5l, D-5m, D-5n, D-5o, D-7, D-8, E, F, F-2,
F-5, F-7, or F-8 permit;
         (b)   Beer, wine, or mixed beverages served for consumption on the
premises by the holder of an F-3 permit, wine served as a tasting sample by an
A-2 permit holder or S permit holder for consumption
on the premises of a farmers market for which an F-10 permit has been issued,
or wine served for consumption on the premises by the holder of an F-4 permit;
         (c)   Beer or intoxicating liquor consumed on the premises of a
convention facility as provided in Ohio R.C. 4303.201;
         (d)   Beer or intoxicating liquor to be consumed during tastings and
samplings approved by rule of the Liquor Control Commission;
         (e)   Spiritous liquor to be consumed for purposes of a tasting
sample, as defined in R.C. § 4301.171.
      (2)   A person may have in the person’s possession on an F liquor permit
premises an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor that was not
purchased from the holder of the F permit if the premises for which the F
permit is issued is a music festival and the holder of the F permit grants
permission for that possession on the premises during the period for which the
F permit is issued.  As used in this division (C)(2), “music festival” means a
series of outdoor live musical performances extending for a period of at least
three consecutive days and located on an area of land of at least 40 acres.
      (3)   (a)   A person may have in the person’s possession on a D-2 liquor
permit premises an opened or unopened container of wine that was not purchased
from the holder of the D-2 permit if the premises for which the D-2 permit is
issued is an outdoor performing arts center, the person is attending an
orchestral performance, and the holder of the D-2 permit grants permission for
the possession and consumption of wine in certain predesignated areas of the
premises during the period for which the D-2 permit is issued.
         (b)   As used in division (C)(3)(a) of this section:
            “Orchestral performance” means a concert comprised of a group of
not fewer than 40 musicians playing various musical instruments.
            “Outdoor performing arts center” means an outdoor performing arts
center that is located on not less than 150  acres of land and that is open for
performances from the first day of April to the last day of October of each
year.
      (4)   A person may have in the person’s possession an opened or unopened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location at which the
person is attending an orchestral performance as defined in division (C)(3)(b)
of this section if the person with supervision and control over the performance
grants permission for the possession and consumption of beer or intoxicating
liquor in certain predesignated areas of that outdoor location.
      (5)   (a)   A person may have in the person’s possession on an F-9 liquor
permit premises an opened or unopened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
that was not purchased from the holder of the F-9 permit if the person is
attending either of the following:
            1.   An orchestral performance and the F-9 permit holder grants
permission for the possession and consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor in
certain predesignated areas of the premises during the period for which the F-
9 permit is issued; or
            2. An outdoor performing arts event or orchestral performance that
is free of charge and the F-9 permit holder annually hosts not less than 25
other events or performances that are free of charge on the permit premises.
         (b)   As used in division (C)(5) of this section, “orchestral
performance” has the same meaning as in division (C)(3)(b) of this section.
      (6)   (a)   A person may have in the person’s possession on the property
of an outdoor motorsports facility an opened or unopened container of beer or
intoxicating liquor that was not purchased from the owner of the facility if
both of the following apply:
            1.   The person is attending a racing event at the facility; and
            2.   The owner of the facility grants permission for the possession
and consumption of beer or intoxicating liquor on the property of the facility.
         (b)   As used in division (C)(6)(a) of this section:
            “Outdoor motorsports facility.” An outdoor racetrack to which all
of the following apply:
               a.   It is 2.4 miles or more in length.
               b.   It is located on 200 acres or more of land.
               c.   The primary business of the owner of the facility is the
hosting and promoting of racing events.
               d.   The holder of a D-1, D-2, or D-3 permit is located on the
property of the facility.
            “Racing event.” A motor vehicle racing event sanctioned by one or
more motor racing sanctioning organizations.
      (7)   (a)   A person may have in the person’s possession an opened
container of beer or intoxicating liquor at an outdoor location within an
outdoor refreshment area created under R.C. § 4301.82 if the opened container
of beer or intoxicating liquor was purchased from an A-1, A-1-A, A-1c, A-2, A-
2f, D class, or F class permit holder to which both of the following apply:
            1.   The permit holder’s premises is located within the outdoor
refreshment area.
            2.   The permit held by the permit holder has an outdoor
refreshment area designation.
         (b)   Division (C)(7) of this section does not authorize a person to
do either of the following:
            1.   Enter the premises of an establishment within an outdoor
refreshment area while possessing an opened container of beer or intoxicating
liquor acquired elsewhere;
            2.   Possess an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor
while being in or on a motor vehicle within an outdoor refreshment area, unless
the possession is otherwise authorized under division (D) or (E) of this
section.
         (c)   As used in division (C)(7) of this section, “D class permit
holder” does not include a D-6 or D-8 permit holder.
      (8)   (a)   A person may have in the person’s possession on the property
of a market, within a defined F-8 permit premises, an opened container of beer
or intoxicating liquor that was purchased from a D permit premises that is
located immediately adjacent to the market if both of the following apply:
            1.   The market grants permission for the possession and
consumption of beer and intoxicating liquor within the defined F-8 permit
premises;
            2.   The market is hosting an event pursuant to an F-8 permit and
the market has notified the division of liquor control about the event in
accordance with Ohio R.C. 4303.208(A)(3).
         (b)   As used in division (C)(8) of this section, “market” means a
market, for which an F-8 permit is held, that has been in operation since 1860.
   (D)   This section does not apply to a person who pays all or a portion of
the fee imposed for use of a chauffeured limousine pursuant to a prearranged
contract or the guest of the person, when all of the following apply:
      (1)   The person or guest is a passenger in the limousine.
      (2)   The person or guest is located in the limousine, but is not
occupying a seat in the front compartment of the limousine where the operator
of the limousine is located.
      (3)   The limousine is located on any street, highway, or other public or
private property open to the public for purposes of vehicular travel or
parking.
   (E)   An opened bottle of wine that was purchased from the holder of a
permit that authorizes the sale of wine for consumption on the premises where
sold is not an opened container for the purposes of this section if both of the
following apply:
      (1)   The opened bottle of wine is securely resealed by the permit holder
or an employee of the permit holder before the bottle is removed from the
premises. The bottle shall be secured in such a manner that it is visibly
apparent if the bottle has been subsequently opened or tampered with.
      (2)   The opened bottle of wine that is resealed in accordance with
division (E)(1) of this section is stored in the trunk of a motor vehicle or,
if the motor vehicle does not have a trunk, behind the last upright seat or in
an area not normally occupied by the driver or passengers and not easily
accessible by the driver.
   (F)   (1)   Except if an ordinance or resolution is enacted or adopted under
division (F)(2) of this section, this section does not apply to a person who,
pursuant to a prearranged contract, is a passenger riding on a commercial
quadricycle when all of the following apply:
         (a)   The person is not occupying a seat in the front of the
commercial quadricycle where the operator is steering or braking.
         (b)   The commercial quadricycle is being operated on a street,
highway, or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular travel or parking.
         (c)   The person has in their possession on the commercial quadricycle
an opened container of beer or wine.
         (d)   The person has in their possession on the commercial quadricycle
not more than either 36 ounces of beer or 18 ounces of wine.
      (2)   The Legislative Authority may enact an ordinance or adopt a
resolution, as applicable, that prohibits a passenger riding on a commercial
quadricycle from possessing an opened container of beer or wine.
      (3)   As used in this section, “commercial quadricycle” means a vehicle
that has fully-operative pedals for propulsion entirely by human power and that
meets all of the following requirements:
         (a)   It has four wheels and is operated in a manner similar to a
bicycle.
         (b)   It has at least five seats for passengers.
         (c)   It is designed to be powered by the pedaling of the operator and
the passengers.
         (d)   It is used for commercial purposes.
         (e)   It is operated by the vehicle owner or an employee of the owner.
   (G)   (1)   This section does not apply to a person that has in the person’s
possession an opened container of beer or intoxicating liquor on the premises
of a market if the beer or intoxicating liquor has been purchased from a D
liquor permit holder that is located in the market.
      (2)   As used in division (G) of this section, “market” means an
establishment that:
         (a)   Leases space in the market to individual vendors, not less than
50% of which are retail food establishments or food service operations licensed
under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3717;
         (b)   Has an indoor sales floor area of not less than 22,000 square
feet;
         (c)   Hosts a farmer’s market on each Saturday from April through
December.
(ORC 4301.62)
§ 612.08  HOURS OF SALE OR CONSUMPTION.
   (A)   This section shall apply to the retail sale of beer, wine, mixed
beverages, or spirituous liquor.
   (B)   No beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor shall be sold or
delivered by an A-1, A-1C, A-2, B-1, B-2, B-4, B-5, C-1, C-2, C-2X, D-1, D-2,
D-2X, D-3 when issued without a D-3A, D-3X, D-4, D-5H, D-5K, D-8, F, F-1, F-2,
F-3, F-4, F-5, F-6, F-7, F-8, F-9, G, or I permit holder:
      (1)   From Monday to Saturday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:30
a.m.
      (2)   On Sunday between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and Sunday midnight,
unless statutorily authorized otherwise.
      (3)   Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor is
also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises of the above permit
holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages,
or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption.
   (C)   No beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor shall be sold or
delivered by an A-1A, D-3 when issued with a D-3A, D-4A, D-5, D-5A, D-5B, D-5C,
D-5D, D-5E, D-5F, D-5G, D-5I, D-5J, D-5L, D-5M, D-5N, D-5O, or D-7 permit
holder:
      (1)   From Monday to Saturday between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and 5:30
a.m.
      (2)   On Sunday between the hours of 2:30 a.m. and Sunday midnight,
unless statutorily authorized otherwise.
      (3)   Consumption of beer, wine, mixed beverages, or spirituous liquor is
also prohibited during the above hours upon the premises of the above permit
holders who are authorized by their permit to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages,
or spirituous liquor for on-premises consumption.
   (D)   Permit holders authorized to sell beer, wine, mixed beverages, or
spirituous liquor at retail who are not specifically identified in divisions
(B) or (C) above shall be subject to the provisions of division (B), unless
statutorily authorized otherwise.
   (E)   The hours on Sunday during which sales, delivery, or consumption of
alcoholic beverages may take place are established by statute, but in no event
shall they begin prior to 5:30 a.m.
(O.A.C. 4301:1-1-49)
   (F)   No association, corporation, local unit of an association or
corporation, or D permit holder who holds an F-2 permit shall sell beer or
intoxicating liquor beyond the hours of sale allowed by the permit. This
division imposes strict liability on the holder of such permit and on any
officer, agent or employee of such permit holder.
(ORC 4303.202(D)(2))
   (G)   No F-8 permit holder shall sell beer or intoxicating liquor beyond the
hours of sale allowed by the permit.  This division imposes strict liability on
the holder of an F-8 permit and on any officer, agent or employee of that
permit holder.
(ORC 4303.208(C))
   (H)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
§ 612.09  POSSESSION OR USE ON CITY PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall possess or use alcoholic beverages on any property
owned by the city.
   (B)   Notwithstanding the provisions of division (A) of this section, the
possession or use of beer may be permitted on city property by the Mayor and a
majority of Council upon the filing of an application by any nonprofit
organization sponsoring a city activity open to all the residents of the city.
      (1)   Said application shall identify the sponsoring entity, identify an
individual natural person responsible for receiving all communications from the
city, specify the date or dates of the proposed event, agree to be responsible
for the cost of any police protection necessary (unless waived by the city) and
agree to indemnify and save the city harmless from any and all liability in
connection with the serving and the use of beer on the property during said
event.
      (2)   The Mayor may cause the Police Department to investigate the
applicant to determine whether there is any history of past criminal
violations.
      (3)   Upon receipt of said application and a payment of a filing fee of
$25 (which shall be used to process said application), if the Mayor and a
majority of Council are satisfied that the organization seeking said permit is
a responsible community organization with no history of criminal activity, the
Mayor shall issue a permit for possession or use of beer on city property for
the duration of said event.
(Ord. 64-97, passed 6-2-1997)
§ 612.10  CONVEYING INTOXICATING LIQUOR OR CASH ONTO GROUNDS OF DETENTION
FACILITIES OR OTHER SPECIFIED GOVERNMENTAL FACILITIES.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly convey, or attempt to convey, onto the
grounds of a detention facility or of an institution, office building, or other
place that is under the control of the Department of Mental Health and
Addiction Services, the Department of Developmental Disabilities, the
Department of Youth Services, or the Department of Rehabilitation and
Correction, any of the following items:
      (1)   Any deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance, as defined in Ohio R.C.
2923.11, or any part of or ammunition for use in the deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance.
      (2)   Any drug of abuse, as defined in Ohio R.C. 3719.011.
      (3)   Any intoxicating liquor, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4301.01.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any person who conveys
or attempts to convey an item onto the grounds of a detention facility or of an
institution, office building, or other place under the control of the
Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services, the Department of
Developmental Disabilities, the Department of Youth Services, or the Department
of Rehabilitation and Correction, with written authorization of the person in
charge of the detention facility or the institution and in accordance with the
written rules of the detention facility or the institution, office building, or
other place.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly deliver, or attempt to deliver, to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, to a prisoner who is temporarily released from confinement
for a work assignment, or to any patient in an institution under the control of
the Department of Mental Health and Addiction Services, or the Department of
Developmental Disabilities, any item listed in division (A).
   (D)   No person shall knowingly deliver or attempt to deliver cash to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, or to a prisoner who is temporarily released from
confinement for a work assignment.
   (E)   No person shall knowingly deliver, or attempt to deliver, to any
person who is confined in a detention facility, to a child confined in a youth
services facility, or to a prisoner who is temporarily released from
confinement for a work assignment a cellular telephone, two-way radio or other
electronic communications device.
   (F)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(1)
of this section that the weapon or dangerous ordnance in question was being
transported in a motor vehicle for any lawful purpose, that it was not on the
actor’s person, and if the weapon or dangerous ordnance was a firearm, that it
was unloaded and was being carried in a closed package, box or case or in a
compartment that can be reached only by leaving the vehicle.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (C) of this
section that the actor was not otherwise prohibited by law from delivering the
item to the confined person, the child, the prisoner, or the patient and that
either of the following applies:
         (a)   The actor was permitted by the written rules of the detention
facility or the institution, office building, or other place to deliver the
item to the confined person or the patient.
         (b)   The actor was given written authorization by the person in
charge of the detention facility or the institution, office building, or other
place to deliver the item to the confined person or the patient.
   (G)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) of this section or commits a
violation of division (C) of this section involving any item listed in division
(A)(1) of this section is guilty of illegal conveyance of weapons onto the
grounds of a specified governmental facility, a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section or commits a
violation of division (C) of this section involving any drug of abuse is guilty
of illegal conveyance of drugs of abuse onto the grounds of a specified
governmental facility, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (A)(3) of this section or commits a
violation of division (C) of this section involving any intoxicating liquor is
guilty of illegal conveyance of intoxicating liquor onto the grounds of a
specified governmental facility, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of illegal
conveyance of cash onto the grounds of a detention facility, a misdemeanor of
the first degree.  If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (D) of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, illegal conveyance of cash onto
the grounds of a detention facility is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (E) of this section is guilty of illegal
conveyance of a communications device onto the grounds of a specified
governmental facility, a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (E)
of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
illegal conveyance of a communications device onto the grounds of a detention
facility is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2921.36)
§ 612.11  SALES OF LOW-ALCOHOL BEVERAGES TO UNDERAGE PERSONS; PROHIBITIONS AND
MISREPRESENTATIONS.
   (A)   As used in this section, “underage person” means a person under 18
years of age.
   (B)   No underage person shall purchase any low-alcohol beverage.
   (C)   No underage person shall order, pay for, share the cost of or attempt
to purchase any low-alcohol beverage.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly furnish any false information as to the
name, age or other identification of any underage person for the purpose of
obtaining or with the intent to obtain any low-alcohol beverage for an underage
person, by purchase or as a gift.
   (E)   No underage person shall knowingly show or give false information
concerning his or her name, age or other identification for the purpose of
purchasing or otherwise obtaining any low-alcohol beverage in any place in this
municipality.
   (F)   No person shall sell or furnish any low-alcohol beverage to, or buy
any low-alcohol beverage for, an underage person, unless given by a physician
in the regular line of his or her practice or given for established religious
purposes, or unless the underage person is accompanied by a parent, spouse who
is not an underage person, or legal guardian.
   (G)   (1)   No person who is the owner or occupant of any public or private
place shall knowingly allow any underage person to remain in or on the place
while possessing or consuming any low-alcohol beverage, unless the low-alcohol
beverage is given to the person possessing or consuming it by that person’s
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, and the
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian is present when
the person possesses or consumes the low-alcohol beverage.
      (2)   An owner of a public or private place is not liable for acts or
omissions in violation of division (G)(1) that are committed by a lessee of
that place, unless the owner authorizes or acquiesces in the lessee’s acts or
omissions.
   (H)   No permit issued by the Division of Liquor Control shall be suspended,
revoked or cancelled because of a violation of either division (F) or (G).
   (I)   No underage person shall knowingly possess or consume any low-alcohol
beverage in any public or private place, unless he or she is accompanied by a
parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian, or unless the
low-alcohol beverage is given by a physician in the regular line of his or her
practice or given for established religious purposes.
   (J)   No parent, spouse who is not an underage person, or legal guardian of
an underage person shall knowingly permit the underage person to violate this
section.
(ORC 4301.631)
   (K)   No low-alcohol beverage shall be sold to any person under 18 years of
age.
(ORC 4301.22(A)(2))
   (L)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section shall be fined not less
than $25 nor more than $100. The court imposing a fine for a violation of
division (B) of this section may order that the fine be paid by the performance
of public work at a reasonable hour rate established by the court. The court
shall designate the time within which the public work shall be completed.
(ORC 4301.99(E))
   (M)   Whoever violates divisions (C) through (K) hereof is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(ORC 4301.99(B))
§ 612.12  ALCOHOL VAPORIZING DEVICES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   As used in this section, “alcohol vaporizing device” means a machine
or other device that mixes beer or intoxicating liquor with pure oxygen or any
other gas to produce a vaporized product for the purpose of consumption by
inhalation.
   (B)   No person shall sell or offer for sale an alcohol vaporizing device.
   (C)   No person shall purchase or use an alcohol vaporizing device.
(ORC 4301.65)
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misdemeanor of the first
degree.  The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
§ 612.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 618:  ANIMALS
Section
618.01   Dogs and other animals running at large and on recreational areas
618.02   Abandoning animals
618.03   Killing or injuring animals
618.04   Poisoning animals
618.05   Cruelty to animals; cruelty to companion animals
618.06   Coloring rabbits and baby poultry; sale or display of poultry
618.07   Barking or howling dogs; destruction of property
618.08   Registration of dogs required
618.09   Hindering capture of unregistered dog
618.095   Dogs required to wear tags
618.10   Unlawful tags
618.11   Rabies quarantine
618.115   Rabies vaccination of dogs and cats required
618.12   Hunting prohibited
618.13   Nuisance conditions prohibited
618.14   Impounding and disposition; redemption
618.15   Dangerous, wild and undomesticated animals or pets prohibited
618.16   Equines
618.17   Steel-jawed trap
618.18   Reporting escapes
618.19   Dangerous and vicious dogs
618.20   Feeding wildlife and stray animals prohibited
618.21   Sexual conduct with an animal
618.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Assaulting police dog or horse or assistance dog, see §
642.08
   Dead animals, see §
660.03
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Driving animals upon roadway, see §§
404.04,
412.05
   Offensive odors from places where animals are kept or fed, see §
660.04
Statutory reference:
   Power to restrain and impound animals, see Ohio R.C. 715.23
§ 618.01  DOGS AND OTHER ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE AND ON RECREATIONAL AREAS.
   (A)   Animals in General.  No person who is the owner or keeper of horses,
mules, cattle, sheep, goats, swine or geese shall permit them to run at large
upon any public way or upon unenclosed land.
(ORC 951.02)  (Adopting Ordinance)
   (B)   Dogs Running at Large.  No person, being the owner of or in charge or
control of any dog, shall permit such dog to run at large within the limits of
the city.  Unauthorized entry by such dog upon any premises or upon any public
street or ground shall constitute “at large” within the meaning of this
division.
   (C)   Dogs on Public Ways and Grounds.  No person, being the owner of or in
charge or control of any dog, shall permit such dog to go or remain upon any
public street or ground within the limits of the city, except when accompanied
by a responsible person and upon a leash or under such control as to prevent
such dog from entering private property and from chasing or attacking any
person, animal, fowl or vehicle.
   (D)   Dogs on Recreational Parks or Grounds.  Under no circumstances shall
the owner or person in charge or control of any dog permit such dog to go upon
the recreational parks or grounds of the city at any time or under any
circumstances, whether such dog is on a leash or not. Under no circumstances
shall a person receive permission to walk or run or otherwise allow a dog to
come upon the recreational grounds or premises of the city.
   (E)   Exceptions.  The provisions of division (B) and (C) of this section
shall not prevent a person, during the season when running is lawful, from
running a dog upon vacant property and the public streets and grounds adjacent
thereto, which vacant property is not less than 500 feet from any lot or
parcel  improved with a dwelling, provided that the permission of the owner or
occupant of such vacant property is first obtained.
   (F)   Evidence.  The running at large of such animal in or upon any of the
places mentioned in divisions (B) and (C) above is prima facie evidence that it
is running at large in violation of this section.
(ORC 951.02)
(Ord. 294, passed 7-10-1950; Ord. 97-78, passed 11-6-1978)
§ 618.02  ABANDONING ANIMALS.
   No owner or keeper of a dog, cat, or other domestic animal shall abandon the
animal.
(ORC 959.01)
§ 618.03  KILLING OR INJURING ANIMALS.
   No person shall maliciously, or willfully and without the consent of the
owner, kill or injure a dog, cat, or any other domestic animal that is the
property of another.  This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian
acting in an official capacity.
(ORC 959.02)
§ 618.04  POISONING ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall maliciously, or willfully and without the consent of
the owner, administer poison, except a licensed veterinarian acting in such
capacity, to a dog, cat, or any other domestic animal that is the property of
another; and no person shall, willfully and without the consent of the owner,
place any poisoned food where it may be easily found and eaten by any such
animal, either upon his or her own lands or the lands of another.
(ORC 959.03)
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(ORC 959.99(C))
§ 618.05  CRUELTY TO ANIMALS; CRUELTY TO COMPANION ANIMALS.
   (A)   No person shall:
      (1)   Torture an animal, deprive one of necessary sustenance,
unnecessarily or cruelly beat, needlessly mutilate or kill, or impound or
confine an animal without supplying it during the confinement with a sufficient
quantity of good wholesome food and water;
      (2)   Impound or confine an animal without affording it, during the
confinement, access to shelter from wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct
sunlight, if it can reasonably be expected that the animal would otherwise
become sick or in some other way suffer.  This division does not apply to
animals impounded or confined prior to slaughter.  For the purpose of this
section, “shelter” means an artificial enclosure, windbreak, sunshade, or
natural windbreak or sunshade that is developed from the earth’s contour, tree
development, or vegetation;
      (3)   Carry or convey an animal in a cruel or inhuman manner;
      (4)   Keep animals other than cattle, poultry or fowl, swine, sheep, or
goats in an enclosure without wholesome exercise and change of air, nor feed
cows on food that produces impure or unwholesome milk;
      (5)   Detain livestock in railroad cars or compartments longer than 28
hours after they are so placed without supplying them with necessary food,
water, and attention, nor permit the stock to be so crowded as to overlie,
crush, wound, or kill each other.
   (B)   Upon the written request of the owner or person in custody of any
particular shipment of livestock, which written request shall be separate and
apart from any printed bill of lading or other railroad form, the length of
time in which the livestock may be detained in any cars or compartment without
food, water, and attention may be extended to 36 hours without penalty
therefor.  Division (A) of this section does not prevent the dehorning of
cattle.
   (C)   All fines collected for violations of division (A) of this section
shall be paid to the society or association for the prevention of cruelty to
animals, if there is one in the municipality; otherwise, all fines shall be
paid to the General Fund.
(ORC 959.13)
   (D)   Cruelty to Companion Animals.
      (1)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall
apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
         “Boarding kennel.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 956.01.
         “Captive white-tailed deer.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
1531.01.
         “Companion animal.” Any animal that is kept inside a residential
dwelling and any dog or cat regardless of where it is kept, including a pet
store as defined in Ohio R.C. 956.01. “Companion animal” does not include
livestock or any wild animal.
         “Cruelty.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 1717.01.
         “Dog kennel.” Means an animal rescue for dogs that is registered under
Ohio R.C. 956.06, a boarding kennel, or a training kennel.
         “Federal Animal Welfare Act.” The “Laboratory Animal Act of 1966",
Pub. L. No. 89-544, 80 Stat. 350 (1966), 7 U.S.C. §§ 2131 et seq., as amended
by the “Animal Welfare Act of 1970", Pub. L. No. 91-579, 84 Stat. 1560 (1970),
the “Animal Welfare Act Amendments of 1976", Pub. L. No. 94-279, 90 Stat. 417
(1976), and the “Food Security Act of 1985", Pub. L. No. 99-198, 99 Stat. 1354
(1985), and as it may be subsequently amended.
         “Livestock.” Means horses, mules, and other equidae; cattle, sheep,
goats, and other bovidae; swine and other suidae; poultry; alpacas; llamas;
captive white-tailed deer; and any other animal that is raised or maintained
domestically for food or fiber.
         “Practice of veterinary medicine.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 4741.01.
         “Residential dwelling.” A structure or shelter or the portion of a
structure or shelter that is used by one or more humans for the purpose of a
habitation.
         “Serious physical harm.” Means any of the following:
            1.   Physical harm that carries an unnecessary or unjustifiable
substantial risk of death;
            2.   Physical harm that involves either partial or total permanent
incapacity;
            3.   Physical harm that involves acute pain of a duration that
results in substantial suffering or that involves any degree of prolonged or
intractable pain;
            4.   Physical harm that results from a person who confines or who
is the custodian or caretaker of a companion animal depriving the companion
animal of good, wholesome food and water that proximately causes the death of
the companion animal.
         “Torment.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 1717.01.
         “Torture.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 1717.01.
         “Training kennel.” Means an establishment operating for profit that
keeps, houses, and maintains dogs for the purpose of training the dogs in
return for a fee or other consideration.
         “Wild animal.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 1531.01.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly torture, torment, needlessly mutilate or
maim, cruelly beat, poison, needlessly kill or commit an act of cruelty against
a companion animal.
      (3)   No person shall knowingly cause serious physical harm to a
companion animal.
      (4)   No person who confines or who is the custodian or caretaker of a
companion animal shall negligently do any of the following:
         (a)   Torture, torment, or commit an act of cruelty against the
companion animal;
         (b)   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance or confine
the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with
sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if it can reasonably be
expected that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way
as a result of or due to the deprivation or confinement;
         (c)   Impound or confine the companion animal without affording it,
during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold,
wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it can reasonably be expected
that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way as a
result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.
      (5)   No owner, manager, or employee of a dog kennel who confines or is
the custodian or caretaker of a companion animal shall knowingly do any of the
following:
         (a)   Torture, torment, needlessly mutilate or maim, cruelly beat,
poison, needlessly kill, or commit an act of cruelty against the companion
animal;
         (b)   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance or confine
the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with
sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if it is reasonably
expected that the companion animal would die or experience unnecessary or
unjustifiable pain or suffering as a result of the deprivation or confinement;
         (c)   Impound or confine the companion animal without affording it,
during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold,
wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it is reasonably expected
that the companion animal would die or experience unnecessary or unjustifiable
pain or suffering as a result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.
      (6)   No owner, manager, or employee of a dog kennel who confines or is
the custodian or caretaker of a companion animal shall negligently do any of
the following:
         (a)   Torture, torment, or commit an act of cruelty against the
companion animal;
         (b)   Deprive the companion animal of necessary sustenance or confine
the companion animal without supplying it during the confinement with
sufficient quantities of good, wholesome food and water if it can reasonably be
expected that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way
as a result of or due to the deprivation or confinement;
         (c)   Impound or confine the companion animal without affording it,
during the impoundment or confinement, with access to shelter from heat, cold,
wind, rain, snow, or excessive direct sunlight if it can reasonably be expected
that the companion animal would become sick or suffer in any other way as a
result of or due to the lack of adequate shelter.
      (7)   Divisions (D)(2), (D)(3), (D)(4), (D)(5), and (D)(6) of this
section do not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   A companion animal used in scientific research conducted by an
institution in accordance with the Federal Animal Welfare Act and related
regulations;
         (b)   The lawful practice of veterinary medicine by a person who has
been issued a license, temporary permit, or registration certificate to do so
under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4741;
         (c)   Dogs being used or intended for use for hunting or field trial
purposes, provided that the dogs are being treated in accordance with usual and
commonly accepted practices for the care of hunting dogs;
         (d)   The use of common training devices, if the companion animal is
being treated in accordance with usual and commonly accepted practices for the
training of animals;
         (e)   The administering of medicine to a companion animal that was
properly prescribed by a person who has been issued a license, temporary
permit, or registration certificate under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4741.
      (8)   Notwithstanding any section of the Ohio Revised Code that otherwise
provides for the distribution of fine moneys, the Clerk of Court shall forward
all fines the Clerk collects that are so imposed for any violation of this
division (D) to the Treasurer of the municipality, whose county humane society
or law enforcement agency is to be paid the fine money as determined under this
division. The Treasurer shall pay the fine moneys to the county humane society
or the county, township, municipal corporation, or state law enforcement agency
in this state that primarily was responsible for or involved in the
investigation and prosecution of the violation. If a county humane society
receives any fine moneys under this division, the county humane society shall
use the fine moneys either to provide the training that is required for humane
agents under section Ohio R.C. 1717.06 or to provide additional training for
humane agents.
(ORC 959.131)
   (E)   In addition to the penalty provided in §
202.99 for a violation of this section, the court may order the offender to
forfeit the animal or livestock and may provide for its disposition including,
but not limited to, the sale of the animal or livestock.  If an animal or
livestock is forfeited and sold pursuant to this division, the proceeds from
the sale first shall be applied to pay the expenses incurred with regard to the
care of the animal from the time it was taken from the custody of the former
owner.  The balance of the proceeds from the sale, if any, shall be paid to the
former owner of the animal.
§ 618.06  COLORING RABBITS AND BABY POULTRY; SALE OR DISPLAY OF POULTRY.
   No person shall dye or otherwise color any rabbit or baby poultry,
including, but not limited to, chicks and ducklings.  No person shall sell,
offer for sale, expose for sale, raffle or give away any rabbit or baby poultry
which has been dyed or otherwise colored.  No poultry younger than four weeks
of age may be sold, given away or otherwise distributed to any person in lots
of less than six.  Stores, shops, vendors and others offering young poultry for
sale or other distribution shall provide and operate brooders or other heating
devices that may be necessary to maintain poultry in good health, and shall
keep adequate food and water available to the poultry at all times.
(ORC 925.62)
§ 618.07  BARKING OR HOWLING DOGS; DESTRUCTION OF PROPERTY.
   No person shall keep or harbor within the city any dog which, by barking,
biting,  howling or in any way or manner, injures or disturbs the safety or
quiet of any other person, animal or fowl, or which destroys or damages any
lawn, tree, shrub, plant, garden, building or other property of another person.
(Ord. 294, passed 7-10-1950)
§ 618.08  REGISTRATION OF DOGS REQUIRED.
   No owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog more than three months of age, nor
owner of a dog kennel, shall fail to file an application for registration
required by Ohio R.C. 955.01, nor shall he or she fail to pay the legal fee
therefor.
(ORC 955.21)
§ 618.09  HINDERING CAPTURE OF UNREGISTERED DOG.
   No person shall obstruct or interfere with anyone lawfully engaged in
capturing an unlicensed dog or making an examination of a dog wearing a tag.
(ORC 955.24)
§ 618.095  DOGS REQUIRED TO WEAR TAGS.
   No owner of a dog, except a dog constantly confined to a dog kennel
registered under R.C. Chapter 955 or one licensed under R.C. Chapter 956, shall
fail to require the dog to wear, at all times, a valid tag issued in connection
with a certificate of registration. A dog found not wearing at any time a valid
tag shall be prima-facie evidence of lack of registration and shall subject any
dog found not wearing such a tag to impounding, sale, or destruction.
(ORC 955.10)
§ 618.10  UNLAWFUL TAGS.
   No person shall own, keep, or harbor a dog wearing a fictitious, altered, or
invalid registration tag or a registration tag not issued by the County Auditor
in connection with the registration of that animal.
(ORC 955.25)
§ 618.11  RABIES QUARANTINE.
   (A)   Animal Defined.  As used in this section, “animal” means any living
creature, domestic or wild.
   (B)   Quarantine of Biting Animal.  Any animal which bites or scratches a
person shall be immediately reported to the Municipal Environmental Maintenance
Specialist and shall thereupon be securely quarantined at the direction of the
Municipal Environmental Maintenance Specialist for a period of ten days and
shall not be released from such quarantine except by written permission of the
Municipal Environmental Maintenance Specialist or under his direction.  At the
discretion of the Municipal Environmental Maintenance Specialist, such
quarantine may be on the premises of the owner, at the shelter designated as
the City Pound or, at the owner’s option and expense, in a veterinary hospital
of his choice.  In the case of stray animals, or in the case of animals whose
ownership is not known, such quarantine shall be at the shelter designated as
the City Pound.
   (C)   Duty of Owner to Surrender Animal; Redemption.  The owner, upon demand
by the Municipal Environmental Maintenance Specialist, shall forthwith
surrender any animal which has bitten a human, or which is suspected as having
been exposed to rabies, for supervised quarantine, the expense of which shall
be borne by the owner.  The animal may be reclaimed by the owner if it is
adjudged free of rabies, upon payment of fees determined therefor by Council
from time to time.
   (D)   Imposition of Area-Wide Quarantine.  When a report indicates a
positive diagnosis of rabies, the Municipal Environmental Maintenance
Specialist may order an area-wide quarantine for a period of sixty days, and
upon the invoking of such quarantine no person shall take a pet animal into the
streets, or permit a pet animal to be in the streets, during such period of
quarantine.  During such quarantine, no person shall take or ship an animal
from the city without permission of the Municipal Environmental Maintenance
Specialist.
   (E)   Vaccination.  During an area-wide quarantine period and as long
thereafter as the Municipal Environmental Maintenance Specialist deems
necessary to prevent the spread of rabies, he may require that all dogs three
months of age and older shall be vaccinated against rabies.  All vaccinated
dogs shall be restricted by leashing or confinement on enclosed premises for
thirty days after vaccination.  During the quarantine period, the Municipal
Environmental Maintenance Specialist is hereby authorized to provide for a
program of mass immunization by the establishment of temporary emergency canine
rabies vaccination clinics strategically located throughout the area of health
jurisdiction.
   (F)   Redemption of Strays Restricted.  No animal which has been impounded,
by reason of its being a stray or unclaimed by its owner, shall be allowed to
be adopted from any animal shelter during the period of rabies emergency
quarantine, except by special authorization of the Municipal Environmental
Maintenance Specialist.
   (G)   Destruction and Isolation of Bitten Animals.  Animals bitten by a
known rabid animal shall be immediately destroyed or, if the owner is unwilling
to destroy the exposed animal, strict isolation of the animal in a kennel,
designated by the Municipal Environmental Maintenance Specialist, for six
months shall be enforced.  If the animal has been previously vaccinated, within
time limits established by the public health service based on the kind of
vaccination used, revaccination and restraint by leashing and confinement for
thirty days shall be carried out.
   (H)   Extension of Quarantine.  If there are additional cases of rabies
occurring during any period of area- wide quarantine, such period of quarantine
may be extended for an additional period of time.
   (I)   Destruction and Removal of Rabid Animals.  No person shall kill or
cause to be killed any rabid animal, any animal suspected of having been
exposed to rabies or any animal biting a human, except as herein provided, or
remove such animal from the city without written permission from the Municipal
Environmental Maintenance Specialist.
   (J)   Surrender of Carcass.  The carcass of any dead animal exposed to
rabies shall be surrendered to the Municipal Environmental Maintenance
Specialist upon demand.
   (K)   Failure to Obey Municipal Environmental Maintenance Specialist.  No
person shall fail or refuse to surrender any animal for quarantine or
destruction as required herein when demand is made therefor by the Municipal
Environmental Maintenance Specialist.
   (L)   Report of Bite Cases.  It shall be the duty of every physician or
other medical practitioner to report to the Municipal Environmental Maintenance
Specialist the names and addresses of persons treated for bites inflicted by
animals, together with such other information as will be helpful in rabies
control.
   (M)   Report of Suspected Cases.  It shall be the duty of every licensed
veterinarian to report to the Municipal Environmental Maintenance Specialist
any animal considered by him to be a rabies suspect.
(Ord. 55-92, passed 6-15-1992)
§ 618.115  RABIES VACCINATION OF DOGS AND CATS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any person owning, keeping or harboring any dog or cat over the age of
three months shall be required to have such animal currently immunized against
rabies by a licensed veterinarian.
   (B)   All owners or keepers as described in division (A) of this section
shall maintain a record of such immunization as provided by a veterinarian and
shall provide said proof of immunization to any person so inquiring.
(Ord. 153-97, passed 10-6-1997)
§ 618.12  HUNTING PROHIBITED.
   (A)   The hunting of animals or fowl within the municipality is prohibited. 
No person shall hunt, kill or attempt to kill any animal or fowl by the use of
firearms or any other means, except as follows:
      (1)   The limited hunting of white-tailed deer by crossbow or long bow
may be permitted within the city under the following terms and conditions:
         (a)   The Mayor or his designated representative may, in his sole
discretion, issue a Municipal Deer Control Permit to a qualified archer
applicant as a corollary to and following the issuance by the ODNR of its own
Deer Damage Control Permit to allow only bow-hunting (long bow and crossbow) of
white-tailed deer;
         (b)   The permit is limited to areas of not less than five contiguous
acres by state-licensed hunters proficient in the use of bow and arrow, on such
forms and subject to such rules and regulations as the Mayor or his designated
representative may prescribe;
         (c)   Hunting shall be conducted from an elevated platform only;
         (d)   Written permission from the property owner(s) has been obtained;
         (e)   Qualified archer shall be defined as an individual having
obtained an approval/certification from an approved archery proficiency test
site, a valid Ohio hunting license, if applicable, and all other state
requirements;
         (f)   Compliance with all laws, rules and regulations of the city and
state is required;
         (g)   All applicants shall agree, in writing, to defend and indemnify
the city for any negligent acts committed by the applicant;
         (h)   Any other requirements as deemed necessary to preserve and
protect the health, safety and welfare of the residents as determined solely by
the Mayor or his designated representative;
         (i)   The Mayor or his designated representative is hereby authorized
to promulgate any and all rules and regulations necessary to carry out the
provision of this section and all other rules and regulations necessary to
insure public health and safety;
         (j)   Nothing in this section shall be deemed to prohibit the killing
of rats and other undesirable rodents authorized to be killed by the Mayor or
his designated representative using means for such killing which are also
authorized by the Mayor or his designated representative.
   (B)   Whoever violates any provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be subject to the penalty provided in
§
202.99.
(Ord. 23-15, passed 12-7-2015; Ord. 32-16, passed 6-6-2016)
§ 618.13  NUISANCE CONDITIONS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall keep or harbor any animal, livestock or poultry in the
municipality so as to create offensive odors or unsanitary conditions.
   (B)   No person owning, keeping or harboring any animal, livestock or
poultry shall permit such animal, livestock or poultry to dig, urinate,
defecate or otherwise damage any public property or private property other than
the sublot or parcel owned or occupied by such owner, keeper or harborer. 
However, this prohibition shall not apply to private property onto which such
owner, keeper or harborer has the permission of the owner of such private
property to walk such animal, livestock or poultry, so long as the person
owning, keeping or harboring such animal, livestock or poultry immediately
removes all feces deposited by such animal, livestock or poultry and disposes
of the same in a sanitary manner.
   (C)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be subject to the penalty provided in
§
202.99.
(Ord. 45-84, passed 7-16-1984)
§ 618.14  IMPOUNDING AND DISPOSITION; REDEMPTION.
   (A)   Duty of Municipal Environmental Maintenance Specialist.  It shall be
the duty of the Municipal Environmental Maintenance Specialist to seize and
impound, subject to the provisions of this chapter, all dogs found in violation
of any of the provisions of this chapter within the city, whether such a dog is
in the immediate presence of its owner or custodian or otherwise.
   (B)   Right of Entry.  The Municipal Environmental Maintenance Specialist is
hereby authorized to enter upon any unfenced lot, tract or parcel of land for
the purpose of seizing and impounding any dog found thereon in violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter.
   (C)   Registry.  The Municipal Environmental Maintenance Specialist shall,
upon receiving any dog, make a complete registry entering the breed, color and
sex of such dog, the time of taking it into custody and, if licensed, the name
and address of the owner of such dog and the number of the license and tag.
   (D)   Time for Redemption.  All impounded dogs shall be redeemed within five
days after they are impounded.  Any dog not redeemed within such time may be
sold, destroyed or otherwise disposed of.
   (E)   Right to Redeem.  The owner of any dog which has been impounded under
the provisions of this chapter shall have the right to redeem the same upon
payment of any and all fees which may be due and payable for the impoundment of
such dog, provided, however, that the payment of the impoundment fees shall not
bar the imposition of any fine which may be imposed for a violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter. 
   (F)   Fees.
      (1)   Prior to redeeming an animal, the owner or purchaser shall pay a
base fee of $15 for the impoundment of any animal under the provisions of this
chapter.
      (2)   Whenever any animal is impounded, an additional fee of $10 shall be
charged for each day or fraction thereof of impoundment for the care and
feeding of such animal.
 
   (G)   Redemption by Person Other Than Owner. If the owner of any dog
impounded under this chapter fails to redeem his dog within the time allowed
for redemption, any other person may, upon complying with all provisions of
this chapter, redeem such dog from the pound and be the lawful owner of such
dog thereafter.
(Ord. 21-68, passed 5-6-1968; Ord. 55-92, passed 6-15-1992; Ord. 119-95, passed
8-21-1995)
§ 618.15  DANGEROUS, WILD AND UNDOMESTICATED ANIMALS OR PETS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall harbor, maintain or control a wild, dangerous or
undomesticated animal within the city.
   (B)   A wild, dangerous or undomesticated animal is an animal that is not an
ordinary household pet and that would be ordinarily confined to a zoo, farm or
the wilderness, or that otherwise causes fear or offensive odors or noises to
the general public.
(Ord. 93-78, passed 11-6-1978)
§ 618.16  EQUINES.
   (A)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      “At large” means any horse, mule, donkey, jackass and/or pony that is off
the premises of its owner and not under the control of a competent person.
      “Owner” means any person, group of persons or corporation owning, keeping
and/or harboring horses, mules, donkeys, jackasses and/or ponies.
      “Stable” means any barn, building or other structure used for the
keeping, housing or feeding of horses, mules, donkeys, jackasses and/or ponies.
   (B)   Stable Required.  A stable shall be required on any premises where
horses, mules, donkeys, jackasses and/or ponies are kept, permitted, allowed,
boarded or harbored.
   (C)   Land and Area Required.  No person shall keep, maintain, permit, allow
or board horses, mules, donkeys, jackasses and/or ponies in any residential
district, except, however, that one such animal may be kept upon property
containing at least two acres, and two such animals may be kept upon property
containing five acres, other than any such animal under six months of age.
However, if the stable used for keeping or harboring such animals has a hard
surface floor equipped with a sanitary sewer drain connected to a public
sanitary sewer and has a city water supply to permit maintenance of required
sanitary conditions, then the minimum land area required for one such animal
shall be two acres and for each additional such animal not less than one acre.
   (D)   Location of Stable.  A stable shall be located on the rear portion of
a lot as an accessory use to a dwelling and shall be located not less than:
      (1)   One hundred twenty-five feet from any neighbor’s dwelling;
      (2)   Thirty-five feet from any lot line;
      (3)   Fifty feet from a drilled well; and
      (4)   Three hundred feet from a dug well.
   (E)   Sanitary Regulations.
      (1)   All stables and yards where horses, mules, donkeys, jackasses and/
or ponies are kept shall be kept in a sanitary condition, and the bedding,
manure and waste materials accumulated from such animals shall be kept in a
covered container or pit. All stables and yards shall be kept clean and in good
repair so as to prevent the breeding of flies and the emission of deleterious
and offensive odors.
      (2)   The Building Commissioner or his duly authorized representative is
hereby authorized to enter upon and inspect any premises to determine whether
the construction or erection of any stable and the keeping of any horse, mule,
donkey, jackass and/or pony on such premises are in compliance with this
section. If he determines that any provision of this section is being violated,
he shall issue a citation therefor to the owner, tenant or occupant of such
premises.
   (F)   Animals at Large.  No person shall permit a horse, mule, donkey,
jackass and/or pony to be at large off the premises of the owner.
   (G)   Riding or Walking on City or Private Sidewalks Prohibited.  No person
shall ride or walk a horse, mule, donkey, jackass and/or pony upon city or
private sidewalks.
(Ord. 41-74, passed 5-6-1974)
§ 618.17  STEEL-JAWED TRAP.
   No person shall use, employ or set a leghold, steel-jawed trap in the
municipality.
(Ord. 22-81, passed 4-6-1981)
§ 618.18  REPORTING ESCAPES.
   (A)   The owner or keeper of any member of a species of the animal kingdom
that escapes from his or her custody or control and that is not indigenous to
this state or presents a risk of serious physical harm to persons or property,
or both, shall, within one hour after he or she discovers or reasonably should
have discovered the escape, report it to:
      (1)   A law enforcement officer of the municipality and the County
Sheriff; and
      (2)   The Clerk of Council.
   (B)   If the office of the Clerk of Council is closed to the public at the
time a report is required by division (A) of this section, it is sufficient
compliance with division (A)(2) of this section if the owner or keeper makes
the report within one hour after the office is next open to the public.
§ 618.19  DANGEROUS AND VICIOUS DOGS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      “Dangerous dog.”  A dog that, without provocation, and subject to the
following sentence, has chased or approached in either a menacing fashion or an
apparent attitude of attack, or has attempted to bite or otherwise endanger any
person while that dog is off the premises of its owner, keeper or harborer or
some other responsible person, or not physically restrained or confined in a
locked pen which has a top, locked fenced yard, or other locked enclosure which
has a top.  “Dangerous dog” does not include a police dog that has chased or
approached in either a menacing fashion or an apparent attitude of attack, or
has attempted to bite or otherwise endanger any person while the police dog is
being used to assist law enforcement officers in the performance of their
official duties.
      “Menacing fashion.”  A dog that would cause any person being chased or
approached to reasonably believe that the dog will cause physical injury to
that person.
      “Police dog.”  A dog that has been trained and may be used to assist one
or more law enforcement officers in the performance of their official duties.
      “Vicious dog.”
         (a)   A dog that, without provocation and subject to division (b) of
this definition, meets any of the following criteria:
            1.   Has killed or caused serious injury to any person;
            2.   Has caused injury, other than killing or serious injury, to
any person, or has killed another dog;
            3.   Belongs to a breed that is commonly known as a pit bull dog. 
The ownership, keeping, or harboring of such a breed of dog shall be prima
facie evidence of the ownership, keeping or harboring of a vicious dog.
         (b)   “Vicious dog” does not include either of the following:
            1.   A police dog that has killed or caused serious injury to any
person or that has caused injury, other than killing or serious injury, to any
person while the police dog is being used to assist law enforcement officers in
the performance of their official duties.
            2.   A dog that has killed or caused serious injury to any person
while a person was committing or attempting to commit a trespass or other
criminal offense on the property of the owner, keeper or harborer of the dog.
      “Without provocation.” A dog acts “without provocation” when it was not
teased, tormented, or abused by a person, or it was not coming to the aid or
the defense of a person who was not engaged in illegal or criminal activity and
who was not using the dog as a means of carrying out such activity.
(ORC 955.11(A))
   (B)   A person who is the owner or has charge of any animal shall not permit
it to run at large in the public road, highway, street, lane, or alley, or upon
unenclosed land, or permit them to go upon any private yard, lot, or enclosure
without the consent of the owner of the yard, lot, or enclosure.
   (C)   No person shall cause animals to be herded, kept, or detained for the
purpose of grazing on premises other than those owned or occupied by the owner
or keeper thereof without the consent of the owner of the premises.
   (D)   The running at large of such animal in or upon any of the places
mentioned in divisions (B) and (C) above is prima facie evidence that it is
running at large in violation of this section.
(ORC 951.01, 951.02)
   (E)   No owner, keeper, or harborer of any female dog shall permit it to go
beyond the premises of the owner, keeper, or harborer at any time the dog is in
heat unless the dog is properly in leash.
   (F)   Except when a dog is lawfully engaged in hunting and accompanied by
the owner, keeper, harborer, or handler of the dog, no owner, keeper, or
harborer of any dog shall fail at any time to do either of the following:
      (1)   Keep the dog physically confined or restrained upon the premises of
the owner, keeper, or harborer by a leash, tether, adequate fence, supervision,
or secure enclosure to prevent escape;
      (2)   Keep the dog under the reasonable control of some person.
   (G)   Except when a dangerous or vicious dog is lawfully engaged in hunting
or training for the purpose of hunting and is accompanied by the owner, keeper,
harborer, or handler of the dog, no owner, keeper, or harborer of a dangerous
or vicious dog shall fail to do either of the following:
      (1)   While the dog is on the premises of the owner, keeper, or harborer,
securely confine it at all times in a locked pen that has a top, locked fenced
yard, or other locked enclosure that has a top, except that a dangerous dog
may, in the alternative, be tied with a leash or tether so that the dog is
adequately restrained.
      (2)   While the dog is off the premises of the owner, keeper, or
harborer, keep that dog on a chain- link leash or tether that is not more than
six feet in length and additionally do at least one of the following:  keep the
dog in a locked pen that has a top, locked fenced yard, or other locked
enclosure that has a top;  have the leash or tether controlled by a person who
is of suitable age and discretion or securely attach, tie, or affix the leash
or tether to the ground or a stationary object or fixture so that the dog is
adequately restrained and station a person in close enough proximity to that
dog so as to prevent it from causing injury to any person; or muzzle that dog.
   (H)   No owner, keeper, or harborer of a vicious dog shall fail to obtain
liability insurance with an insurer authorized to write liability insurance in
this state providing coverage in each occurrence, subject to a limit, exclusive
of interest and costs, of not less than $100,000 because of damage or bodily
injury to or death of a person caused by the vicious dog.
   (I)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Debark or surgically silence a dog that the person knows or has
reason to believe is a vicious dog;
      (2)   Possess a vicious dog if the person knows or has reason to believe
that the dog has been debarked or surgically silenced;
      (3)   Falsely attest on a waiver form provided by the veterinarian under
division (J) of this section that the person’s dog is not a vicious dog or
otherwise provide false information on that written waiver form.
   (J)   Before a veterinarian debarks or surgically silences a dog, the
veterinarian may give the owner of the dog a written waiver form that attests
that the dog is not a vicious dog.  The written waiver form shall include all
of the following:
      (1)   The veterinarian’s license number and current business address;
      (2)   The number of the license of the dog if the dog is licensed;
      (3)   A reasonable description of the age, coloring, and gender of the
dog as well as any notable markings on the dog;
      (4)   The signature of the owner of the dog attesting that the owner’s
dog is not a vicious dog;
      (5)   A statement that division (F) of Ohio R.C. 955.22 prohibits any
person from doing any of the following:
         (a)   Debarking or surgically silencing a dog that the person knows or
has reason to believe is a vicious dog;
         (b)   Possessing a vicious dog if the person knows or has reason to
believe that the dog has been debarked or surgically silenced;
         (c)   Falsely attesting on a waiver form provided by the veterinarian
under division (G) of Ohio R.C. 955.22 that the person’s dog is not a vicious
dog or otherwise provide false information on that written waiver form.
   (K)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of a violation of division
(I) of this section that the veterinarian who is charged with the violation
obtained, prior to debarking or surgically silencing the dog, a written waiver
form that complies with division (J) of this section and that attests that the
dog is not a vicious dog.
(ORC 955.22)
   (L)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree. In addition, if the offender is guilty of a violation of division (E)
or (F) of this section, the court may order the offender to personally
supervise the dog that the offender owns, keeps, or harbors, to cause that dog
to complete dog obedience training, or to do both.
   (M)   (1)   If a violation of division (G) of this section involves a
dangerous dog, then, in addition to the penalty provided in §
202.99, the court may order the offender to personally supervise the dangerous
dog that the offender owns, keeps, or harbors, to cause that dog to complete
dog obedience training, or to do both, and the court may order the offender to
obtain liability insurance pursuant to division (H) of this section.  The
court, in the alternative, may order the dangerous dog to be humanely destroyed
by a licensed veterinarian, the county dog warden, or the county humane
society.
      (2)   If a violation of division (G) of this section involves a vicious
dog, whoever violates that division (G) is guilty of one of the following:
         (a)   A felony, to be prosecuted under appropriate state law, on a
first or subsequent offense if the dog kills or seriously injures a person.
Additionally, the court shall order that the vicious dog be humanely destroyed
by a licensed veterinarian, the county dog warden, or the county humane
society.
         (b)   A misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense and a
felony, to be prosecuted under appropriate state law, on each subsequent
offense. Additionally, the court may order the vicious dog to be humanely
destroyed by a licensed veterinarian, the county dog warden, or the county
humane society.
         (c)   A misdemeanor of the first degree if the dog causes injury,
other than killing or serious injury, to a person.
   (N)   Whoever violates division (I) of this section is guilty of a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  Additionally, the court shall order
that the vicious dog be humanely destroyed by as licensed veterinarian, the
County Dog Warden, or the County Humane Society.
(ORC 955.99(E) - (H), (J))
§ 618.20  FEEDING WILDLIFE AND STRAY ANIMALS PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person shall provide food for dogs, cats, deer, geese, ducks,
raccoons, fowl or other wild animals or wildlife by setting such food out on
any public property or within a 150-yard radius of any private residence or
public roadway. This section does not apply to animals owned by the person or
to songbirds fed from a stationary bird feeder.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor for the
first offense and a fourth degree misdemeanor for a second or subsequent
offense. Penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99 of these Codified Ordinances.
(Ord. 148-05, passed 12-19-2005)
§ 618.21  SEXUAL CONDUCT WITH AN ANIMAL.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Animal.” Means a nonhuman mammal, bird, reptile, or amphibian,
either dead or alive.
      (2)   “Offense.” Means a violation of this section or an attempt, in
violation of R.C. § 2923.02, to violate this section.
      (3)   “Officer.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 959.132.
      (4)   “Sexual conduct.” Means either of the following committed for the
purpose of sexual gratification:
         (a)   Any act done between a person and animal that involves contact
of the penis of one and the vulva of the other, the penis of one and the penis
of the other, the penis of one and the anus of the other, the mouth of one and
the penis of the other, the mouth of one and the anus of the other, the vulva
of one and the vulva of the other, the mouth of one and the vulva of the other,
any other contact between a reproductive organ of one and a reproductive organ
of the other, or any other insertion of a reproductive organ of one into an
orifice of the other;
         (b)   Without a bona fide veterinary or animal husbandry purpose to do
so, the insertion, however slight, of any part of a person’s body or any
instrument, apparatus, or other object into the vaginal, anal, or reproductive
opening of an animal.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly engage in sexual conduct with an animal or
knowingly possess, sell, or purchase an animal with the intent that it be
subjected to sexual conduct.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly organize, promote, aid, or abet in the
conduct of an act involving any sexual conduct with an animal.
   (D)   An officer may seize and cause to be impounded at an impounding agency
an animal that the officer has probable cause to believe is the subject of an
offense. With respect to an animal so seized and impounded, all procedures and
requirements that are established in R.C. § 959.132, and all other provisions
of that section, apply to the seizure, impoundment, and disposition of the
animal. References in R.C. § 959.132 to “section 959.131 of the Revised Code,”
“companion animal,” and “offense” shall be construed, respectively, as being
references to “§ 618.17 of this Code” and to “animal” and “offense” as defined
in this section, for purposes of application under this section only.
(ORC 959.21)
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the
second degree. In addition, the court may order the offender to forfeit the
animal or livestock and may provide for its disposition including but not
limited to the sale of the animal or livestock. If an animal or livestock is
forfeited and sold pursuant to this division, the proceeds from the sale first
shall be applied to pay the expenses incurred with regard to the care of the
animal from the time it was taken from the custody of the former owner. The
balance of the proceeds from the sale, if any, shall be paid to the former
owner of the animal.
(ORC 959.99(D))
      (2)   If a court has reason to believe that a person who is convicted of
or pleads guilty to a violation of this section suffers from a mental or
emotional disorder that contributed to the violation, the court may impose as a
community control sanction or as a condition of probation a requirement that
the offender undergo psychological evaluation or counseling. The court shall
order the offender to pay the costs of the evaluation or counseling.
(ORC 959.99(E)(7))
§ 618.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 620:  COSTS OF EMERGENCY ACTION
Section
620.01   Purposes
620.02   Definitions
620.03   Liability for expenses
620.04   Services of other governmental bodies or parties
620.05   Records; schedule of charges; payment
Cross-reference:
   Burning of hazardous wastes, see §
660.085
   Traffic direction during emergencies, see §
404.06
Statutory reference:
   Liability for costs of dealing with unauthorized spill, release or
discharge, see Ohio R.C. 3745.13
§ 620.01  PURPOSES.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for compensation to the city for
costs incurred in investigating, mitigating, minimizing, removing or abating
unauthorized spills, releases or discharges of materials into or upon the
environment within the territorial jurisdiction or responsibility of the city,
which spills, releases or discharges require emergency action to protect the
public health or safety or the environment.
(Ord. 101-90, passed 7-23-1990)
§ 620.02  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   “Common carrier by motor vehicle” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
4919.75(E) or 4912.02(A), as appropriate.
   “Contract carrier by motor vehicle” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
4919.75(F) or 4923.02(A), as appropriate.
   “Costs” includes, but is not limited to, all direct and incidental costs,
including personnel costs, incurred by or on behalf of the city in connection
with the investigation, mitigation, minimization, removal or abatement of an
unauthorized spill, release or discharge, which costs are incurred while:
      (1)   Operating any vehicle, apparatus or equipment used in connection
with any such incident;
      (2)   Sanitizing, cleaning and/or repairing any vehicle, apparatus,
equipment or apparel used in connection with any such incident;
      (3)   Testing any spilled, released or discharged material, or any
vehicle, apparatus, equipment or apparel used in connection with any such
incident;
      (4)   Storing any spilled, released or discharged material;
      (5)   Disposing of any spilled, released or discharged material, or any
vehicle, apparatus, equipment, apparel or goods rendered unusable as a result
of any such incident;
      (6)   Replacing any vehicle, apparatus, equipment, apparel or goods lost
or rendered unusable as a result of any such incident; and any costs incurred
by a private party or governmental body or subdivision thereof, whose
assistance is requested by the city in the event of an unauthorized spill,
release or discharge, and who submits a written invoice to the city setting
forth the costs incurred in responding to the incident.
   “Material” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3745.13, and any regulations
promulgated or matters decided thereunder, as appropriate.
   “Motor vehicle” means any automobile, truck, tractor, trailer, semitrailer,
motorbus or other self- propelled vehicle not operated or driven on fixed
tracks.
   “Private motor carrier” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4923.02.
   “Railroad” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4907.02.
   “Unauthorized spill, release or discharge” has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. Chapter 3745, and any regulations promulgated or matters decided
thereunder, and includes but is not limited to any spilling, leaking, pumping,
pouring, emitting, emptying, discharging, releasing, injecting, escaping,
leaching, dumping or disposing of any material into or upon the environment,
which may endanger the public health or safety or the environment.
“Unauthorized spill, release or discharge” does not include any spill, release
or discharge that is in compliance with Ohio R.C. Chap. 1509, 3704, 3734 or
6111, and rules adopted thereunder, or the terms and conditions of a current
and valid permit or license.
(Ord. 101-90, passed 7-23-1990)
§ 620.03  LIABILITY FOR EXPENSES.
   (A)   Any person responsible for causing or allowing an unauthorized spill,
release or discharge of material into or upon the environment is liable to the
city for disaster services rendered and all incidental and related costs. The
costs shall be paid by the person or entity responsible for causing or allowing
the unauthorized spill, release or discharge of materials into or upon the
environment that requires emergency action to protect the public health or
safety or the environment.
   (B)   If an unauthorized spill, release or discharge occurs from a motor
vehicle or train being operated by or on behalf of a common carrier by motor
vehicle, contract carrier by motor vehicle, private motor carrier or railroad,
a claim or civil action shall be submitted to or brought against, as
appropriate, and the costs of the emergency action shall be recovered from the
motor carrier or railroad, regardless of whether or not the motor carrier or
railroad was responsible for causing or allowing the unauthorized spill,
release or discharge to occur.
   (C)   Costs recoverable under this chapter shall accrue, commencing with the
first notification to the city of an incident which involves, may involve or
subsequently proves to involve an unauthorized spill, release or discharge.
(Ord. 101-90, passed 7-23-1990)
§ 620.04  SERVICES OF OTHER GOVERNMENTAL BODIES OR PARTIES.
   (A)   The Fire Chief or his or her designated officers or fire fighters may
request the assistance of any other governmental body, agency or division
thereof in the event of an unauthorized spill, release or discharge at a
location within the territorial jurisdiction or responsibility of the city.
   (B)   The Fire Chief or his or her designated officers or fire fighters may
request the assistance of any expert, consultant or contractor in the event of
an unauthorized spill, release or discharge at a location within the
territorial jurisdiction or responsibility of the city.
(Ord. 101-90, passed 7-23-1990)
§ 620.05  RECORDS; SCHEDULE OF CHARGES; PAYMENT.
   (A)   The Fire Chief or his or her designated representative shall keep a
record of the city’s costs for investigating, mitigating, minimizing, removing
or abating an unauthorized spill, release or discharge, including any
incidental costs. A schedule of charges used to determine such costs shall be
kept on file in the Fire Department and made available for inspection by the
public during normal working hours. Such schedule shall be revised annually to
reflect an increase of four percent in the value of the items listed. The Fire
Chief or his or her designated representative shall formally notify the Law
Director of any unpaid claims hereunder.
   (B)   Not less than thirty days before bringing civil action for the
recovery costs pursuant to this section and Ohio R.C. 3745.13, the Law Director
shall prepare and submit to the responsible party a written itemized claim for
the total certified costs incurred by the city and a written notice that,
unless the amount is paid to the city within the thirty days after the date of
mailing of the claim and notice, the Law Director shall bring a civil action
for that amount.
(Ord. 101-90, passed 7-23-1990)
CHAPTER 624:  DRUGS
Section
624.01   Definitions
624.02   Trafficking in controlled substances; gift of marihuana
624.025   Cultivation of marihuana
624.03   Drug possession offenses
624.04   Possession of drug abuse instruments
624.05   Permitting drug abuse
624.07   Abusing harmful intoxicants
624.073   Improperly dispensing or distributing nitrous oxide
624.076   Possessing nitrous oxide in motor vehicles
624.08   Illegal dispensing of drug samples
624.09   Possession, sale and disposal of hypodermics
624.10   Evidence
624.11   Double jeopardy
624.12   Controlled substance schedules
624.13   Controlled substance or  prescription labels
624.14   Use or possession of paraphernalia
624.15   Counterfeit controlled substances
624.16   Pseudoephedrine sales
624.17   Sale of pure caffeine product
624.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Alcoholic beverages, see
Chapter 612
   Disorderly conduct while voluntarily intoxicated, see §
648.04
   Driving or physical control while under the influence, see §
434.01
   Effect of voluntary intoxication on criminal liability, see §
606.07
   Intoxicated pedestrians, see §
416.10
   Mandatory Drug Fine Fund, see §
236.12
   Placing harmful substance or objects in food or confection, see §
636.16
   Using weapons while intoxicated, see §
672.03
Statutory reference:
   Treatment of drug dependent persons in lieu of conviction, see Ohio R.C.
2951.041
§ 624.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.  Words,
terms and phrases and their derivatives used in this chapter which are not
defined in this section shall have the meanings given to them in the Ohio
Revised Code.
   “Administer.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   “Adulterate.” To cause a drug to be adulterated as described in R.C. §
3715.63.
   “Bulk amount.” Of a controlled substance, means any of the following:
      (1)   For any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in
Schedule I, Schedule II, or Schedule III, with the exception of any controlled
substance analog, marihuana, cocaine, L.S.D., heroin, any fentanyl-related
compound, and hashish and except as provided in division (2), (5), or (6) of
this definition, whichever of the following is applicable:
         (a)   An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams or 25 unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of a
Schedule I opiate or opium derivative;
         (b)   An amount equal to or exceeding ten grams of a compound,
mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of raw or gum
opium;
         (c)   An amount equal to or exceeding 30 grams or ten unit doses of a
compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of a
Schedule I hallucinogen other than tetrahydrocannabinol or lysergic acid amide,
or a Schedule I stimulant or depressant;
         (d)   An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or five times the
maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II opiate or opium
derivative;
         (e)   An amount equal to or exceeding five grams or ten unit doses of
a compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of
phencyclidine;
         (f)   An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30 times the
maximum daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard
pharmaceutical reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation or
substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule II stimulant that is in
a final dosage form manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food,
Drug and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended) and the federal
drug abuse control laws, as defined in this section, that is or contains any
amount of a Schedule II depressant substance or a Schedule II hallucinogenic
substance;
         (g)   An amount equal to or exceeding three grams of a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is or contains any amount of a Schedule
II stimulant, or any of its salts or isomers, that is not in a final dosage
form manufactured by a person authorized by the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic
Act (21 U.S.C. §§ 301 et seq., as amended) and the federal drug abuse control
laws;
      (2)   An amount equal to or exceeding 120 grams or 30 times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III or IV substance other than an anabolic
steroid or a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative;
2020 S-1
89   Drugs   § 624.01
      (3)   An amount equal to or exceeding 20 grams or five times the maximum
daily dose in the usual dose range specified in a standard pharmaceutical
reference manual of a compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III opiate or opium derivative;
      (4)   An amount equal to or exceeding 250 milliliters or 250 grams of a
compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or contains any amount of a
Schedule V substance;
      (5)   An amount equal to or exceeding 200 solid dosage units, 16 grams,
or 16 milliliters of a compound, mixture, preparation or substance that is or
contains any amount of a Schedule III anabolic steroid;
      (6)   For any compound, mixture, preparation, or substance that is a
combination of a fentanyl-related compound and any other compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V,
if the defendant is charged with a violation of R.C. § 2925.11 and the
sentencing provisions set forth in R.C. § 2925.11(C)(10)(b) and (C)(11) will
not apply regarding the defendant and the violation, the bulk amount of the
controlled substance for purposes of the violation is the amount specified in
division (1), (2), (3), (4), or (5) of this definition for the other Schedule
III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V controlled substance that is combined with the
fentanyl-related compound.
   “Certified grievance committee.” A duly constituted and organized committee
of the Ohio State Bar Association or of one or more local bar associations of
the state that complies with the criteria set forth in Rule V, Section 6 of the
Rules for the Government of the Bar of Ohio.
   “Cocaine.” Any of the following:
      (1)   A cocaine salt, isomer or derivative, a salt of a cocaine isomer or
derivative, or the base form of cocaine.
      (2)   Coca leaves or a salt, compound, derivative or preparation of coca
leaves, including ecgonine, a salt, isomer or derivative of ecgonine, or a salt
of an isomer or derivative of ecgonine.
      (3)   A salt, compound, derivative or preparation of a substance
identified in division (1) or (2) of this definition that is chemically
equivalent to or identical with any of those substances, except that the
substances shall not include decocainized coca leaves or extraction of coca
leaves if the extractions do not contain cocaine or ecgonine.
   “Committed in the vicinity of a juvenile.” An offense is “committed in the
vicinity of a juvenile” if the offender commits the offense within 100 feet of
a juvenile or within the view of a juvenile, regardless of whether the offender
knows the age of the juvenile, whether the offender knows the offense is being
committed within 100 feet of or within view of the juvenile, or whether the
juvenile actually views the commission of the offense.
   “Committed in the vicinity of a school.” An offense is “committed in the
vicinity of a school” if the offender commits the offense on school premises,
in a school building, or within 1,000 feet of the boundaries
2020 S-1
§ 624.01   Broadview Heights - General Offenses   90
of any school premises, regardless of whether the offender knows the offense is
being committed on school premises, in a school building, or within 1,000 feet
of the boundaries of any school premises.
   “Controlled substance.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   “Controlled substance analog.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   “Counterfeit controlled substance.” Any of the following:
      (1)   Any drug that bears, or whose container or label bears, a
trademark, trade name or other identifying mark used without authorization of
the owner of rights to the trademark, trade name or identifying mark.
      (2)   Any unmarked or unlabeled substance that is represented to be a
controlled substance manufactured, processed, packed or distributed by a person
other than the person that manufactured, processed, packed or distributed it.
      (3)   Any substance that is represented to be a controlled substance but
is not a controlled substance or is a different controlled substance.
      (4)   Any substance other than a controlled substance that a reasonable
person would believe to be a controlled substance because of its similarity in
shape, size and color, or its markings, labeling, packaging, distribution or
the price for which it is sold or offered for sale.
   “Cultivate.” Includes planting, watering, fertilizing or tilling.
   “Dangerous drug.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   “Deception.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2913.01.
   “Disciplinary counsel.” The disciplinary counsel appointed by the Board of
Commissioners on Grievances and Discipline of the Ohio Supreme Court under the
Rules for the Government of the Bar of Ohio.
   “Dispense.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   “Distribute.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   “Drug.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   “Drug abuse offense.” Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2913.02(A) that constitutes theft of drugs,
or any violation of R.C. § 2925.02, 2925.03, 2925.04, 2925.041, 2925.05,
2925.06, 2925.11, 2925.12, 2925.13, 2925.22, 2925.23, 2925.24, 2925.31,
2925.32, 2925.36 or 2925.37.
2020 S-1
91   Drugs   § 624.01
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former law of any municipality, state
or of the United States, that is substantially equivalent to any section listed
in division (1) of this definition.
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former law of any municipality,
state or of the United States, of which planting, cultivating, harvesting,
processing, making, manufacturing, producing, shipping, transporting,
delivering, acquiring, possessing, storing, distributing, dispensing, selling,
inducing another to use, administering to another, using or otherwise dealing
with a controlled substance is an element.
      (4)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing or attempting to commit, any offense under division (1), (2) or (3)
of this definition.
   “Drug dependent person.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.011.
   “Drug of abuse.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.011.
   “Felony drug abuse offense.” Any drug abuse offense that would constitute a
felony under the laws of this state, any other state or the United States.
   “Fentanyl-related compound.” Any of the following:
      (1)   Fentanyl;
      (2)   Alpha-methylfentanyl (N-[1-(alpha-methyl-beta-phenyl)ethyl-4-
piperidyl] propionanilide; 1-(1-methyl-2-phenylethyl)-4-(N-propanilido)
piperidine);
      (3)   Alpha-methylthiofentanyl (N-[1-methyl-2-(2-thienyl)ethyl-4-
piperidinyl]-N- phenylpropanamide);
      (4)   Beta-hydroxyfentanyl (N-[1-(2-hydroxy-2-phenethyl-4-piperidinyl]-N-
phenylpropanamide);
      (5)   Beta-hydroxy-3-methylfentanyl (other name: N-[1-(2-hydroxy-2-
phenethyl)-3- methyl-4-piperidinyl]-N-phenylpropanamide);
      (6)   3-methylfentanyl (N-[3-methyl-1-(2-phenylethyl)-4-piperidyl]-N-
phenylpropanamide);
      (7)   3-methylthiofentanyl (N-[3-methyl-1-[2-(thienyl)ethyl]-4-
piperidinyl]-N- phenylpropanamide);
      (8)   Para-fluorofentanyl (N-(4-fluorophenyl)-N-[1-(2-phenethyl)-4-
piperidinyl]propanamide;
      (9)   Thiofentanyl (N-phenyl-N-[1-(2-thienyl)ethyl-4-piperidinyl]-
propanamide;
      (10)   Alfentanil;
      (11)   Carfentanil;
2020 S-1
§ 624.01   Broadview Heights - General Offenses   92
      (12)   Remifentanil;
      (13)   Sufentanil;
      (14)   Acetyl-alpha-methylfentanyl (N-[1-(1-methyl-2-phenethyl)-4-
piperidinyl]-N- phenylacetamide); and
      (15)   Any compound that meets all of the following fentanyl
pharmacophore requirements to bind at the mu receptor, as identified by a
report from an established forensic laboratory, including acetylfentanyl,
furanylfentanyl, valerylfentanyl, butyrylfentanyl, isobutyrylfentanyl, 4-
methoxybutyrylfentanyl, para-fluorobutyrylfentanyl, acrylfentanyl, and ortho-
fluorofentanyl:
         (a)   A chemical scaffold consisting of both of the following:
            1.   A five, six, or seven member ring structure containing a
nitrogen, whether or not further substituted;
            2.   An attached nitrogen to the ring, whether or not that nitrogen
is enclosed in a ring structure, including an attached aromatic ring or other
lipophilic group to that nitrogen.
         (b)   A polar functional group attached to the chemical scaffold,
including but not limited to a hydroxyl, ketone, amide, or ester;
         (c)   An alkyl or aryl substitution off the ring nitrogen of the
chemical scaffold; and
         (d)   The compound has not been approved for medical use by the United
States food and drug administration.
   “Harmful intoxicant.” Does not include beer or intoxicating liquor, but
means any of the following:
      (1)   Any compound, mixture, preparation or substance the gas, fumes or
vapor of which when inhaled can induce intoxication, excitement, giddiness,
irrational behavior, depression, stupefaction, paralysis, unconsciousness,
asphyxiation or other harmful physiological effects, and includes but is not
limited to any of the following:
         (a)   Any volatile organic solvent, plastic cement, model cement,
fingernail polish remover, lacquer thinner, cleaning fluid, gasoline or other
preparation containing a volatile organic solvent.
         (b)   Any aerosol propellant.
         (c)   Any fluorocarbon refrigerant.
         (d)   Any anesthetic gas.
2020 S-1
93   Drugs   § 624.01
      (2)   Gamma Butyrolactone;
      (3)   1,4 Butanediol.
   “Hashish.” The resin or a preparation of the resin contained in marihuana,
whether in solid form or in a liquid concentrate, liquid extract or liquid
distillate form.
   “Hypodermic.”  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   “Juvenile.” A person under 18 years of age.
   “Licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs.” Has the same
meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   “L.S.D.” Lysergic acid diethylamide.
   “Major drug offender.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
   “Mandatory prison term.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2929.01.
   “Manufacture.” To plant, cultivate, harvest, process, make, prepare or
otherwise engage in any part of the production of a drug, by propagation,
extraction, chemical synthesis or compounding, or any combination of the same,
and includes packaging, repackaging, labeling and other activities incident to
production.
   “Manufacturer.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   “Marihuana.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01, except that it does
not include hashish.
   “Methamphetamine.” Methamphetamine, any salt, isomer or salt of an isomer of
methamphetamine, or any compound, mixture, preparation or substance containing
methamphetamine or any salt, isomer or salt of an isomer of methamphetamine.
   “Minor drug possession offense.” Either of the following:
      (1)   A violation of R.C. § 2925.11, as it existed prior to July 1, 1996,
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   A violation of R.C. § 2925.11, as it exists on and after July 1,
1996, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that is a misdemeanor
or a felony of the fifth degree.
   “Official written order.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   “Person.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
2020 S-1
§ 624.01   Broadview Heights - General Offenses   94
   “Pharmacist.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   “Pharmacy.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   “Possess” or “possession.” Having control over a thing or substance but may
not be inferred solely from mere access to the thing or substance through
ownership or occupation of the premises upon which the thing or substance is
found.
   “Prescription.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   “Presumption for a prison term” or “presumption that a prison term shall be
imposed.” A presumption as described in R.C. § 2929.13(D) that a prison term is
a necessary sanction for a felony in order to comply with the purposes and
principles of sentencing under R.C. § 2929.11.
   “Professional license.” Any license, permit, certificate, registration,
qualification, admission, temporary license, temporary permit, temporary
certificate or temporary registration that is described in R.C. § 2925.01(W)(1)
to (W)(37) and that qualifies a person as a professionally licensed person.
   “Professionally licensed person.” Any of the following:
      (1)   A person who has received a certificate or temporary certificate as
a certified public accountant or who has registered as a public accountant
under R.C. Chapter 4701 and who holds an Ohio permit issued under that chapter;
      (2)   A person who holds a certificate of qualification to practice
architecture issued or renewed and registered under R.C. Chapter 4703;
      (3)   A person who is registered as a landscape architect under R.C.
Chapter 4703 or who holds a permit as a landscape architect issued under that
chapter;
      (4)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4707;
      (5)   A person who has been issued a certificate of registration as a
registered barber under R.C. Chapter 4709;
      (6)   A person licensed and regulated to engage in the business of a debt
pooling company by a legislative authority, under authority of R.C. Chapter
4710;
      (7)   A person who has been issued a cosmetologist’s license, hair
designer’s license, manicurist’s license, esthetician’s license, natural hair
stylist’s license, advanced cosmetologist’s license, advanced hair designer’s
license, advanced manicurist’s license, advanced esthetician’s license,
advanced natural hair stylist’s license, cosmetology instructor’s license, hair
design instructor’s license, manicurist instructor’s license, esthetics
instructor’s license, natural hair style instructor’s license, independent
contractor’s license, or tanning facility permit under R.C. Chapter 4713;
2020 S-1
95   Drugs   § 624.01
      (8)   A person who has been issued a license to practice dentistry, a
general anesthesia permit, a conscious sedation permit, a limited resident’s
license, a limited teaching license, a dental hygienist’s license or a dental
hygienist’s teacher’s certificate under R.C. Chapter 4715;
      (9)   A person who has been issued an embalmer’s license, a funeral
director’s license, a funeral home license or a crematory license, or who has
been registered for an embalmer’s or funeral director’s apprenticeship under
R.C. Chapter 4717;
      (10)   A person who has been licensed as a registered nurse or practical
nurse, or who has been issued a certificate for the practice of nurse-midwifery
under R.C. Chapter 4723;
      (11)   A person who has been licensed to practice optometry or to engage
in optical dispensing under R.C. Chapter 4725;
      (12)   A person licensed to act as a pawnbroker under R.C. Chapter 4727;
      (13)   A person licensed to act as a precious metals dealer under R.C.
Chapter 4728;
      (14)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 as a pharmacist or
pharmacy intern or registered under that chapter as a registered pharmacy
technician, certified pharmacy technician, or pharmacy technician trainee;
      (15)   A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 as a manufacturer of
dangerous drugs, outsourcing facility, third-party logistics provider,
repackager of dangerous drugs, wholesale distributor of dangerous drugs, or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs;
      (16)   A person who is authorized to practice as a physician assistant
under R.C. Chapter 4730;
      (17)   A person who has been issued a license to practice medicine and
surgery, osteopathic medicine and surgery, or podiatric medicine and surgery
under R.C. Chapter 4731 or has been issued a certificate to practice a limited
branch of medicine under that chapter;
      (18)   A person licensed as a psychologist or school psychologist under
R.C. Chapter 4732;
      (19)   A person registered to practice the profession of engineering or
surveying under R.C. Chapter 4733;
      (20)   A person who has been issued a license to practice chiropractic
under R.C. Chapter 4734;
      (21)   A person licensed to act as a real estate broker or real estate
salesperson under R.C. Chapter 4735;
      (22)   A person registered as a registered sanitarian under R.C. Chapter
4736;
2020 S-1
§ 624.01   Broadview Heights - General Offenses   96
      (23)   A person licensed to operate or maintain a junkyard under R.C.
Chapter 4737;
      (24)   A person who has been issued a motor vehicle salvage dealer’s
license under R.C. Chapter 4738;
      (25)   A person who has been licensed to act as a steam engineer under
R.C. Chapter 4739;
      (26)   A person who has been issued a license or temporary permit to
practice veterinary medicine or any of its branches, or who is registered as a
graduate animal technician under R.C. Chapter 4741;
      (27)   A person who has been issued a hearing aid dealer’s or fitter’s
license or trainee permit under R.C. Chapter 4747;
      (28)   A person who has been issued a class A, class B or class C license
or who has been registered as an investigator or security guard employee under
R.C. Chapter 4749;
      (29)   A person licensed to practice as a nursing home administrator
under R.C. Chapter 4751;
      (30)   A person licensed to practice as a speech-language pathologist or
audiologist under R.C. Chapter 4753;
      (31)   A person issued a license as an occupational therapist or physical
therapist under R.C. Chapter 4755;
      (32)   A person who is licensed as a licensed professional clinical
counselor, licensed professional counselor, social worker, independent social
worker, independent marriage and family therapist, or marriage and family
therapist, or registered as a social work assistant under R.C. Chapter 4757;
      (33)   A person issued a license to practice dietetics under R.C. Chapter
4759;
      (34)   A person who has been issued a license or limited permit to
practice respiratory therapy under R.C. Chapter 4761;
      (35)   A person who has been issued a real estate appraiser certificate
under R.C. Chapter 4763;
      (36)   A person who has been issued a home inspector license under R.C.
Chapter 4764;
      (37)   A person who has been admitted to the bar by order of the Ohio
Supreme Court in compliance with its prescribed and published rules.
   “Public premises.” Any hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall or
other place of public accommodation, business, amusement or resort.
   “Sale.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
2020 S-1
97   Drugs   § 624.02
   “Sample drug.” A drug or pharmaceutical preparation that would be hazardous
to health or safety if used without the supervision of a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs, or a drug of abuse, and that, at
one time, had been placed in a container plainly marked as a sample by a
manufacturer.
   “Schedule I”, “Schedule II”, “Schedule III”, “Schedule IV” or “Schedule V.”
Have the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
   “School.” Any school operated by a board of education, any community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314, or any nonpublic school for which the
State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under R.C. § 3301.07,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities or training provided
by the school is being conducted at the time a criminal offense is committed.
   “School building.” Any building in which any of the instruction,
extracurricular activities or training provided by a school is conducted,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities or training provided
by the school is being conducted in the school building at the time a criminal
offense is committed.
   “School premises.” Either of the following:
      (1)   The parcel of real property on which any school is situated,
whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or training
provided by the school is being conducted on the premises at the time a
criminal offense is committed.
      (2)   Any other parcel of real property that is owned or leased by a
board of education of a school, the governing authority of a community school
established under R.C. Chapter 3314, or the governing body of a nonpublic
school for which the State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards
under R.C. § 3301.07 and on which some of the instruction, extracurricular
activities or training of the school is conducted, whether or not any
instruction, extracurricular activities, or training provided by the school is
being conducted on the parcel of real property at the time a criminal offense
is committed.
   “Standard Pharmaceutical Reference Manual.” The current edition, with
cumulative changes if any, of references that are approved by the State Board
of Pharmacy.
   “Unit dose.” An amount or unit or a compound, mixture or preparation
containing a controlled substance that is separately identifiable and in a form
that indicates that it is the amount or unit by which the controlled substance
is separately administered to or taken by an individual.
   “Wholesaler.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
(R.C. § 2925.01)
§ 624.02  TRAFFICKING IN CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES; GIFT OF MARIHUANA.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Sell or offer to sell a controlled substance or a controlled
substance analog;
      (2)   Prepare for shipment, ship, transport, deliver, prepare for
distribution or distribute a controlled substance or a controlled substance
analog, when the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe that the
controlled substance or a controlled substance analog, is intended for sale or
resale by the offender or another person.
   (B)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   Manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized to
prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, and other persons whose
conduct is in accordance with Ohio R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730,
4731, and 4741.
      (2)   If the offense involves an anabolic steroid, any person who is
conducting or participating in a research project involving the use of an
anabolic steroid if the project has been approved by the United States Food and
Drug Administration.
      (3)   Any person who sells, offers for sale, prescribes, dispenses, or
administers for livestock or other nonhuman species an anabolic steroid that is
expressly intended for administration through implants to livestock or other
nonhuman species and approved for that purpose under the “Federal Food, Drug
and Cosmetic Act” (21 U.S.C. 301 et seq., as amended), and is sold, offered for
sale, prescribed, dispensed, or administered for that purpose in accordance
with that Act.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of the
following:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (C)(2) and (C)(3) of this
section, trafficking in controlled substances is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, if the offense
involves a gift of 20 grams or less of marihuana, trafficking in marihuana is a
minor misdemeanor upon a first offense and a misdemeanor of the third degree
upon a subsequent offense. If the offense involves a gift of 20 grams or less
of marihuana and if the offense was committed in the vicinity of a school or in
the vicinity of a juvenile, trafficking in marihuana is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
      (3)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that is a combination of a fentanyl-related compound
and marihuana, one of the following applies:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3)(b) of this
section, the offender is guilty of trafficking in marihuana and shall be
punished under division (C)(2) of this section. The offender is not guilty of
trafficking in a fentanyl-related compound and shall not be charged with,
convicted of, or punished under R.C. § 2925.03(C)(9) for trafficking in a
fentanyl-related compound.
         (b)   If the offender knows or has reason to know that the compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is the drug involved contains a
fentanyl-related compound, the offender is guilty of trafficking in a fentanyl-
related compound and shall be punished under R.C. § 2925.03(C)(9).
   (D)   As used in this section, "drug" includes any substance that is
represented to be a drug.
(ORC 2925.03(A) - (C), (I))  (Ord. 21-79, passed 3-5-1979)
Statutory reference:
   Felony drug trafficking offenses, see Ohio R.C. 2925.03(C)
§ 624.025  CULTIVATION OF MARIHUANA.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly cultivate marihuana.
   (B)   This section does not apply to any person listed in Ohio R.C. 2925.03
(B)(1), (2) or (3), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, to the
extent and under the circumstances described in that division.
   (C)   Whoever commits a violation of division (A) of this section is guilty
of illegal cultivation of marihuana.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2), illegal
cultivation of marihuana is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (2)   If the amount of marihuana involved equals or exceeds 200 grams,
illegal cultivation of marihuana is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (D)   Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this section
does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person’s criminal
record, including any inquiries contained in any application for employment,
license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s
appearance as a witness.
(ORC 2925.04(A), (B), (C)(5), (G))
§ 624.03  DRUG POSSESSION OFFENSES.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly obtain, possess or use a controlled
substance or a controlled substance analog.
   (B)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   Manufacturers, licensed health professionals authorized to
prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, and other persons whose
conduct is in accordance with Ohio R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730,
4731 and 4741.
         (b)   If the offense involves an anabolic steroid, any person who is
conducting or participating in a research project involving the use of an
anabolic steroid if the project has been approved by the United States Food and
Drug Administration.
         (c)   Any person who sells, offers for sale, prescribes, dispenses or
administers for livestock or other nonhuman species an anabolic steroid that is
expressly intended for administration through implants to livestock or other
nonhuman species and approved for that purpose under the Federal Food, Drug and
Cosmetic Act, and is sold, offered for sale, prescribed, dispensed or
administered for that purpose in accordance with that Act.
         (d)   Any person who obtained the controlled substance pursuant to a
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs if the prescription was issued for a legitimate medical purpose and not
altered, forged, or obtained through deception or commission of a theft
offense. As used in this division (B)(1)(d), “deception” and “theft offense”
have the same meanings as in R.C. § 2913.01.
      (2)   (a)   As used in division (B)(2) of this section:
            “Community addiction services provider” has the same meaning as in
Ohio R.C. 5119.01.
            “Community control sanction” has the same meanings as in Ohio R.C.
2929.01
            “Drug treatment program” has the same meanings as in Ohio R.C.
2929.01.
            “Health care facility” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
2919.16.
            “Minor drug possession offense” a violation of this section or Ohio
R.C. 2925.11 that is a misdemeanor or a felony of the fifth degree.
            “Peace officer” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2935.01.
            “Post-release control sanction” has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 2967.28.
            “Public agency” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2930.01.
            “Qualified individual” means a person who is not on community
control or post-release control and is a person acting in good faith who seeks
or obtains medical assistance for another person who is experiencing a drug
overdose, a person who experiences a drug overdose and who seeks medical
assistance for that overdose, or a person who is the subject of another person
seeking or obtaining medical assistance for that overdose as described in
division (B)(2)(b) of this section.
            “Seek or obtain medical assistance” includes, but is not limited to
making a 9-1-1 call, contacting in person or by telephone call an on-duty peace
officer, or transporting or presenting a person to a health care facility.
         (b)   Subject to division (B)(2)(f) of this section, a qualified
individual shall not be arrested, charged, prosecuted, convicted, or penalized
pursuant to this chapter for a minor drug possession offense if all of the
following apply:
            1.   The evidence of the obtaining, possession, or use of the
controlled substance or controlled substance analog that would be the basis of
the offense was obtained as a result of the qualified individual seeking the
medical assistance or experiencing an overdose and needing medical assistance.
            2.   Subject to division (B)(2)(g) of this section, within 30 days
after seeking or obtaining the medical assistance, the qualified individual
seeks and obtains a screening and receives a referral for treatment from a
community addiction services provider or a properly credentialed addiction
treatment professional.
            3.   Subject to division (B)(2)(g) of this section, the qualified
individual who obtains a screening and receives a referral for treatment under
division (B)(2)(b)2. of this section, upon the request of any prosecuting
attorney, submits documentation to the prosecuting attorney that verifies that
the qualified individual satisfied the requirements of that division. The
documentation shall be limited to the date and time of the screening obtained
and referral received.
         (c)   If a person is found to be in violation of any community control
sanction and if the violation is a result of either of the following, the court
shall first consider ordering the person’s participation or continued
participation in a drug treatment program or mitigating the penalty specified
in Ohio R.C. 2929.13, 2929.15, or 2929.25, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, whichever is applicable, after which the court has the
discretion either to order the person’s participation or continued
participation in a drug treatment program or to impose the penalty with the
mitigating factor specified in any of those applicable sections:
            1.   Seeking or obtaining medical assistance in good faith for
another person who is experiencing a drug overdose;
            2.   Experiencing a drug overdose and seeking medical assistance
for that overdose or being the subject of another person seeking or obtaining
medical assistance for that overdose as described in division (B)(2)(b) of this
section.
         (d)   If a person is found to be in violation of any post-release
control sanction and if the violation is a result of either of the following,
the court or the parole board shall first consider ordering the person’s
participation or continued participation in a drug treatment program or
mitigating the penalty specified in Ohio R.C. 2929.141 or 2967.28, whichever is
applicable, after which the court or the parole board has the discretion either
to order the person’s participation or continued participation in a drug
treatment program or to impose the penalty with the mitigating factor specified
in either of those applicable sections:
            1.   Seeking or obtaining medical assistance in good faith for
another person who is experiencing a drug overdose;
            2.   Experiencing a drug overdose and seeking medical assistance
for that emergency or being the subject of another person seeking or obtaining
medical assistance for that overdose as described in division (B)(2)(b) of this
section.
         (e)   Nothing in division (B)(2)(b) of this section shall be construed
to do any of the following:
            1.   Limit the admissibility of any evidence in connection with the
investigation or prosecution of a crime with regards to a defendant who does
not qualify for the protections of division (B)(2)(b) of this section or with
regards to any crime other than a minor drug possession offense committed by a
person who qualifies for protection pursuant to division (B)(2)(b) of this
section for a minor drug possession offense;
            2.   Limit any seizure of evidence or contraband otherwise
permitted by law;
            3.   Limit or abridge the authority of a peace officer to detain or
take into custody a person in the course of an investigation or to effectuate
an arrest for any offense except as provided in that division;
            4.   Limit, modify, or remove any immunity from liability available
pursuant to law in effect prior to September 13, 2016 to any public agency or
to an employee of any public agency.
         (f)   Division (B)(2)(b) of this section does not apply to any person
who twice previously has been granted an immunity under division (B)(2)(b) of
this section. No person shall be granted an immunity under division (B)(2)(b)
of this section more than two times.
         (g)   Nothing in this section shall compel any qualified individual to
disclose protected health information in a way that conflicts with the
requirements of the “Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of
1996,” 104 Pub. L. No. 191, 110 Stat. 2021, 42 U.S.C. §§ 1320d et seq., as
amended, and regulations promulgated by the United States Department of Health
and Human Services to implement the act or the requirements of 42 C.F.R. Part
2.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of one of the
following:
      (1)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule I or Schedule II, with the
exception of marihuana or hashish, whoever violates division (A) of this
section is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V,
whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of possession of drugs.
The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2)(b) of this
section, possession of drugs is a misdemeanor of the first degree or, if the
offender previously has been convicted of a drug abuse offense, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (b)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds the bulk
amount, possession of drugs is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   If the drug involved in the violation is marihuana or a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance containing marihuana other than hashish,
whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of possession of
marihuana. The penalty for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3)(b) or (C)(3)(c)
of this section, possession of marihuana is a minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds 100 grams
but is less than 200 grams, possession of marihuana is a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
         (c)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds 200 grams,
possession of marihuana is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (4)   If the drug involved in the violation is hashish or a compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance containing hashish, whoever violates
division (A) of this section is guilty of possession of hashish. The penalty
for the offense shall be determined as follows:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(4)(b) or (C)(4)(c)
of this section, possession of hashish is a minor misdemeanor.
         (b)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds five grams
but is less than ten grams of hashish in a solid form or equals or exceeds one
gram but is less than two grams of hashish in a liquid concentrate, liquid
extract, or liquid distillate form, possession of hashish is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree.
         (c)   If the amount of the drug involved equals or exceeds ten grams
of hashish in a solid form or equals or exceeds two grams of hashish in a
liquid concentrate, liquid extract, or liquid distillate form, possession of
hashish is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that is a combination of a fentanyl-related compound
and marihuana, one of the following applies:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(5)(b) of this
section, the offender is guilty of possession of marihuana and shall be
punished as provided in division (C)(3) of this section. Except as otherwise
provided in division (C)(5)(b) of this section, the offender is not guilty of
possession of a fentanyl- related compound under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) and
shall not be charged with, convicted of, or punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)
(11) for possession of a fentanyl-related compound.
         (b)   If the offender knows or has reason to know that the compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is the drug involved contains a
fentanyl-related compound, the offender is guilty of possession of a fentanyl-
related compound and shall be punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11).
      (6)   If the drug involved in the violation is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance that is a combination of a fentanyl-related compound
and any Schedule III, Schedule IV, or Schedule V controlled substance that is
not a fentanyl-related compound, one of the following applies:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(6)(b) of this
section, the offender is guilty of possession of drugs and shall be punished as
provided in division (C)(2) of this section. Except as otherwise provided in
division (C)(6)(b) of this section, the offender is not guilty of possession of
a fentanyl- related compound under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) and shall not be
charged with, convicted of, or punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11) for
possession of a fentanyl-related compound.
         (b)   If the offender knows or has reason to know that the compound,
mixture, preparation, or substance that is the drug involved contains a
fentanyl-related compound, the offender is guilty of possession of a fentanyl-
related compound and shall be punished under R.C. § 2925.11(C)(11).
   (D)   Arrest or conviction for a minor misdemeanor violation of this section
does not constitute a criminal record and need not be reported by the person so
arrested or convicted in response to any inquiries about the person’s criminal
record, including any inquiries contained in any application for employment,
license, or other right or privilege, or made in connection with the person’s
appearance as a witness. 
   (E)   (1)   In addition to the penalties provided in §§
202.99 and
624.99, any prison term or jail term authorized or required by division (C) of
this section and Ohio R.C. 2929.13, 2929.14, 2929.22, 2929.24, and 2929.25, or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and in addition to any other
sanction that is imposed for the offense under this section or Ohio R.C.
2929.11 through 2929.18, or Ohio R.C. 2929.21 to 2929.28, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the court that sentences an offender who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of division (A) of this section
may suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit
for not more than five years. However, if the offender pleaded guilty to or was
convicted of a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance or the law of another state or the United States arising
out of the same set of circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend
the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit for not more
than five years. If applicable, the court also shall do the following:
      (2)   If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to
any other sanction imposed for a violation of this section, the court
immediately shall comply with Ohio R.C. 2925.38.
   (F)   (1)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the
United States that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation
for which the offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section
shall not file such a motion.
      (2)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (F) of this section, the
sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(ORC 2925.11)  (Ord. 69-99, passed 5-3-1999)
Statutory reference:
   Felony drug possession offenses, see Ohio R.C. 2925.11(C)
§ 624.04  POSSESSION OF DRUG ABUSE INSTRUMENTS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make, obtain, possess, or use any
instrument, article, or thing the customary and primary purpose of which is for
the administration or use of a dangerous drug, other than marihuana, when the
instrument involved is a hypodermic or syringe, whether or not of crude or
extemporized manufacture or assembly, and the instrument, article, or thing
involved has been used by the offender to unlawfully administer or use a
dangerous drug, other than marihuana, or to prepare a dangerous drug, other
than marihuana, for unlawful administration or use.
   (B)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health
professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies,
and other persons whose conduct was in accordance with Ohio R.C. Chapters 3719,
4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, and 4741.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing drug abuse
instruments, a misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as
provided in §
202.99.
   (D)   (1)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a
violation of this section, the court may suspend for not more than five years
the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit. However, if
the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of Ohio R.C.
4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or the law of another
state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the
violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit for not more than five years. If the offender is a
professionally licensed person, in addition to any other sanction imposed for a
violation of this section, the court immediately shall comply with Ohio R.C.
2925.38.
      (2)   (a)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the
United States that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation
for which the offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section
shall not file such a motion.
         (b)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (D)(2) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(ORC 2925.12)
§ 624.05  PERMITTING DRUG ABUSE.
   (A)   No person who is the owner, operator, or person in charge of a
locomotive, watercraft, aircraft, or other vehicle, as defined in Ohio R.C.
4501.01, shall knowingly permit the vehicle to be used for the commission of a
felony drug abuse offense.
   (B)   No person, who is the owner, lessee, or occupant, or who has custody,
control, or supervision of premises, or real estate, including vacant land,
shall knowingly permit his or her premises, or real estate, including vacant
land, to be used for the commission of a felony drug abuse offense by another
person.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting drug abuse.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (C)(2) of this section, permitting
drug abuse is a misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as
provided in §
202.99.
      (2)   Permitting drug abuse is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law if the felony drug abuse offense in question is a
violation of R.C. §§ 2925.02, 2925.03, or 2925.04, or if the felony drug abuse
offense in question is a violation of R.C. § 2925.041 and the offender had
actual knowledge, at the time the offender permitted the vehicle, premises, or
real estate to be used as described in division (a) or (b) of this section,
that the person who assembled or possessed the chemicals in question in
violation of R.C. § 2925.041 had assembled or possessed them with the intent to
manufacture a controlled substance in Schedule I or Schedule II in violation of
R.C. § 2925.04.
   (D)   Any premises or real estate that is permitted to be used in violation
of division (B) of this section constitutes a nuisance subject to abatement
pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 3767.
(ORC 2925.13)
§ 624.07  ABUSING HARMFUL INTOXICANTS.
   (A)   Except for lawful research, clinical, medical, dental, or veterinary
purposes, no person, with purpose to induce intoxication or similar
physiological effects, shall obtain, possess, or use a harmful intoxicant.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of abusing harmful
intoxicants, a misdemeanor of the first degree, and shall be subject to the
penalty provided in §
202.99.  If the offender previously has been convicted of a drug abuse offense,
abusing harmful intoxicants is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (C)   (1)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a
violation of this section, the court may suspend for not more than five years
the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit. However, if
the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of Ohio R.C.
4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or the law of another
state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the
violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit for not more than five years. If the offender is a
professionally licensed person, in addition to any other sanction imposed for a
violation of this section, the court immediately shall comply with Ohio R.C.
2925.38.
      (2)   (a)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to the September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the
United States that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation
for which the offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section
shall not file such a motion.
         (b)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (C)(2) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(ORC 2925.31)
§ 624.073  IMPROPERLY DISPENSING OR DISTRIBUTING NITROUS OXIDE.
   (A)   No person who dispenses or distributes nitrous oxide in cartridges
shall fail to comply with either of the following:
      (1)   The record-keeping requirements established under division (C) of
this section.
      (2)   The labeling and transaction identification requirements
established under division (D) of this section.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section is guilty
of improperly dispensing or distributing nitrous oxide, a misdemeanor of the
first degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
   (C)   Beginning July 1, 2001, a person who dispenses or distributes nitrous
oxide shall record each transaction involving the dispensing or distribution of
the nitrous oxide on a separate card.  The person shall require the purchaser
to sign the card and provide a complete residence address.  The person
dispensing or distributing the nitrous oxide shall sign and date the card.  The
person shall retain the card recording a transaction for one year from the date
of the transaction.  The person shall maintain the cards at the person’s
business address and make them available during normal business hours for
inspection and copying by officers or employees of the State Board of Pharmacy
or of other law enforcement agencies that are authorized to investigate
violations of this code, Ohio R.C. Chapters 2925, 3719, or 4729, or federal
drug abuse control laws.  The cards used to record each transaction shall
inform the purchaser of the following:
      (1)   That nitrous oxide cartridges are to be used only for purposes of
preparing food;
      (2)   That inhalation of nitrous oxide can have dangerous health effects;
and
      (3)   That it is a violation of state law to distribute or dispense
cartridges of nitrous oxide to any person under age 21, punishable as a felony
of the fifth degree.
   (D)   (1)   Each cartridge of nitrous oxide dispensed or distributed in this
municipality shall bear the following printed warning:  “Nitrous oxide
cartridges are to be used only for purposes of preparing food.  Nitrous oxide
cartridges may not be sold to persons under age 21.  Do not inhale contents. 
Misuse can be dangerous to your health.”
      (2)   Each time a person dispenses or distributes one or more cartridges
of nitrous oxide, the person shall mark the packaging containing the cartridges
with a label or other device that identifies the person who dispensed or
distributed the nitrous oxide and the person’s business address.
(ORC 2925.32(B)(4), (D)(2), (F), (G))
Statutory reference:
   Trafficking in harmful intoxicants, felony offenses, see Ohio R.C. 2925.32
§ 624.076  POSSESSING NITROUS OXIDE IN MOTOR VEHICLES.
   (A)   As used in this section, “motor vehicle,” “street,” and “highway” have
the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
   (B)   Unless authorized by these Codified Ordinances or by state law, no
person shall possess an open cartridge of nitrous oxide in either of the
following circumstances:
      (1)   While operating or being a passenger in or on a motor vehicle on a
street, highway, or other public or private property open to the public for
purposes of vehicular traffic or parking.
      (2)   While being in or on a stationary motor vehicle on a street,
highway, or other public or private property open to the public for purposes of
vehicular traffic or parking.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing nitrous oxide in
a motor vehicle, a misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as
provided in §
202.99.
   (D)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for
possessing nitrous oxide in a motor vehicle, the court may suspend for not more
than five years the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit.
(ORC 2925.33)
§ 624.08  ILLEGAL DISPENSING OF DRUG SAMPLES.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly furnish a sample drug to another person.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to manufacturers,
wholesalers, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies, licensed health professionals
authorized to prescribe drugs, and other persons whose conduct is in accordance
with Ohio R.C. Chapters 3719, 4715, 4723, 4725, 4729, 4730, 4731, and 4741.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal dispensing of
drug samples.
      (2)   If the drug involved in the offense is a compound, mixture,
preparation, or substance included in Schedule I or Schedule II, with the
exception of marihuana, illegal dispensing of drug samples is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the drug involved in the offense is a dangerous drug or a
compound, mixture, preparation, or substance included in Schedule III, Schedule
IV or Schedule V, or is marihuana, the penalty for the offense shall be as
provided in §
202.99.
(ORC 2925.36(A) - (C))
Statutory reference:
   Felony offenses, see Ohio R.C. 2925.36(C)(2)
§ 624.09  POSSESSION, SALE AND DISPOSAL OF HYPODERMICS.
   (A)   Possession of a hypodermic is authorized for the following:
      (1)   A manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in hypodermics, or
medication packaged in hypodermics, and any authorized agent of employee of
that manufacturer, distributor or dealer, in the regular course of business;
      (2)   A terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, in the regular course of
business;
      (3)   A person authorized to administer injections, in the regular course
of the person’s profession or employment;
      (4)   A person, when the hypodermic in his possession was lawfully
obtained and is kept and used for the purpose of self-administration of insulin
or other drug prescribed for the treatment of disease by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs;
      (5)   A person whose use of a hypodermic is for legal research, clinical,
educational or medicinal purposes;
      (6)   A farmer, for the lawful administration of a drug to an animal;
      (7)   A person whose use of a hypodermic is for lawful professional,
mechanical, trade or craft purposes.
   (B)   No manufacturer or distributor of, or dealer in, hypodermics or
medication packaged in hypodermics, or their authorized agents or employees,
and no terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, shall display any hypodermic
for sale.  No person authorized to possess a hypodermic pursuant to division
(A) of this section shall negligently fail to take reasonable precautions to
prevent any hypodermic in the person’s possession from theft or acquisition by
any unauthorized person.
(ORC 3719.172(A), (B))
   (C)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
(ORC 3719.99(E))
Statutory reference:
   Felony offenses, see Ohio R.C. 3719.172(C), (D)
§ 624.10  EVIDENCE.
   (A)   (1)   In any criminal prosecution for a violation of this chapter or
Ohio R.C. Chapters 2925 or 3719, a laboratory report from the Bureau of
Criminal Identification and Investigation or a laboratory operated by another
law enforcement agency, or a laboratory established by or under the authority
of an institution of higher education that has its main campus in this state
and that is accredited by the Association of American Universities or the North
Central Association of Colleges and Secondary Schools, primarily for the
purpose of providing scientific service to law enforcement agencies, and signed
by the person performing the analysis, stating that the substance that is the
basis of the alleged offense has been weighed and analyzed and stating the
findings as to the content, weight, and identity of the substance and that it
contains any amount of a controlled substance and the number and description of
unit dosages, is prima facie evidence of the content, identity, and weight or
the existence and number of unit dosages of the substance. In any criminal
prosecution for a violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.041 or a violation of this
chapter, Ohio R.C. Chapter 2925 or Ohio R.C. Chapter 3719 that is based on the
possession of chemicals sufficient to produce a compound, mixture, preparation,
or substance included in Schedule I, II, III, IV, or V, a laboratory report
from the Bureau or from any laboratory that is operated or established as
described in this division that is signed by the person performing the
analysis, stating that the substances that are the basis of the alleged offense
have been weighed and analyzed and stating the findings as to the content,
weight, and identity of each of the substances, is prima facie evidence of the
content, identity, and weight of the substances.
      (2)   Attached to that report shall be a copy of a notarized statement by
the signer of the report giving the name of the signer and stating that the
signer is an employee of the laboratory issuing the report and that performing
the analysis is a part of the signer’s regular duties, and giving an outline of
the signer’s education, training, and experience for performing an analysis of
materials included under this section.  The signer shall attest that
scientifically accepted tests were performed with due caution, and that the
evidence was handled in accordance with established and accepted procedures
while in the custody of the laboratory.
   (B)   The prosecuting attorney shall serve a copy of the report on the
attorney of record for the accused, or on the accused if the accused has no
attorney, prior to any proceeding in which the report is to be used against the
accused other than at a preliminary hearing or grand jury proceeding where the
report may be used without having been previously served upon the accused.
   (C)   The report shall not be prima facie evidence of the contents,
identity, and weight or the existence and number of unit dosages of the
substance if the accused or the accused’s attorney demands the testimony of the
person signing the report, by serving the demand upon the prosecuting attorney,
within seven days from the accused or the accused’s attorney’s receipt of the
report.  The time may be extended by a trial judge in the interests of justice.
   (D)   Any report issued for use under this section shall contain notice of
the right of the accused to demand, and the manner in which the accused shall
demand, the testimony of the person signing the report.
   (E)   Any person who is accused of a violation of this chapter or Ohio R.C.
Chapters 2925 or 3719 is entitled, upon written request made to the prosecuting
attorney, to have a portion of the substance that is, or of each of the
substances that are, the basis of the alleged violation preserved for the
benefit of independent analysis performed by a laboratory analyst employed by
the accused person, or, if the accused is indigent, by a qualified laboratory
analyst appointed by the court.  Such portion shall be a representative sample
of the entire substance that is, or of each of the substances that are, the
basis of the alleged violation and shall be of sufficient size, in the opinion
of the court, to permit the accused’s analyst to make a thorough scientific
analysis concerning the identity of the substance or substances.  The
prosecuting attorney shall provide the accused’s analyst with the sample
portion at least 14 days prior to trial, unless the trial is to be held in a
court not of record or unless the accused person is charged with a minor
misdemeanor, in which case the prosecuting attorney shall provide the accused’s
analyst with the sample portion at least three days prior to trial.  If the
prosecuting attorney determines that such a sample portion cannot be preserved
and given to the accused’s analyst, the prosecuting attorney shall so inform
the accused person, or the accused’s attorney.  In such a circumstance, the
accused person is entitled, upon written request made to the prosecuting
attorney, to have the accused’s privately employed or court appointed analyst
present at an analysis of the substance that is, or the substances that are,
the basis of the alleged violation, and, upon further written request, to
receive copies of all recorded scientific data that result from the analysis
and that can be used by an analyst in arriving at conclusions, findings, or
opinions concerning the identity of the substance or substances subject to the
analysis.
   (F)   In addition to the rights provided under division (E) of this section,
any person who is accused of a violation of this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapters
2925 or 3719 that involves a bulk amount of a controlled substance, or any
multiple thereof, or who is accused of a violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.11 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, other than a minor misdemeanor
violation, that involves marihuana, is entitled, upon written request made to
the prosecuting attorney, to have a laboratory analyst of the accused’s choice,
or, if the accused is indigent, a qualified laboratory analyst appointed by the
court, present at a measurement or weighing of the substance that is the basis
of the alleged violation.  Also, the accused person is entitled, upon further
written request, to receive copies of all recorded scientific data that result
from the measurement or weighing and that can be used by an analyst in arriving
at conclusions, findings, or opinions concerning the weight, volume, or number
of unit doses of the substance subject to the measurement or weighing.
(ORC 2925.51)
   (G)   In addition to the financial sanctions authorized or required under
Ohio R.C. 2929.18 and 2929.28 and to any costs otherwise authorized or required
under any provision of law, the court imposing sentence upon an offender who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a drug abuse offense may order the offender to
pay to the state, municipal, or county law enforcement agencies that handled
the investigation and prosecution all of the costs that the state, municipal
corporation, or county reasonably incurred in having tests performed under this
section or Ohio R.C. 2925.51 or in any other manner on any substance that was
the basis of, or involved in, the offense to determine whether the substance
contained any amount of a controlled substance if the results of the tests
indicate that the substance tested contained any controlled substance. No court
shall order an offender under this section to pay the costs of tests performed
on a substance if the results of the tests do not indicate that the substance
tested contained any controlled substance. The court shall hold a hearing to
determine the amount of costs to be imposed under this section. The court may
hold the hearing as part of the sentencing hearing for the offender.
(ORC 2925.511) (Ord. 21-79, passed 3-5-1979)
§ 624.11  DOUBLE JEOPARDY.
   No person shall be prosecuted for a violation of this chapter if the person
has been acquitted or convicted under the federal drug abuse control laws of
the same act or omission which, it is alleged, constitutes a violation of this
chapter.
(ORC 2925.50, 3719.19)
§ 624.12  CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE SCHEDULES.
   Controlled Substance Schedules I, II, III, IV, and V, as established in Ohio
R.C. 3719.41 and amended by Ohio R.C. 3719.43 and 3719.44, are hereby adopted
by reference, and shall be treated as if set forth in full herein.
§ 624.13  CONTROLLED SUBSTANCE OR PRESCRIPTION LABELS.
   (A)   Whenever a manufacturer sells a controlled substance, and whenever a
wholesaler, repackager, or outsourcing facility sells a controlled substance in
a package the wholesaler, repackager, or outsourcing facility has prepared, the
manufacturer or the wholesaler, repackager, or outsourcing facility, as the
case may be, shall securely affix to each package in which the controlled
substance is contained a label showing in legible English the name and address
of the vendor and the quantity, kind, and form of controlled substance
contained therein. No person, except a pharmacist for the purpose of dispensing
a controlled substance upon a prescription shall alter, deface, or remove any
label so affixed. As used in this division, “repackager” and “outsourcing
facility” have the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
   (B)   No person shall alter, deface or remove any label affixed pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 3719.08 as long as any of the original contents remain.
(ORC 3719.08(A), (E))
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree and shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
202.99. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this
section, or Ohio R.C. 3719.07 or 3719.08, or a drug abuse offense, a violation
of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  If
the violation involves the sale, offer to sell, or possession of a Schedule I
or II controlled substance, with the exception of marihuana, and if the
offender, as a result of the violation, is a major drug offender, then Ohio
R.C. 3719.99(D) applies.
(ORC 3719.99(C))
§ 624.14  USE OR POSSESSION OF PARAPHERNALIA.
   (A)   As used in this section, “drug paraphernalia” means any equipment,
product, or material of any kind that is used by the offender, intended by the
offender for use, or designed for use, in propagating, cultivating, growing,
harvesting, manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing, processing,
preparing, testing, analyzing, packaging, repackaging, storing, containing,
concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introduced into the
human body, a controlled substance in violation of this chapter.  “Drug
paraphernalia” includes, but is not limited to, any of the following equipment,
products, or materials that are used by the offender, intended by the offender
for use, or designed by the offender for use, in any of the following manners:
      (1)   A kit for propagating, cultivating, growing, or harvesting any
species of a plant that is a controlled substance or from which a controlled
substance can be derived.
      (2)   A kit for manufacturing, compounding, converting, producing,
processing, or preparing a controlled substance.
      (3)   Any object, instrument, or device for manufacturing, compounding,
converting, producing, processing, or preparing methamphetamine.
      (4)   An isomerization device for increasing the potency of any species
of a plant that is a controlled substance.
      (5)   Testing equipment for identifying, or analyzing the strength,
effectiveness, or purity of, a controlled substance.
      (6)   A scale or balance for weighing or measuring a controlled
substance.
      (7)   A diluent or adulterant, such as quinine hydrochloride, mannitol,
mannite, dextrose, or lactose, for cutting a controlled substance.
      (8)   A separation gin or sifter for removing twigs and seeds from, or
otherwise cleaning or refining, marihuana.
      (9)   A blender, bowl, container, spoon, or mixing device for compounding
a controlled substance.
      (10)   A capsule, balloon, envelope, or container for packaging small
quantities of a controlled substance.
      (11)   A container or device for storing or concealing a controlled
substance.
      (12)   A hypodermic syringe, needle, or instrument for parenterally
injecting a controlled substance into the human body.
      (13)   An object, instrument, or device for ingesting, inhaling, or
otherwise introducing into the human body, marihuana, cocaine, hashish, or
hashish oil, such as a metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic, or
ceramic pipe, with or without a screen, permanent screen, hashish head, or
punctured metal bowl; water pipe; carburetion tube or device; smoking or
carburetion mask; roach clip or similar object used to hold burning material,
such as a marihuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be
held in the hand; miniature cocaine spoon, or cocaine vial; chamber pipe;
carburetor pipe; electric pipe; air driver pipe; chillum; bong; or ice pipe or
chiller.
   (B)   In determining if any equipment, product, or material is drug
paraphernalia, a court or law enforcement officer shall consider, in addition
to other relevant factors, the following:
      (1)   Any statement by the owner or by anyone in control of the
equipment, product, or material, concerning its use.
      (2)   The proximity in time or space of the equipment, product, or
material, or of the act relating to the equipment, product, or material, to a
violation of any provision of this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2925.
      (3)   The proximity of the equipment, product, or material to any
controlled substance.
      (4)   The existence of any residue of a controlled substance on the
equipment, product, or material.
      (5)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the intent of the owner, or of
anyone in control, of the equipment, product, or material, to deliver it to any
person whom he or she knows intends to use the equipment, product, or material
to facilitate a violation of any provision of this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter
2925.  A finding that the owner or anyone in control of the equipment, product,
or material is not guilty of a violation of any other provision of this chapter
or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2925 does not prevent a finding that the equipment,
product, or material was intended or designed by the offender for use as drug
paraphernalia.
      (6)   Any oral or written instruction provided with the equipment,
product, or material concerning its use.
      (7)   Any descriptive material accompanying the equipment, product, or
material and explaining or depicting its use.
      (8)   National or local advertising concerning the use of the equipment,
product, or material.
      (9)   The manner and circumstances in which the equipment, product, or
material is displayed for sale.
      (10)   Direct or circumstantial evidence of the ratio of the sales of the
equipment, product, or material to the total sales of the business enterprise.
      (11)   The existence and scope of legitimate uses of the equipment,
product, or material in the community.
      (12)   Expert testimony concerning the use of the equipment, product, or
material.
   (C)   (1)   Subject to division (D)(2) of this section, no person shall
knowingly use, or possess with purpose to use, drug paraphernalia.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly sell, or possess or manufacture with
purpose to sell, drug paraphernalia, if he or she knows or reasonably should
know that the equipment, product, or material will be used as drug
paraphernalia.
      (3)   No person shall place an advertisement in any newspaper, magazine,
handbill, or other publication that is published and printed and circulates
primarily within this state, if he or she knows that the purpose of the
advertisement is to promote the illegal sale in this municipality or in this
state of the equipment, product, or material that the offender intended or
designed for use as drug paraphernalia.
   (D)   (1)   This section does not apply to manufacturers, licensed health
professionals authorized to prescribe drugs, pharmacists, owners of pharmacies,
and other persons whose conduct is in accordance with Ohio R.C. Chapters 3719,
4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, and 4741.  This section shall not be construed to
prohibit the possession or use of a hypodermic as authorized by Ohio R.C.
3719.172.
      (2)   Division (C)(1) of this section does not apply to a person’s use,
or possession with purpose to use, any drug paraphernalia that is equipment, a
product, or material of any kind that is used by the person, intended by the
person for use, or designed for use in storing, containing, concealing,
injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing into the human body
marihuana.
   (E)   Notwithstanding Ohio R.C. 2981, any drug paraphernalia that was used,
possessed, sold, or manufactured in violation of this section shall be seized,
after a conviction for that violation, shall be forfeited, and upon forfeiture
shall be disposed of pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2981.12(B).
   (F)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
   (G)   (1)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender for a
violation of this section, the court may suspend for not more than five years
the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit. However, if
the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of Ohio R.C.
4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or the law of another
state or the United States arising out of the same set of circumstances as the
violation, the court shall suspend the offender’s driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or permit for not more than five years. If the offender is a
professionally licensed person, in addition to any other sanction imposed for a
violation of this section, the court immediately shall comply with Ohio R.C.
2925.38.
      (2)   (a)   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under this section
prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the sentencing court
requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an offender who pleaded
guilty to or was convicted of a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another state or the
United States that arose out of the same set of circumstances as the violation
for which the offender’s license or permit was suspended under this section
shall not file such a motion.
         (b)   Upon the filing of a motion under division (G)(2) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(ORC 2925.14) (Ord. 69-99, passed 5-3-1999)
   (H)   Illegal Use or Possession of Marihuana Drug Paraphernalia.
      (1)   As used in this division (H), “drug paraphernalia” has the same
meaning as in division (A) of this section.
      (2)   In determining if any equipment, product, or material is drug
paraphernalia, a court or law enforcement officer shall consider, in addition
to other relevant factors, all factors identified in division (B) of this
section.
      (3)   No person shall knowingly use, or possess with purpose to use, any
drug paraphernalia that is equipment, a product, or material of any kind that
is used by the person, intended by the person for use, or designed for use in
storing, containing, concealing, injecting, ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise
introducing into the human body marihuana.
      (4)   This division (H) does not apply to any person identified in
division (D)(1) of this section, and it shall not be construed to prohibit the
possession or use of a hypodermic as authorized by R.C. § 3719.172.
      (5)   Division (E) of this section applies with respect to any drug
paraphernalia that was used or possessed in violation of this section.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (H)(3) of this section is guilty of
illegal use or possession of marihuana drug paraphernalia, a minor misdemeanor.
      (7)   (a)   In addition to any other sanction imposed upon an offender
for a violation division (H) of this section, the court may suspend for not
more than five years the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
permit. However, if the offender pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a
violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance or the law of another state or the United States arising out of the
same set of circumstances as the violation, the court shall suspend the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit for not more than
five years. If the offender is a professionally licensed person, in addition to
any other sanction imposed for a violation of division (H) of this section, the
court immediately shall comply with Ohio R.C. 2925.38.
         (b)   1.   Any offender who received a mandatory suspension of the
offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit under division (H)
of this section prior to September 13, 2016 may file a motion with the
sentencing court requesting the termination of the suspension. However, an
offender who pleaded guilty to or was convicted of a violation of Ohio R.C.
4511.19 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance or law of another
state or the United States that arose out of the same set of circumstances as
the violation for which the offender’s license or permit was suspended under
division (H) of this section shall not file such a motion.
            2.   Upon the filing of a motion under division (H)(7)(b) of this
section, the sentencing court, in its discretion, may terminate the suspension.
(ORC 2925.141)
§ 624.15  COUNTERFEIT CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly possess any counterfeit controlled
substance.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section shall be guilty of
possession of counterfeit controlled substances, a misdemeanor of the first
degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
(ORC 2925.37(A), (G))
Statutory reference:
   Trafficking, other felony counterfeit controlled substance offenses, see
Ohio R.C. 2925.37(H) - (M)
§ 624.16  PSEUDOEPHEDRINE SALES.
   (A)   Unlawful Purchases.
      (1)   As used in divisions (A), (B), (C) and (D) of this section:
         “Consumer product.” Any food or drink that is consumed or used by
humans and any drug, including a drug that may be provided legally only
pursuant to a prescription, that is intended to be consumed or used by humans.
         “Ephedrine.” Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that
contains any quantity of ephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers, or salts
of optical isomers.
         “Ephedrine product.” A consumer product that contains ephedrine.
         “Pseudoephedrine.” Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation
that contains any quantity of pseudoephedrine, any of its salts, optical
isomers, or salts of optical isomers.
         “Pseudoephedrine product.” A consumer product consisting that contains
pseudoephedrine.
         “Retailer.” A place of business that offers consumer products for sale
to the general public.
         “Single-ingredient preparation.” A compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that contains a single active ingredient.
         “Terminal distributor of dangerous drugs.” Has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 4729.01.
      (2)   (a)   1.   No individual shall knowingly purchase, receive, or
otherwise acquire an amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
that is greater than either of the following unless the pseudoephedrine product
or ephedrine product is dispensed by a pharmacist pursuant to a valid
prescription issued by a licensed health professional authorized to prescribe
drugs and the conduct of the pharmacist and the licensed health professional
authorized to prescribe drugs is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715,
4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, or 4741:
               a.   Three and six tenths grams within a period of a single day;
               b.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
            2.   The limits specified in divisions (A)(2)(a)1.a. and (A)(2)
(a)1.b. of this section apply to the total amount of base pseudoephedrine or
base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product,
respectively. The limits do not apply to the product’s overall weight.
         (b)   It is not a violation of division (B)(1) of this section for an
individual to receive or accept more than an amount of pseudoephedrine product
or ephedrine product specified in division (A)(2)(a)1.a. or (A)(2)(a)1.b. of
this section if the individual is an employee of a retailer or terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs, and the employee receives or accepts from the
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs the pseudoephedrine product
or ephedrine product in a sealed container in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the
product.
      (3)   (a)   No individual under 18 years of age shall knowingly purchase,
receive, or otherwise acquire a pseudoephedrine product, or ephedrine product
unless the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product is dispensed by a
pharmacist pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs and the conduct of the pharmacist
and the licensed health professional
authorized to prescribe drugs is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715,
4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, or 4741.
         (b)   Division (A)(3)(a) of this section does not apply to an
individual under 18 years of age who purchases, receives, or otherwise acquires
a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product from any of the following:
            1.   A licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs
or pharmacist who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides the pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to that individual and whose conduct is in
accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, or 4741;
            2.   A parent or guardian of that individual who provides the
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            3.   A person, as authorized by that individual’s parent or
guardian, who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides the pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            4.   A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs who
provides the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to that individual if
the individual is an employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs and the individual receives or accepts from the retailer or
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs the pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product in a sealed container in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the
product.
      (4)   No individual under 18 years of age shall knowingly show or give
false information concerning the individual’s name, age, or other
identification for the purpose of purchasing, receiving, or otherwise acquiring
a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product.
      (5)   No individual shall knowingly fail to comply with the requirements
of R.C. § 3715.051(B).
      (6)   Whoever violates division (A)(2)(a) of this section is guilty of
unlawful purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (A)(3)(a) of this section is guilty of
underage purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if it could be
committed by an adult.
      (8)   Whoever violates division (A)(4) of this section is guilty of using
false information to purchase a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the first degree if it could be
committed by an adult.
      (9)   Whoever violates division (A)(5) of this section is guilty of
improper purchase of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
(ORC 2925.55)
   (B)   Unlawful Retail Sales.
      (1)   (a)   1.   Except as provided in division (B)(1)(b) of this
section, no retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs or an employee
of a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall knowingly sell,
offer to sell, hold for sale, deliver, or otherwise provide to any individual
an amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product that is greater than
either of the following:
               a.   Three and six tenths grams within a period of a single day;
               b.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
            2.   The maximum amounts specified in divisions (B)(1)(a)1.a. and
(B)(1)(a)1.b. of this section apply to the total amount of base pseudoephedrine
or base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product,
respectively. The maximum amounts do not apply to the product’s overall weight.
         (b)   1.   Division (B)(1)(a) of this section does not apply to any
quantity of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product dispensed by a
pharmacist pursuant to a valid prescription issued by a licensed health
professional authorized to prescribe drugs if the conduct of the pharmacist and
the licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs is in accordance
with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731, or 4741.
            2.   It is not a violation of division (B)(1)(a) of this section
for a retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, or employee of either
to provide to an individual more than an amount of pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product specified in division (B)(1)(a)1.a. or (B)(1)(a)1.b. of this
section under either of the following circumstances:
               a.   The individual is an employee of the retailer or terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs, and the employee receives or accepts from the
retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, or employee the
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product in a sealed container in
connection with manufacturing, warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging,
loading, or unloading of the product;
               b.   A stop-sale alert is generated after the submission of
information to the national precursor log exchange under the conditions
described in R.C. § 3715.052(A)(2).
      (2)   (a)   Except as provided in division (B)(2)(b) of this section, no
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs or an employee of a
retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall sell, offer to sell,
hold for sale, deliver, or otherwise provide a pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product to an individual who is under 18 years of age.
         (b)   Division (B)(2)(a) of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
            1.   A licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs
or pharmacist who dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides a pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product to an individual under 18 years of age and whose
conduct is in accordance with R.C. Chapter 3719, 4715, 4723, 4729, 4730, 4731,
or 4741;
            2.   A parent or guardian of an individual under 18 years of age
who provides a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the individual;
            3.   A person who, as authorized by the individual’s parent or
guardian, dispenses, sells, or otherwise provides a pseudoephedrine product or
ephedrine product to an individual under 18 years of age;
            4.   The provision by a retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs, or employee of either of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
in a sealed container to an employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of
dangerous drugs who is under 18 years of age in connection with manufacturing,
warehousing, placement, stocking, bagging, loading, or unloading of the
product.
      (3)   No retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall fail
to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 3715.051(A) or R.C. § 3715.052(A)(2).
      (4)   No retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs shall fail
to comply with the requirements of R.C. § 3715.052(A)(1).
      (5)   Whoever violates division (B)(1)(a) of this section is guilty of
unlawfully selling a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (B)(2)(a) of this section is guilty of
unlawfully selling a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to a minor, a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree.
      (7)   Whoever violates division (B)(3) of this section is guilty of
improper sale of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product, a misdemeanor
of the second degree.
      (8)   Whoever violates division (B)(4) of this section is guilty of
failing to submit information to the national precursor log exchange, a
misdemeanor for which the offender shall be fined not more than $1,000 per
violation.
(ORC 2925.56)
   (C)   Transaction Scans.
      (1)   As used in this division and division (D) of this section:
         “Card holder” means any person who presents a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card to a seller, or an agent or employee
of a seller, to purchase or receive any pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product from the seller, agent, or employee.
         “Identification card” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2927.021.
         “Seller” means a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs.
         “Transaction scan” means the process by which a seller or an agent or
employee of a seller checks by means of a transaction scan device the validity
of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card that is
presented as a condition for purchasing or receiving any pseudoephedrine
product or ephedrine product.
         “Transaction scan device.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2927.021.
      (2)   (a)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may perform a
transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device to check the validity of
a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a
card holder as a condition for selling, giving away, or otherwise distributing
to the card holder a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product.
         (b)   If the information deciphered by the transaction scan performed
under division (C)(2)(a) of this section fails to match the information printed
on the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented
by the card holder, or if the transaction scan indicates that the information
so printed is false or fraudulent, neither the seller nor any agent or employee
of the seller shall sell, give away, or otherwise distribute any
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the card holder.
         (c)   Division (C)(2)(a) of this section does not preclude a seller or
an agent or employee of a seller as a condition for selling, giving away, or
otherwise distributing a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the
person presenting the document from using a transaction scan device to check
the validity of a document other than a driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or an identification card if the document includes a bar code or magnetic strip
that may be scanned by the device.
      (3)   Rules adopted by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under Ohio R.C.
4301.61(C) apply to the use of transaction scan devices for purposes of this
division (C)  and division (D) of this section.
      (4)   (a)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
electronically or mechanically record or maintain any information derived from
a transaction scan, except the following:
            1.   The name, address, and date of birth of the person listed on
the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by
a card holder;
            2.   The expiration date, identification number, and issuing agency
of the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented
by a card holder.
         (b)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use the
information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is permitted to be
recorded and maintained under division (C)(4)(a) of this section except for
purposes of division (D) of this section, R.C. § 2925.58, or R.C. § 3715.052(A)
(1).
         (c)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use a
transaction scan device for a purpose other than the purpose specified in
division (C)(2)(a) of this section.
         (d)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall sell or
otherwise disseminate the information derived from a transaction scan to any
third party, including, but not limited to, selling or otherwise disseminating
that information for any marketing, advertising, or promotional activities, but
a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that information pursuant
to a court order or as specifically authorized by division (D) of this section
or any other section of the Ohio Revised Code.
      (5)   Nothing in this division (C) or division (D) of this section
relieves a seller or an agent or employee of a seller of any responsibility to
comply with any other applicable state or federal laws or rules governing the
sale, giving away, or other distribution of pseudoephedrine products or
ephedrine products.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (C)(2)(b) or (C)(4) of this section is
guilty of engaging in an illegal pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
transaction scan, and the court may impose upon the offender a civil penalty of
up to $1,000 for each violation. The Clerk of the Court shall pay each
collected civil penalty to the County Treasurer for deposit into the County
Treasury.
(ORC 2925.57)
   (D)   Affirmative Defenses.
      (1)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may not be found
guilty of a charge of a violation of division (B) of this section in which the
age of the purchaser or other recipient of a pseudoephedrine product is an
element of the alleged violation if the seller, agent, or employee raises and
proves as an affirmative defense that all of the following occurred:
         (a)   A card holder attempting to purchase or receive a
pseudoephedrine product presented a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or
an identification card.
         (b)   A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or identification card that the card holder presented indicated that
the license or card was valid.
         (c)   The pseudoephedrine product was sold, given away, or otherwise
distributed to the card holder in reasonable reliance upon the identification
presented and the completed transaction scan.
      (2)   In determining whether a seller or an agent or employee of a seller
has proven the affirmative defense provided by division (D)(1) of this section,
the trier of fact in the action for the alleged violation of division (B) of
this section shall consider any written policy that the seller has adopted and
implemented and that is intended to prevent violations of division (B) of this
section. For purposes of division (D)(1)(c) of this section, the trier of fact
shall consider that reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and
the completed transaction scan may require a seller or an agent or employee of
a seller to exercise reasonable diligence to determine, and that the use of a
transaction scan device does not excuse a seller or an agent or employee of a
seller from exercising reasonable diligence to determine, the following:
         (a)   Whether a person to whom the seller or agent or employee of a
seller sells, gives away, or otherwise distributes a pseudoephedrine product is
18 years of age or older;
         (b)   Whether the description and picture appearing on the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a card holder
is that of the card holder.
      (3)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense provided by
division (D)(1) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a
deputy registrar who issued an identification card under Ohio R.C. 4507.50
through 4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the records of
that issuance in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or contractors with
the Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the action.
(ORC 2925.58)
   (E)   Retailer’s Duties.
      (1)   As used in divisions (E) and (F) of this section:
         “Consumer product.” Any food or drink that is consumed or used by
humans and any drug, including a drug that may be provided legally only
pursuant to a prescription, that is intended to be consumed or used by humans.
         “Drug.” Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         “Ephedrine.” Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation that
contains any quantity of ephedrine, any of its salts, optical isomers, or salts
of optical isomers.
         “Ephedrine product.” A consumer product that contains ephedrine.
         “Law enforcement official.” An officer or employee of any agency or
authority of the United States, a state, a territory, a political subdivision
of a state or territory, or an Indian tribe, who is empowered by the law to
investigate or conduct an official inquiry into a potential violation of law or
prosecute or otherwise conduct a criminal, civil, or administrative proceeding
arising from an alleged violation of law.
         “Licensed health professional authorized to prescribe drugs.” Has the
same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         “National Precursor Log Exchange” or “Exchange.” The electronic system
for tracking sales of pseudoephedrine products and ephedrine products on a
national basis that is administered by the National Association of Drug
Diversion Investigators or a successor organization.
         “Pharmacist.” A person licensed under R.C. Chapter 4729 to engage in
the practice of pharmacy.
         “Pharmacy.” Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         “Prescriber.” Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         “Prescription.” Has the same meanings as in R.C. § 4729.01.
         “Proof of age.” A driver’s license, a commercial driver’s license, a
military identification card, a passport, or an identification card issued
under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52 that shows a person is 18 years of age or
older.
         “Pseudoephedrine.” Any material, compound, mixture, or preparation
that contains any quantity of pseudoephedrine, any of its salts, optical
isomers, or salts of optical isomers.
         “Pseudoephedrine product.” A consumer product that contains
pseudoephedrine.
         “Retailer.” A place of business that offers consumer products for sale
to the general public.
         “Single-ingredient preparation.” A compound, mixture, preparation, or
substance that contains a single active ingredient.
         “Stop-sale alert.” A notification sent from the national precursor log
exchange to a retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs indicating
that the completion of a sale of a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product
would result in a violation of R.C. § 2925.56(A)(1) or federal law.
         “Terminal distributor of dangerous drugs.” Has the same meanings as in
R.C. § 4729.01.
         “Wholesaler.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 3719.01.
      (2)   A retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs that sells,
offers to sell, holds for sale, delivers, or otherwise provides a
pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product to the public shall do all of the
following:
         (a)   Segregate pseudoephedrine products or ephedrine products from
other merchandise so that no member of the public may procure or purchase such
products without the direct assistance of a pharmacist or other authorized
employee of the retailer or terminal distributor of dangerous drugs;
         (b)   With regard to each time a pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product is sold or otherwise provided without a valid prescription:
            1.   Determine, by examination of a valid proof of age, that the
purchaser or recipient is at least 18 years of age;
            2.   a.   Using any information available, including information
from the national precursor log exchange if the information is accessible, make
a reasonable attempt to ensure that no individual purchases or receives an
amount of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine product that is greater than
either of the following:
                  i.   Three and six tenths grams within a period of a single
day;
                  ii.   Nine grams within a period of 30 consecutive days.
               b.   The maximum amounts specified in divisions (E)(2)(b)2.a.i.
and (E)(2)(b)2.a.ii. of this section apply to the total amount of base
pseudoephedrine or base ephedrine in the pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product, respectively. The maximum amounts do not apply to the product’s
overall weight.
         (c)   Maintain a log book of pseudoephedrine product or ephedrine
product purchases, in accordance with R.C. § 3715.051;
         (d)   If required to comply with section R.C. § 3715.052, submit the
information specified in divisions (A)(1)(a) to (A)(1)(d) of that section to
the national precursor log exchange.
      (3)   Prescriptions, orders, and records maintained pursuant to this
section and stocks of pseudoephedrine products and ephedrine products shall be
open for inspection to federal, state, county, and municipal officers, and
employees of the State Board of Pharmacy whose duty it is to enforce the laws
of this state or of the United States relating to controlled substances. Such
prescriptions, orders, records, and stocks
shall be open for inspection by the State Medical Board and its employees for
purposes of enforcing R.C. Chapter 4731.
(ORC 3715.05)
   (F)   Theft or Loss; Reporting Requirements.
      (1)   Each retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, pharmacy,
prescriber, or wholesaler that sells, offers to sell, holds for sale, delivers,
or otherwise provides any pseudoephedrine product and that discovers the theft
or loss of any pseudoephedrine product in an amount of more than nine grams per
incident of theft or loss shall notify all of the following upon discovery of
the theft or loss:
         (a)   The State Board of Pharmacy, by telephone immediately upon
discovery of the theft or loss;
         (b)   Law enforcement authorities. If the incident is a theft and the
theft constitutes a felony, the retailer, terminal distributor of dangerous
drugs, pharmacy, prescriber, or wholesaler shall report the theft to the law
enforcement authorities in accordance with Ohio R.C. 2921.22.
      (2)   Within 30 days after making a report by telephone to the State
Board of Pharmacy pursuant to division (F)(1)(a) of this section, a retailer,
terminal distributor of dangerous drugs, pharmacy, prescriber, or wholesaler
shall send a written report to the State Board of Pharmacy.
      (3)   The reports required under this section shall identify the product
that was stolen or lost, the amount of the product stolen or lost, and the date
and time of discovery of the theft or loss.
(ORC 3715.06)
§ 624.17  SALE OF PURE CAFFEINE PRODUCT.
   (A)   As used in this section, "pure caffeine product" means:
      (1)   Subject to division (A)(2) of this section, a product that consists
solely or primarily of caffeine and is manufactured into a crystalline, liquid,
or powdered form.
      (2)   The phrase does not include any of the following that contains
caffeine and is formulated, manufactured, and labeled in accordance with the
laws and regulations enforced by the United States Food and Drug
Administration:
         (a)   Coffee, tea, any soft drink, any energy drink, or any other
caffeine-containing beverage;
         (b)   Any energy product.
   (B)   Except as provided in division (C) of this section, no person shall
knowingly sell or offer for sale a pure caffeine product.
   (C)   Division (B) of this section does not prohibit a person from selling
or offering for sale any product manufactured in a unit-dose form such as a
pill, tablet, or caplet, but only if each unit dose of the product contains not
more than 250 milligrams of caffeine.
   (D)   Nothing in this section prohibits either of the following:
      (1)   Possession of a product described in division (C) of this section;
      (2)   Possession of a pure caffeine product by any of the following:
         (a)   A food processing establishment, as defined in R.C. § 3715.021;
         (b)   A manufacturer of a drug that is available without a
prescription;
         (c)   A laboratory that holds a current, valid category III terminal
distributor of dangerous drugs license issued by the state board of pharmacy
under R.C. § 4729.54;
         (d)   A laboratory of any agency or department of this state that
performs testing, analysis, and other laboratory services on behalf of the
state;
         (e)   A postal or delivery service that transports or delivers a pure
caffeine product to an entity specified in divisions (D)(2)(a) to (D)(2)(d) of
this section.
   (E)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of illegal
sale of pure caffeine, a minor misdemeanor on a first offense and a misdemeanor
of the third degree on each subsequent offense.
(R.C. § 2925.34)
§ 624.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates §§
624.03,
624.04 ,
624.05 ,
624.07 ,
624.073 ,
624.076 ,
624.08 ,
624.09 ,
624.13 ,
624.14  or
624.15  may be imprisoned as provided in §
202.99  of these Codified Ordinances and shall be fined the mandatory sum of
$1,000.
(Ord. 69-99, passed 5-3-1999)
Editor’s note:
   See §
202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 630:  GAMBLING
Section
630.01   Definitions
630.02   Gambling in general
630.03   Operating a gambling house
630.04   Public gaming
630.05   Cheating
630.06   Responsibility of charitable organization conducting bingo game
630.07   Maintenance of records by charitable organizations
630.08   Qualifications of bingo game operator
630.09   Exemption for bingo games conducted for amusement
630.10   Prohibitions where instant bingo game is conducted
630.11   Raffle drawings
630.12   Instant bingo other than at bingo sessions
630.13   Restrictions on owner or lessor of location at instant bingo
630.14   Skill-based amusement machines; prohibited conduct
630.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by Police Department,
see §
606.24
Statutory reference:
   Power to destroy devices, see Ohio R.C. 715.51
   Power to prohibit gambling, see Ohio R.C. 715.49
§ 630.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   “Bet” means the hazarding of anything of value upon the result of an event,
undertaking, or contingency, but does not include a bona fide business risk.
   “Bingo” means either of the following:
      (1)   A game with all of the following characteristics:
         (a)   The participants use bingo cards or sheets, including paper
formats and electronic representation or image formats, that are divided into
25 spaces arranged in 5 horizontal and 5 vertical rows of spaces, with each
space, except the central space, being designated by a combination of a letter
and a number and with the central space being designated as a free space;
         (b)   The participants cover the spaces on the bingo cards or sheets
that correspond to combinations of letters and numbers that are announced by a
bingo game operator;
         (c)   A bingo game operator announces combinations of letters and
numbers that appear on objects that a bingo game operator selects by chance,
either manually or mechanically, from a receptacle that contains 75 objects at
the beginning of each game, each object marked by a different combination of a
letter and a number that corresponds to one of the 75 possible combinations of
a letter and a number that can appear on the bingo cards or sheets;
         (d)   The winner of the bingo game includes any participant who
properly announces during the interval between the announcements of letters and
numbers, as described in division (1)(c) of this definition, that a
predetermined and pre-announced pattern of spaces has been covered on a bingo
card or sheet being used by the participant.
      (2)   Instant bingo, punch boards, and raffles.
   “Bingo game operator” means any person, except security personnel, who
performs work or labor at the site of bingo including but not limited to
collecting money from participants, handing out bingo cards or sheets or
objects to cover spaces on bingo cards or sheets, selecting from a receptacle
the objects that contain the combination of letters and numbers that appear on
bingo cards or sheets, calling out the combinations of letters and numbers,
distributing prizes, selling or redeeming instant bingo tickets or cards,
supervising the operation of a punch board, selling raffle tickets, selecting
raffle tickets from a receptacle and announcing the winning numbers in a
raffle, and preparing, selling, and serving food or beverages.
   “Bingo session” means a period that includes both of the following:
      (1)   Not to exceed five continuous hours for the conduct of one or more
games described in division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in this section,
instant bingo, and seal cards;
      (2)   A period for the conduct of instant bingo and seal cards for not
more than two hours before and not more than two hours after the period
described in division (1) of this definition.
   “Bingo supplies” means bingo cards or sheets; instant bingo tickets or
cards; electronic bingo aids; raffle tickets; punch boards; seal cards; instant
bingo ticket dispensers; and devices for selecting or displaying the
combination of bingo letters and numbers or raffle tickets. Items that are
“bingo supplies” are not gambling devices if sold or otherwise provided, and
used, in accordance with this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915. For purposes
of this chapter, “bingo supplies” are not to be considered equipment used to
conduct a bingo game.
   “Bookmaking” means the business of receiving or paying off bets.
   “Chamber of commerce” means any organization of individuals, professionals,
and businesses that has the purpose to advance the commercial, financial,
industrial, and civic interests of the community and that is, and has received
from the Internal Revenue Service a determination letter that currently is in
effect stating that the organization is, exempt from federal income taxation
under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(6).
   “Charitable bingo game” means any bingo game described in divisions (1) or
(2) of the definition of “bingo” in this section that is conducted by a
charitable organization that has obtained a license pursuant to Ohio R.C.
2915.08 and the proceeds of which are used for a charitable purpose.
   “Charitable instant bingo organization” means an organization that is exempt
from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3)
and is a charitable organization as defined in this section. A “charitable
instant bingo organization” does not include a charitable organization that is
exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501
(c)(3) and that is created by a veteran’s organization, a fraternal
organization, or a sporting organization in regards to bingo conducted or
assisted by a veteran’s organization, a fraternal organization, or a sporting
organization pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.13, or any substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
   “Charitable organization”.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, “charitable
organization” means either of the following:
         (a)   An organization that is and has received from the Internal
Revenue Service a determination letter that is currently in effect, stating
that the organization is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC § 501(a)
and described in IRC § 501(c)(3);
         (b)   A volunteer rescue service organization, volunteer firefighter’s
organization, veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC §§ 501(c)
(4), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10) or 501(c)(19).
      (2)   To qualify as a charitable organization, an organization shall have
been in continuous existence as such in this state for a period of two years
immediately preceding either the making of an application for a bingo license
under R.C. § 2915.08 or the conducting of any game of chance as provided in
R.C. § 2915.02(D), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   “Charitable purpose” means that the net profit of bingo, other than instant
bingo, is used by, or is given, donated, or otherwise transferred to, any of
the following:
      (1)   Any organization that is described in IRC 509(a)(1), 509(a)(2), or
509(a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an organization that is tax
exempt under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3);
      (2)   A veteran’s organization that is a post, chapter, or organization
of veterans, or an auxiliary unit or society of, or a trust or foundation for,
any such post, chapter, or organization organized in the United States or any
of its possessions, at least 75% of the members of which are veterans and
substantially all of the other members of which are individuals who are
spouses, widows, or widowers of veterans, or such individuals, provided that no
part of the net earnings of such post, chapter, or organization inures to the
benefit of any private shareholder or individual, and further provided that the
net profit is used by the post, chapter, or organization for the charitable
purposes set forth in Ohio R.C. 5739.02(B)(12), is used for awarding
scholarships to or for attendance at an institution mentioned in that division
of the Revised Code, is donated to a governmental agency, or is used for
nonprofit youth activities, the purchase of United States or Ohio flags that
are donated to schools, youth groups, or other bona fide nonprofit
organizations, promotion of patriotism, or disaster relief;
      (3)   A fraternal organization that has been in continuous existence in
this state for 15 years and that uses the net profit exclusively for religious,
charitable, scientific, literary, or educational purposes, or for the
prevention of cruelty to children or animals, if contributions for such use
would qualify as a deductible charitable contribution under IRC 170;
      (4)   A volunteer firefighter’s organization that uses the net profit for
the purposes set forth in the definition of “volunteer firefighter’s
organization” in this section.
   “Community action agency” has the same  meaning as in Ohio R.C. 122.66.
   “Conduct” means to back, promote, organize, manage, carry on, sponsor, or
prepare for the operation of bingo or a game of chance, a scheme of chance, or
a sweepstakes.
   “Deal of instant bingo tickets” means a single game of instant bingo tickets
all with the same serial number.
   “Distributor” means any person who purchases or obtains bingo supplies and
who does either of the following:
      (1)   Sells, offers for sale, or otherwise provides or offers to provide
the bingo supplies to another person for use in this state;
      (2)   Modifies, converts, adds to, or removes parts from the bingo
supplies to further their promotion or sale for use in this state.
   “Electronic bingo aid.”
      (1)   “Electronic bingo aid” means an electronic device used by a
participant to monitor bingo cards or sheets purchased at the time and place of
a bingo session and that does all of the following:
         (a)   It provides a means for a participant to input numbers and
letters announced by a bingo caller.
         (b)   It compares the numbers and letters entered by the participant
to the bingo faces previously stored in the memory of the device.
         (c)   It identifies a winning bingo pattern.
      (2)   “Electronic bingo aid” does not include any device into which a
coin, currency, token, or an equivalent is inserted to activate play.
   “Expenses” means the reasonable amount of gross profit actually expended for
all of the following:
      (1)   The purchase or lease of bingo supplies;
      (2)   The annual license fee required under Ohio R.C. 2915.08;
      (3)   Bank fees and service charges for a bingo session or game account
described in Ohio R.C. 2915.10;
      (4)   Audits and accounting services;
      (5)   Safes;
      (6)   Cash registers;
      (7)   Hiring security personnel;
      (8)   Advertising bingo;
      (9)   Renting premises in which to conduct a bingo session;
      (10)   Tables and chairs;
      (11)   Expenses for maintaining and operating a charitable organization’s
facilities, including, but not limited to, a post home, club house, lounge,
tavern, or canteen and any grounds attached to the post home, club house,
lounge, tavern, or canteen;
      (12)   Payment of real property taxes and assessments that are levied on
a premises on which bingo is conducted;
      (13)   Any other product or service directly related to the conduct of
bingo that is authorized in rules adopted by the Attorney General under Ohio
R.C. 2915.08(B)(1).
   “Fraternal organization” means any society, order, state headquarters, or
association within this state, except a college or high school fraternity, that
is not organized for profit, that is a branch, lodge, or chapter of a national
or state organization, that exists exclusively for the common business or
sodality of its members.
   “Gambling device” means any of the following:
      (1)   A book, totalizer, or other equipment used for recording bets;
      (2)   A ticket, token, or other device representing a chance, share, or
interest in a scheme of chance or evidencing a bet;
      (3)   A deck of cards, dice, gaming table, roulette wheel, slot machine,
or other apparatus designed for use in connection with a game of chance;
      (4)   Any equipment, device, apparatus, or paraphernalia specially
designed for gambling purposes;
      (5)   Bingo supplies sold or otherwise provided, or used, in violation of
this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915.
   “Gambling offense” means any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2915.02, 2915.03, 2915.04, 2915.05,
2915.06, 2915.07, 2915.08, 2915.081, 2915.082, 2915.09, 2915.091, 2915.092,
2915.10, or 2915.11;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States substantially equivalent to any
section listed in division (1) of this definition or a violation of Ohio R.C.
2915.06 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996;
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law
of this or any other state or of the United States, of which gambling is an
element;
      (4)   A conspiracy or attempt to commit, or complicity in committing any
offense under division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.
   “Game flare” means the board or placard that accompanies each deal of
instant bingo tickets and that has printed on or affixed to it the following
information for the game:
      (1)   The name of the game;
      (2)   The manufacturer’s name or distinctive logo;
      (3)   The form number;
      (4)   The ticket count;
      (5)   The prize structure, including the number of winning instant bingo
tickers by denomination and the respective winning symbol or number
combinations for the winning instant bingo tickets;
      (6)   The cost per play;
      (7)   The serial number of the game.
   “Game of chance” means poker, craps, roulette, or other game in which a
player gives anything of value in the hope of gain, the outcome of which is
determined largely by chance, but does not include bingo.
   “Game of chance conducted for profit” means any game of chance designed to
produce income for the person who conducts or operates the game of chance, but
does not include bingo.
   “Gross annual revenues” means the annual gross receipts derived from the
conduct of bingo described in division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in this
section plus the annual net profit derived from the conduct of bingo described
in division (2) of the definition of “bingo” in this section.
   “Gross profit” means gross receipts minus the amount actually expended for
the payment of prize awards.
   “Gross receipts” means all money or assets, including admission fees, that a
person receives from bingo without the deduction of any amounts for prizes paid
out or for the expenses of conducting bingo.  “Gross receipts” does not include
any money directly taken in from the sale of food or beverages by a charitable
organization conducting bingo, or by a bona fide auxiliary unit or society of a
charitable organization conducting bingo, provided all of the following apply:
      (1)   The auxiliary unit or society has been in existence as a bona fide
auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization for at least two years
prior to conducting bingo.
      (2)   The person who purchases the food or beverage receives nothing of
value except the food or beverage and items customarily received with the
purchase of that food or beverage.
      (3)   The food and beverages are sold at customary and reasonable prices.
   “Historic railroad” means all or a portion of the tracks and right-of-way of
a railroad that was owned and operated by a for profit common carrier in this
state at any time prior to January 1, 1950.
   “Instant bingo” means a form of bingo that shall use folded or banded
tickets or paper cards with perforated break-open tabs, a face of which is
covered or otherwise hidden from view to conceal a number, letter, or symbol,
or set of numbers, letters, or symbols, some of which have been designated in
advance as prize winners, and may also include games in which some winners are
determined by the random selection of one or more bingo numbers by the use of a
seal card or bingo blower. In all “instant bingo” the prize amount and
structure shall be predetermined. The term does not include any device that is
activated by the insertion of a coin, currency, token, or an equivalent, and
that contains as one of its components a video display monitor that is capable
of displaying numbers, letters, symbols, or characters in winning or losing
combinations.
   “Instant bingo ticket dispenser” means a mechanical device that dispenses an
instant bingo ticket or card as the sole item of value dispensed and that has
the following characteristics:
      (1)   It is activated upon the insertion of United States currency.
      (2)   It performs no gaming functions.
      (3)   It does not contain a video display monitor or generate noise.
      (4)   It is not capable of displaying any numbers, letters, symbols, or
characters in winning or losing combinations.
      (5)   It does not simulate or display rolling or spinning reels.
      (6)   It is incapable of determining whether a dispensed bingo ticket or
card is a winning or non- winning ticket or card and requires a winning ticket
or card to be paid by a bingo game operator.
      (7)   It may provide accounting and security features to aid in
accounting for the instant bingo tickets or cards it dispenses.
      (8)   It is not part of an electronic network and is not interactive.
   “IRC” or “Internal Revenue Code” means the Internal Revenue Code of 1986,
100 Stat. 2085, 26 U.S.C. 1 et seq., as now or hereafter amended.
   “Manufacturer” means any person who assembles completed bingo supplies from
raw materials, other items, or subparts or who modifies, converts, adds to, or
removes parts from bingo supplies to further their promotion or sale.
   “Merchandise prize” means any item of value, but shall not include any of
the following:
      (1)   Cash, gift cards, or any equivalent thereof;
      (2)   Plays on games of chance, state lottery tickets, bingo, or instant
bingo;
      (3)   Firearms, tobacco, or alcoholic beverages; or
      (4)   A redeemable voucher that is redeemable for any of the items listed
in division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.
   “Net profit” means gross profit minus expenses.
   “Net profit from the proceeds of the sale of instant bingo” means gross
profit minus the ordinary, necessary, and reasonable expense expended for the
purchase of instant bingo supplies, and, in the case of instant bingo conducted
by a veteran’s, fraternal, or sporting organization, minus the payment by that
organization of real property taxes and assessments levied on a premises on
which instant bingo is conducted.
   “Participant” means any person who plays bingo.
   “Person” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 1.59 and includes any firm or
any other legal entity, however organized.
   “Pool not conducted for profit” means a scheme in which a participant gives
a valuable consideration for a chance to win a prize and the total amount of
consideration wagered is distributed to a participant or participants.
   “Punch board” means a board containing a number of holes or receptacles of
uniform size in which are placed, mechanically and randomly, serially numbered
slips of paper that may be punched or drawn from the hole or receptacle when
used in conjunction with instant bingo. A player may punch or draw the numbered
slips of paper from the holes or receptacles and obtain the prize established
for the game if the number drawn corresponds to a winning number or, if the
punch board includes the use of a seal card, a potential winning number.
   “Raffle” means a form of bingo in which the one or more prizes are won by
one or more persons who have purchased a raffle ticket. The one or more winners
of the raffle are determined by drawing a ticket stub or other detachable
section from a receptacle containing ticket stubs or detachable sections
corresponding to all tickets sold for the raffle.  The term does not include
the drawing of a ticket stub or other detachable section of a ticket purchased
to attend a professional sporting event if both of the following apply:
      (1)   The ticket stub or other detachable section is used to select the
winner of a free prize given away at the professional sporting event; and
      (2)   The cost of the ticket is the same as the cost of a ticket to the
professional sporting event on days when no free prize is given away.
   “Redeemable voucher” means any ticket, token, coupon, receipt, or other
noncash representation of value.
   “Religious organization” means any church, body of communicants, or group
that is not organized or operated for profit and that gathers in common
membership for regular worship and religious observances.
   “Revoke” means to void permanently all rights and privileges of the holder
of a license issued under Ohio R.C. 2915.08, 2915.081, or 2915.082 or a
charitable gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.
   “Scheme of chance.”
      (1)   A slot machine unless authorized under R.C. Chapter 3772, lottery
unless authorized under R.C. Chapter 3770, numbers game, pool conducted for
profit, or other scheme in which a participant gives a valuable consideration
for a chance to win a prize, but does not include bingo, a skill-based
amusement machine, or a pool not conducted for profit. “Scheme of chance”
includes the use of an electronic device to reveal the results of a game entry
if valuable consideration is paid, directly or indirectly, for a chance to win
a prize. Valuable consideration is deemed to be paid for a chance to win a
prize in the following instances:
         (a)   Less than 50% of the goods or services sold by a scheme of
chance operator in exchange for game entries are used or redeemed by
participants at any one location;
         (b)   Less than 50% of participants who purchase goods or services at
any one location do not accept, use, or redeem the goods or services sold or
purportedly sold;
         (c)   More than 50% of prizes at any one location are revealed to
participants through an electronic device simulating a game of chance or a
“casino game” as defined in R.C. § 3772.01;
         (d)   The good or service sold by a scheme of chance operator in
exchange for a game entry cannot be used or redeemed in the manner advertised;
         (e)   A participant pays more than fair market value for goods or
services offered by a scheme of chance operator in order to receive one or more
game entries;
         (f)   A participant may use the electronic device to purchase
additional game entries;
         (g)   A participant may purchase additional game entries by using
points or credits won as prizes while using the electronic device;
         (h)   A scheme of chance operator pays out in prize money more than
20% of the gross revenue received at one location; or
         (i)   A participant makes a purchase or exchange in order to obtain
any good or service that may be used to facilitate play on the electronic
device.
      (2)   As used in this division, “electronic device” means a mechanical,
video, digital, or electronic machine or device that is capable of displaying
information on a screen or other mechanism and that is owned, leased, or
otherwise possessed by any person conducting a scheme of chance, or by that
person’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, or contractors.
   “Seal card” means a form of instant bingo that uses instant bingo tickets in
conjunction with a board or placard that contains one or more seals that, when
removed or opened, reveal predesignated winning numbers, letters, or symbols.
   “Security personnel” includes any person who either is a sheriff, deputy
sheriff, marshal, deputy marshal, township constable, or member of an organized
police department of a municipal corporation or has successfully completed a
peace officer’s training course pursuant to Ohio R.C. 109.71 to 109.79 and who
is hired to provide security for the premises on which bingo is conducted.
   “Skill-based amusement machine.”
      (1)   (a)   A mechanical, video, digital, or electronic device that
rewards the player or players, if at all, only with merchandise prizes or with
redeemable vouchers redeemable only for merchandise prizes, provided that with
respect to rewards for playing the game all of the following apply:
            1.   The wholesale value of a merchandise prize awarded as a result
of the single play of a machine does not exceed $10;
            2.   Redeemable vouchers awarded for any single play of a machine
are not redeemable for a merchandise prize with a wholesale value of more than
$10;
            3.   Redeemable vouchers are not redeemable for a merchandise prize
that has a wholesale value of more than $10 times the fewest number of single
plays necessary to accrue the redeemable vouchers required to obtain that
prize; and
            4.   Any redeemable vouchers or merchandise prizes are distributed
at the site of the skill- based amusement machine at the time of play.
         (b)   A card for the purchase of gasoline is a redeemable voucher for
purposes of division (1) of this definition even if the skill-based amusement
machine for the play of which the card is awarded is located at a place where
gasoline may not be legally distributed to the public or the card is not
redeemable at the location of, or at the time of playing, the skill-based
amusement machine.
      (2)   A device shall not be considered a skill-based amusement machine
and shall be considered a slot machine if it pays cash or one or more of the
following apply:
         (a)   The ability of a player to succeed at the game is impacted by
the number or ratio of prior wins to prior losses of players playing the game;
         (b)   Any reward of redeemable vouchers is not based solely on the
player achieving the object of the game or the players score;
         (c)   The outcome of the game, or the value of the redeemable voucher
or merchandise prize awarded for winning the game, can be controlled by a
source other than any player playing the game;
         (d)   The success of any player is or may be determined by a chance
event that cannot be altered by player actions;
         (e)   The ability of any player to succeed at the game is determined
by game features not visible or known to the player;
         (f)   The ability of the player to succeed at the game is impacted by
the exercise of a skill that no reasonable player could exercise.
      (3)   All of the following apply to any machine that is operated as
described in division (1) of this definition:
         (a)   As used in this definition of “skill-based amusement machine”, 
“game” and “play” mean one event from the initial activation of the machine
until the results of play are determined without payment of additional
consideration. An individual utilizing a machine that involves a single game,
play, contest, competition, or tournament may be awarded redeemable vouchers or
merchandise prizes based on the results of play.
         (b)   Advance play for a single game, play, contest, competition, or
tournament participation may be purchased. The cost of the contest,
competition, or tournament participation may be greater than a single non-
contest, competition, or tournament play.
         (c)   To the extent that the machine is used in a contest,
competition, or tournament, that contest, competition, or tournament has a
defined starting and ending date and is open to participants in competition for
scoring and ranking results toward the awarding of redeemable vouchers or
merchandise prizes that are stated prior to the start of the contest,
competition, or tournament.
      (4)   For purposes of division (1) of this definition, the mere presence
of a device, such as a pin- setting, ball-releasing, or scoring mechanism, that
does not contribute to or affect the outcome of the play of the game does not
make the device a skill-based amusement machine.
   “Slot machine”.
      (1)   Means either of the following:
         (a)   Any mechanical, electronic, video, or digital device that is
capable of accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on
behalf of a player who gives the thing of value in the hope of gain;
         (b)   Any mechanical, electronic, video, or digital device that is
capable of accepting anything of value, directly or indirectly, from or on
behalf of a player to conduct bingo or a scheme or game of chance.
      (2)   “Slot machine” does not include a skill-based amusement machine or
an instant bingo ticket dispenser.
   “Sporting organization” means a hunting, fishing, or trapping organization,
other than a college or high school fraternity or sorority, that is not
organized for profit, that is affiliated with a state or national sporting
organization, including but not limited to, the League of Ohio Sportsmen, and
that has been in continuous existence in this state for a period of three
years.
   “Suspend” means to interrupt temporarily all rights and privileges of the
holder of a license issued under Ohio R.C. 2915.08, 2915.081, or 2915.082 or a
charitable gaming license issued by another jurisdiction.
   “Sweepstakes.” Any game, contest, advertising scheme or plan, or other
promotion where consideration is not required for a person to enter to win or
become eligible to receive any prize, the determination of which is based upon
chance. “Sweepstakes” does not include bingo as authorized under R.C. Chapter
2915, pari-mutuel wagering as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3769, lotteries
conducted by the State Lottery Commission as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3770,
and casino gaming as authorized by R.C. Chapter 3772.
   “Sweepstakes terminal device.”
      (1)   A mechanical, video, digital, or electronic machine or device that
is owned, leased, or otherwise possessed by any person conducting a
sweepstakes, or by that person’s partners, affiliates, subsidiaries, or
contractors, that is intended to be used by a sweepstakes participant, and that
is capable of displaying information on a screen or other mechanism. A device
is a sweepstakes terminal device if any of the following apply:
         (a)   The device uses a simulated game terminal as a representation of
the prizes associated with the results of the sweepstakes entries.
         (b)   The device utilizes software such that the simulated game
influences or determines the winning of or value of the prize.
         (c)   The device selects prizes from a predetermined finite pool of
entries.
         (d)   The device utilizes a mechanism that reveals the content of a
predetermined sweepstakes entry.
         (e)   The device predetermines the prize results and stores those
results for delivery at the time the sweepstakes entry results are revealed.
         (f)   The device utilizes software to create a game result.
         (g)   The device reveals the prize incrementally, even though the
device does not influence the awarding of the prize or the value of any prize
awarded.
         (h)   The device determines and associates the prize with an entry or
entries at the time the sweepstakes is entered.
      (2)   As used in this definition and in §
630.02:
         “Enter.” The act by which a person becomes eligible to receive any
prize offered in a sweepstakes.
         “Entry.” One event from the initial activation of the sweepstakes
terminal device until all the sweepstakes prize results from that activation
are revealed.
         “Prize.” Any gift, award, gratuity, good, service, credit, reward, or
any other thing of value that may be transferred to a person, whether
possession of the prize is actually transferred, or placed on an account or
other record as evidence of the intent to transfer the prize.
         “Sweepstakes terminal device facility.” Any location in this state
where a sweepstakes terminal device is provided to a sweepstakes participant,
except as provided in §
630.02(G) and R.C. § 2915.02(G).
   “Veteran’s organization” means any individual post or state headquarters of
a national veteran’s association or an auxiliary unit of any individual post of
a national veteran’s association, which post, state headquarters, or auxiliary
unit is incorporated as a nonprofit corporation and either has received a
letter from the state headquarters of the national veteran’s association
indicating that the individual post or auxiliary unit is in good standing with
the national veteran’s association or has received a letter from the national
veteran’s association indicating that the state headquarters is in good
standing with the national veteran’s association.  As used in this division,
“national veteran’s association” means any veteran’s association that has been
in continuous existence as such for a period of at least five years and either
is incorporated by an act of the United States Congress or has a national dues-
paying membership of at least 5,000 persons.
   “Volunteer firefighter’s organization” means any organization of volunteer
firefighters, as defined in Ohio R.C. 146.01, that is organized and operated
exclusively to provide financial support for a volunteer fire department or a
volunteer fire company and that is recognized or ratified by a county,
municipal corporation, or township.
   “Volunteer rescue service organization” means any organization of volunteers
organized to function as an emergency medical service organization as defined
in Ohio R.C. 4765.01.
   “Youth athletic organization” means any organization, not organized for
profit, that is organized and operated exclusively to provide financial support
to, or to operate, athletic activities for persons who are 21 years of age or
younger by means of sponsoring, organizing, operating, or contributing to the
support of an athletic team, club, league, or association.
   “Youth athletic park organization” means any organization, not organized for
profit, that satisfies both of the following:
      (1)   It owns, operates, and maintains playing fields that satisfy both
of the following:
         (a)   The playing fields are used at least 100 days per year for
athletic activities by one or more organizations, not organized for profit,
each of which is organized and operated exclusively to provide financial
support to, or to operate, athletic activities for persons who are 18 years of
age or younger by means of sponsoring, organizing, operating, or contributing
to the support of an athletic team, club, league, or association.
         (b)   The playing fields are not used for any profit-making activity
at any time during the year.
      (2)   It uses the proceeds of bingo it conducts exclusively for the
operation, maintenance, and improvement of its playing fields of the type
described in division (1) of this definition.
(ORC 2915.01)
§ 630.02  GAMBLING IN GENERAL.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Engage in bookmaking, or knowingly engage in conduct that
facilitates bookmaking.
      (2)   Establish, promote, or operate or knowingly engage in conduct that
facilitates any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme of chance.
      (3)   Knowingly procure, transmit, exchange, or engage in conduct that
facilitates the procurement, transmission, or exchange of information for use
in establishing odds or determining winners in connection with bookmaking or
with any game of chance conducted for profit or any scheme of chance.
      (4)   Engage in betting or in playing any scheme or game of chance as a
substantial source of income or livelihood.
      (5)   Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes with the
use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal device facility
and either:
         (a)   Give to another person any item described in R.C. § 2915.01(VV)
(1), (VV)(2), (VV)(3), or (VV)(4) as a prize for playing or participating in a
sweepstakes; or
         (b)   Give to another person any merchandise prize, or a redeemable
voucher for a merchandise prize, the wholesale value of which is in excess of
$10 and which is awarded as a single entry for playing or participating in a
sweepstakes. Redeemable vouchers shall not be redeemable for a merchandise
prize that has a wholesale value of more than $10.
      (6)   Conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a sweepstakes with the
use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes terminal device facility
without first obtaining a current annual “certificate of registration” from the
Attorney General as required by R.C. § 2915.02(F).
      (7)   With purpose to violate division (A)(1), (2), (3), (4), (5), or (6)
of this section, acquire, possess, control, or operate any gambling device.
   (B)   For purposes of division (A)(1) of this section, a person facilitates
bookmaking if the person in any way knowingly aids an illegal bookmaking
operation, including, without limitation, placing a bet with a person engaged
in or facilitating illegal bookmaking.  For purposes of division (A)(2) of this
section, a person facilitates a game of chance conducted for profit or a scheme
of chance if the person in any way knowingly aids in the conduct or operation
of any such game or scheme, including, without limitation, playing any such
game or scheme.
   (C)   This section does not prohibit conduct in connection with gambling
expressly permitted by law.
   (D)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
      (1)   Games of chance, if all of the following apply:
         (a)   The games of chance are not craps for money or roulette for
money.
         (b)   The games of chance are conducted by a charitable organization
that is and has received from the Internal Revenue Service a determination
letter that is currently in effect, stating that the organization is exempt
from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3).
         (c)   The games of chance are conducted at festivals of the charitable
organization that are conducted not more than a total of five days a calendar
year, and are conducted on premises owned by the charitable organization for a
period of no less than one year immediately preceding the conducting of the
games of chance, on premises leased from a governmental unit, or on premises
that are leased from a veteran’s or fraternal organization and that have been
owned by the lessor veteran’s or fraternal organization for a period of no less
than one year immediately preceding the conducting of the games of chance. A
charitable organization shall not lease premises from a veteran’s or fraternal
organization to conduct a festival described in this division, if the veteran’s
or fraternal organization already has leased the premises 12 times during the
preceding year to charitable organizations for that purpose.  If a charitable
organization leases premises from a veteran’s or fraternal organization to
conduct a festival described in this division, the charitable organization
shall not pay a rental rate for the premises per day of the festival that
exceeds the rental rate per bingo session that a charitable organization may
pay under Ohio R.C. 2915.09(B)(1) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance when it leases premises from another charitable organization to
conduct bingo games.
         (d)   All of the money or assets received from the games of chance
after deduction only of prizes paid out during the conduct of the games of
chance are used by, given, donated or otherwise transferred to any organization
that is described in IRC 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a
governmental unit or an organization that is tax exempt under IRC 501(a) and
described in IRC 501(c)(3).
         (e)   The games of chance are not conducted during or within ten hours
of a bingo game conducted for amusement purposes only pursuant to Ohio R.C.
2915.12 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.  No person shall
receive any commission, wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or other
form of compensation, directly or indirectly, for operating or assisting in the
operation of any game of chance.
      (2)   Any tag fishing tournament, as defined in Ohio R.C. 1531.01,
operated under a permit issued under Ohio R.C. 1533.92.
      (3)   Bingo conducted by a charitable organization that holds a license
issued under Ohio R.C. 2915.08.
   (E)   Division (D) of this section shall not be construed to authorize the
sale, lease, or other temporary or permanent transfer of the right to conduct
games of chance, as granted by that division, by any charitable organization
that is granted that right.
   (F)   Any person desiring to conduct, or participate in the conduct of, a
sweepstakes with the use of a sweepstakes terminal device at a sweepstakes
terminal device facility shall first register with the Office of the Attorney
General and obtain an annual certificate of registration by providing a filing
fee of $200 and all information as required by rule adopted under R.C. §
2915.02(H). Not later than the tenth day of each month, each sweepstakes
terminal device operator shall file a sweepstakes terminal device monthly
report with the Attorney General and provide a filing fee of $50 and all
information required by rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.02(H). All information
provided to the Attorney General under this division shall be available to law
enforcement upon request.
   (G)   (1)   A person may apply to the Attorney General, on a form prescribed
by the Attorney General, for a certificate of compliance that the person is not
operating a sweepstakes terminal device facility. The form shall require the
person to include the address of the business location where sweepstakes
terminal devices will be used and to make the following certifications:
         (a)   That the person will not use more than two sweepstakes terminal
devices at the business location;
         (b)   That the retail value of sweepstakes prizes to be awarded at the
business location using sweepstakes terminal devices during a reporting period
will be less than 3% of the gross revenue received at the business location
during the reporting period;
         (c)   That no other form of gaming except lottery ticket sales as
authorized under R.C. Chapter 3770 will be conducted at the business location
or in an adjoining area of the business location;
         (d)   That any sweepstakes terminal device at the business location
will not allow any deposit of any money, coin, or token, or the use of any
credit card, debit card, prepaid card, or any other method of similar payment
to be used, directly or indirectly, to participate in a sweepstakes;
         (e)   That notification of any prize will not take place on the same
day as a participant’s sweepstakes entry; and
         (f)   That the person consents to provide any other information to the
Attorney General as required by rule adopted under R.C. § 2915.02(H).
      (2)   The filing fee for a certificate of compliance is $250. The
Attorney General may charge up to an additional $250 for reasonable expenses
resulting from any investigation related to an application for a certificate of
compliance.
      (3)   A certificate of compliance is effective for one year. The
certificate holder may reapply for a certificate of compliance. A person issued
a certificate of compliance shall file semiannual reports with the Attorney
General stating the number of sweepstakes terminal devices at the business
location and that the retail value of prizes awarded at the business location
using sweepstakes terminal devices is less than 3% of the gross revenue
received at the business location.
   (H)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of gambling, a misdemeanor of
the first degree.  The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99. If the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling offense,
gambling is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
Notwithstanding this division, failing to file a sweepstakes terminal device
monthly report as required by division (F) of this section or the semiannual
report required by division (G) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
(ORC 2915.02(A) - (G), (K))
§ 630.03  OPERATING A GAMBLING HOUSE.
   (A)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control, or
supervision of premises, shall:
      (1)   Use or occupy the premises for gambling in violation of Ohio R.C.
2915.02 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (2)   Recklessly permit the premises to be used or occupied for gambling
in violation of Ohio R.C. 2915.02 or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of operating a
gambling house, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  The penalty shall be as
provided in §
202.99. If the offender previously has been convicted of a gambling offense,
operating a gambling house is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
   (C)   Premises used or occupied in violation of this section constitute a
nuisance subject to abatement under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3767.
(ORC 2915.03)
§ 630.04  PUBLIC GAMING.
   (A)   No person, while at a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall,
or other place of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort shall
make a bet or play any game of chance or scheme of chance.
   (B)   No person, being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control, or
supervision of a hotel, restaurant, tavern, store, arena, hall, or other place
of public accommodation, business, amusement, or resort shall recklessly permit
those premises to be used or occupied in violation of division (A) of this
section.
   (C)   Divisions (A) and (B) of this section do not prohibit conduct in
connection with gambling expressly permitted by law.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public gaming, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
   (E)   Premises used or occupied in violation of division (B) of this section
constitute a nuisance subject to abatement under R.C. Chapter 3767.
(ORC 2915.04)
§ 630.05  CHEATING.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome
of any of the following:
      (1)   The subject of a bet.
      (2)   A contest of knowledge, skill, or endurance that is not an athletic
or sporting event.
      (3)   A scheme or game of chance.
      (4)   Bingo.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Offer, give, solicit, or accept anything of value to corrupt the
outcome of an athletic or sporting event.
      (2)   Engage in conduct designed to corrupt the outcome of an athletic or
sporting event.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
cheating.  Except as otherwise provided in this division, cheating is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the potential gain from the cheating is
$1,000 or more or if the offender previously has been convicted of any gambling
offense or of any theft offense as defined in Ohio R.C. 2913.01, cheating is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
corrupting sports.  Corrupting sports is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(ORC 2915.05)
§ 630.06  RESPONSIBILITY OF CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION CONDUCTING BINGO GAME.
   (A)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo shall fail to do any of
the following:
      (1)   Own all of the equipment used to conduct bingo or lease that
equipment from a charitable organization that is licensed to conduct bingo, or
from the landlord of a premises where bingo is conducted, for a rental rate
that is not more than is customary and reasonable for that equipment;
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(3) of this section,
use all of the gross receipts from bingo for paying prizes, for reimbursement
of expenses for or for renting premises in which to conduct bingo, for
purchasing or leasing bingo supplies used in conducting bingo, for
reimbursement of expenses for or for hiring security personnel, for
reimbursement of expenses for or for advertising bingo, or for reimbursement of
other expenses or for other expenses listed in the definition for “expenses” in
Ohio R.C. 2915.01, provided that the amount of the receipts so spent is not
more than is customary and reasonable for a similar purchase, lease, hiring,
advertising, or expense. If the building in which bingo is conducted is owned
by the charitable organization conducting bingo and the bingo conducted
includes a form of bingo described in division (1) of the definition of “bingo”
in Ohio R.C. 2915.01, the charitable organization may deduct from the total
amount of the gross receipts from each session a sum equal to the lesser of
$600 or 45% of the gross receipts from the bingo described in that division as
consideration for the use of the premises;
      (3)   Use, or give, donate, or otherwise transfer, all of the net profit
derived from bingo, other than instant bingo, for a charitable purpose listed
in its license application and described in the definition for “charitable
purpose” in Ohio R.C. 2915.01, or distribute all of the net profit from the
proceeds of the sale of instant bingo as stated in its license application and
in accordance with Ohio R.C. 2915.101.
   (B)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in
division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in Ohio R.C. 2915.01 shall fail to do
any of the following:
      (1)   Conduct the bingo game on premises that are owned by the charitable
organization, on premises that are owned by another charitable organization and
leased from that charitable organization for a rental rate not in excess of the
lesser of $650 per bingo session or 45% of the gross receipts of the bingo
session, on premises that are leased from a person other than a charitable
organization for a rental rate that is not more than is customary and
reasonable for premises that are similar in location, size, and quality but not
in excess of $450 per bingo session, or on premises that are owned by a person
other than a charitable organization, that are leased from that person by
another charitable organization, and that are subleased from that other
charitable organization by the charitable organization for a rental rate not in
excess of $450 per bingo session.  No charitable organization is required to
pay property taxes or assessments on premises that the charitable organization
leases from another person to conduct bingo sessions. If the charitable
organization leases from a person other than a charitable organization the
premises on which it conducts bingo sessions, the lessor of the premises shall
provide only the premises to the organization and shall not provide the
organization with bingo game operators, security personnel, concessions or
concession operators, bingo supplies, or any other type of service. A
charitable organization shall not lease or sublease premises that it owns or
leases to more than three other charitable organizations per calendar week for
the purpose of conducting bingo sessions on the premises. A person that is not
a charitable organization shall not lease premises that it owns, leases, or
otherwise is empowered to lease to more than three charitable organizations per
calendar week for conducting bingo sessions on the premises. In no case shall
more than nine bingo sessions be conducted on any premises in any calendar
week;
      (2)   Display its license conspicuously at the premises where the bingo
session is conducted;
      (3)   Conduct the bingo session in accordance with division (1) of the
definition of “bingo” in Ohio R.C. 2915.01.
   (C)   No charitable organization that conducts a bingo game described in
division (1) of the definition of “bingo” in Ohio R.C. 2915.01 shall do any of
the following:
      (1)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for operating a bingo
session that is conducted by the charitable organization or for preparing,
selling, or serving food or beverages at the site of the bingo session, permit
any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to pay
compensation to any bingo game operator who prepares, sells, or serves food or
beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable organization, or
permit any auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization to prepare,
sell, or serve food or beverages at a bingo session conducted by the charitable
organization, if the auxiliary unit or society pays any compensation to the
bingo game operators who prepare, sell, or serve the food or beverages;
      (2)   Pay consulting fees to any person for any services performed in
relation to the bingo session;
      (3)   Pay concession fees to any person who provides refreshments to the
participants in the bingo session;
      (4)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(4) of this section,
conduct more than three bingo sessions in any seven-day period. A volunteer
firefighter’s organization or a volunteer rescue service organization that
conducts not more than five bingo sessions in a calendar year may conduct more
than three bingo sessions in a seven-day period after notifying the Attorney
General when it will conduct the sessions;
      (5)   Pay out more than $6,000 in prizes for bingo games described in
Ohio R.C. 2915.01(S)(1) during any bingo session that is conducted by the
charitable organization.  “Prizes” does not include awards from the conduct of
instant bingo.
      (6)   Conduct a bingo session at any time during the eight-hour period
between 2:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m., at any time during, or within ten hours of, a
bingo game conducted for amusement only pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.12 or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, at any premises not specified on
its license, or on any day of the week or during any time period not specified
on its license. This division does not prohibit the sale of instant bingo
tickets beginning at 9:00 a.m. for a bingo session that begins at 10:00 a.m. 
If circumstances make it impractical for the charitable organization to conduct
a bingo session at the premises, or on the day of the week or at the time
specified on its license or if a charitable organization wants to conduct bingo
sessions on a day of the week or at a time other than the day or time specified
on its license, the charitable organization may apply in writing to the
Attorney General for an amended license pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.08(F).  A
charitable organization may apply twice in each calendar year for an amended
license to conduct bingo sessions on a day of the week or at a time other than
the day or time specified on its license. If the amended license is granted,
the organization may conduct bingo sessions at the premises, on the day of the
week, and at the time specified on its amended license;
      (7)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, is under the age of 18 to work as a bingo game operator;
      (8)   Permit any person whom the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any
jurisdiction to be a bingo game operator;
      (9)   Permit the lessor of the premises on which the bingo session is
conducted, if the lessor is not a charitable organization, to provide the
charitable organization with bingo game operators, security personnel,
concessions, bingo  supplies, or any other type of service;
      (10)   Purchase or lease bingo supplies from any person except a
distributor issued a license under Ohio R.C. 2915.081;
      (11)   (a)   Use or permit the use of electronic bingo aids except under
the following circumstances:
            1.   For any single participant, not more than 90 bingo faces can
be played using an electronic bingo aid or aids.
            2.   The charitable organization shall provide a participant using
an electronic bingo aid with corresponding paper bingo cards or sheets.
            3.   The total price of bingo faces played with an electronic bingo
aid shall be equal to the total price of the same number of bingo faces played
with a paper bingo card or sheet sold at the same bingo session but without an
electronic bingo aid.
            4.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be part of an electronic
network other than a network that includes only bingo aids and devices that are
located on the premises at which the bingo is being conducted or be interactive
with any device not located on the premises at which the bingo is being
conducted.
            5.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to participate in bingo
that is conducted at a location other than the location at which the bingo
session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used.
            6.   An electronic bingo aid cannot be used to provide for the
input of numbers and letters announced by a bingo caller other than the bingo
caller who physically calls the numbers and letters at the location at which
the bingo session is conducted and at which the electronic bingo aid is used.
         (b)   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with Ohio
R.C. Chapter 119 that govern the use of electronic bingo aids. The rules may
include a requirement that an electronic bingo aid be capable of being audited
by the Attorney General to verify the number of bingo cards or sheets played
during each bingo session.
      (12)   Permit any person the charitable organization knows, or should
have known, to be under 18 years of age to play bingo described in division (1)
of the definition of “bingo” in Ohio R.C. 2915.01.
   (D)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) of this section,
no charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator, and no bingo
game operator shall receive or accept, any commission, wage, salary, reward,
tip, donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation, directly or indirectly,
regardless of the source, for conducting bingo or providing other work or labor
at the site of bingo during a bingo session.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) of this section, no
charitable organization shall provide to a bingo game operator any commission,
wage, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity, or other form of compensation,
directly or indirectly regardless of the source, for conducting instant bingo
other than at a bingo session at the site of instant bingo other than at a
bingo session.
      (3)   Nothing in this division (D) of this section prohibits an employee
of a fraternal organization, veteran’s organization, or sporting organization
from selling instant bingo tickets or cards to the organization’s members or
invited guests, as long as no portion of the employee’s compensation is paid
from any receipts of bingo.
   (E)   Notwithstanding division (B)(1) of this section, a charitable
organization that, prior to December 6, 1977, has entered into written
agreements for the lease of premises it owns to another charitable organization
or other charitable organizations for the conducting of bingo sessions so that
more than two bingo sessions are conducted per calendar week on the premises,
and a person that is not a charitable organization and that, prior to December
6, 1977, has entered into written agreements for the lease of premises it owns
to charitable organizations for the conducting of more than two bingo sessions
per calendar week on the premises, may continue to lease the premises to those
charitable organizations, provided that no more than four sessions are
conducted per calendar week, that the lessor organization or person has
notified the Attorney General in writing of the organizations that will conduct
the sessions and the days of the week and the times of the day on which the
sessions will be conducted, that the initial lease entered into with each
organization that will conduct the sessions was filed with the Attorney General
prior to December 6, 1977, and that each organization that will conduct the
sessions was issued a license to conduct bingo games by the Attorney General
prior to December 6, 1977.
   (F)   This section does not prohibit a bingo licensed charitable
organization or a game operator from giving any person an instant bingo ticket
as a prize.
   (G)   Whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section is guilty of
illegally conducting a bingo game, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law. Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A)(1), (A)(3), (B)(1), (B)(2), (B)(3), (C)(1) to (C)(11), or (D) of
this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. Whoever violates
division (C)(12) of this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.  The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
division (C)(12) of this section, a violation of division (C)(12) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2915.09)
§ 630.07  MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS BY CHARITABLE ORGANIZATIONS.
   (A)   No charitable organization that conducts bingo or a game of chance
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.02(D), or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, shall fail to maintain the following records for at least three
years from the date on which the bingo or game of chance is conducted:
      (1)   An itemized list of the gross receipts of each bingo session, each
game of instant bingo by serial number, each raffle, each punch board game, and
each game of chance, and an itemized list of the gross profits of each game of
instant bingo by serial number;
      (2)   An itemized list of all expenses, other than prizes, that are
incurred in conducting bingo or instant bingo, the name of each person to whom
the expenses are paid, and a receipt for all of the expenses;
      (3)   A list of all prizes awarded during each bingo session, each
raffle, each punch board game, and each game of chance conducted by the
charitable organization, the total prizes awarded from each game of instant
bingo by serial number, and the name, address, and social security number of
all persons who are winners of prizes of $600 or more in value;
      (4)   An itemized list of the recipients of the net profit of bingo or
game of chance, including the name and address of each recipient to whom the
money is distributed, and if the organization uses the net profit of bingo, or
the money or assets received from a game of chance, for any charitable or other
purpose set forth in Ohio R.C. 2915.01(V), Ohio R.C. 2915.02(D), or Ohio R.C.
2915.101, a list of each purpose and an itemized list of each expenditure for
each purpose;
      (5)   The number of persons who participate in any bingo session or game
of chance that is conducted by the charitable organization;
      (6)   A list of receipts from the sale of food and beverages by the
charitable organization or one of its auxiliary units or societies, if the
receipts were excluded from “gross receipts” under Ohio R.C. 2915.01(T);
      (7)   An itemized list of all expenses incurred at each bingo session,
each raffle, each punch board game, or each game of instant bingo conducted by
the charitable organization in the sale of food and beverages by the charitable
organization or by an auxiliary unit or society of the charitable organization,
the name of each person to whom the expenses are paid, and a receipt for all of
the expenses.
   (B)   A charitable organization shall keep the records that it is required
to maintain pursuant to division (A) of this section at its principal place of
business in this state or at its headquarters in this state and shall notify
the Attorney General of the location at which those records are kept.
   (C)   The gross profit from each bingo session or game described in division
(1) or (2) of the definition of “bingo” in Ohio R.C. 2915.01 shall be deposited
into a checking account devoted exclusively to the bingo session or game. 
Payments for allowable expenses incurred in conducting the bingo session or
game and payments to recipients of some or all of the net profit of the bingo
session or game shall be made only by checks or electronic fund transfers drawn
on the bingo session or game account.
   (D)   Each charitable organization shall conduct and record an inventory of
all of its bingo supplies as of the first day of November of each year.
   (E)   The Attorney General may adopt rules in accordance with Ohio R.C.
Chapter 119 that establish standards of accounting, record keeping, and
reporting to ensure that gross receipts from bingo or games of chance are
properly accounted for.
   (F)   A distributor shall maintain, for a period of three years after the
date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of its selling
or otherwise providing to another person bingo supplies for use in this state.
The record shall include all of the following for each instance:
      (1)   The name of the manufacturer from which the distributor purchased
the bingo supplies and the date of the purchase;
      (2)   The name and address of the charitable organization or other
distributor to which the bingo supplies were sold or otherwise provided;
      (3)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies;
      (4)   Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of all paper
bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided
to each charitable organization.
   (G)   A manufacturer shall maintain, for a period of three years after the
date of its sale or other provision, a record of each instance of its selling
or otherwise providing bingo supplies for use in this state. The record shall
include all of the following for each instance:
      (1)   The name and address of the distributor to whom the bingo supplies
were sold or otherwise provided;
      (2)   A description that clearly identifies the bingo supplies, including
serial numbers;
      (3)   Invoices that include the nonrepeating serial numbers of all paper
bingo cards and sheets and all instant bingo deals sold or otherwise provided
to each distributor.
   (H)   (1)   The Attorney General or any law enforcement agency may do all of
the following:
         (a)   Investigate any charitable organization or any officer, agent,
trustee, member, or employee of the organization;
         (b)   Examine the accounts and records of the organization;
         (c)   Conduct inspections, audits, and observations of bingo or games
of chance;
         (d)   Conduct inspections of the premises where bingo or games of
chance are conducted;
         (e)   Take any other necessary and reasonable action to determine if a
violation of any provision of this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915 has
occurred and to determine whether Ohio R.C. 2915.11, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, has been complied with.
      (2)   If any law enforcement agency has reasonable grounds to believe
that a charitable organization or an officer, agent, trustee, member, or
employee of the organization has violated any provision of this chapter or Ohio
R.C. Chapter 2915, the law enforcement agency may proceed by action in the
proper court to enforce this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915, provided that
the law enforcement agency shall give written notice to the Attorney General
when commencing an action as described in this division.
   (I)   No person shall destroy, alter, conceal, withhold, or deny access to
any accounts or records of a charitable organization that have been requested
for examination, or obstruct, impede, or interfere with any inspection, audit,
or observation of bingo or a game of chance or premises where bingo or a game
of chance is conducted, or refuse to comply with any reasonable request of, or
obstruct, impede, or interfere with any other reasonable action undertaken by,
the Attorney General or a law enforcement agency pursuant to division (H) of
this section.
   (J)   Whoever violates division (A) or (I) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
(ORC 2915.10)
§ 630.08  QUALIFICATIONS OF BINGO GAME OPERATOR.
   (A)   No person shall be a bingo game operator unless the person is 18 years
of age or older.
   (B)   No person who has been convicted of a felony or a gambling offense in
any jurisdiction shall be a bingo game operator.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
(ORC 2915.11)
§ 630.09  EXEMPTION FOR BINGO GAMES CONDUCTED FOR AMUSEMENT.
   (A)   Sections
630.06 to
630.13 do not apply to bingo games that are conducted for the purpose of
amusement only.  A bingo game is conducted for the purpose of amusement only if
it complies with all of the requirements specified in either division (A)(1) or
(A)(2) of this section.
      (1)   (a)   The participants do not pay any money or any other thing of
value, including an admission fee or any fee, for bingo cards or sheets,
objects to cover the spaces, or other devices used in playing bingo, for the
privilege of participating in the bingo game, or to defray any costs of the
game, or pay tips or make donations during or immediately before or after the
bingo game.
         (b)   All prizes awarded during the course of the game are non-
monetary, and in the form of merchandise, goods, or entitlement to goods or
services only, and the total value of all prizes awarded during the game is
less than $100.
         (c)   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity,
or other form of compensation, either directly or indirectly, and regardless of
the source, is paid to any bingo game operator for work or labor performed at
the site of the bingo game.
         (d)   The bingo game is not conducted either during or within ten
hours of any of the following:
            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is
conducted pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.07 through 2915.11 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
            2.   A scheme or game of chance, or bingo described in Ohio R.C.
2915.01(O)(2).
         (e)   The number of players participating in the bingo game does not
exceed 50.
      (2)   (a)   The participants do not pay money or any other thing of value
as an admission fee, and no participant is charged more than twenty-five cents
($0.25) to purchase a bingo card or sheet, objects to cover the spaces, or
other devices used in playing bingo.
         (b)   The total amount of money paid by all of the participants for
bingo cards or sheets, objects to cover the spaces, or other devices used in
playing bingo does not exceed $100.
         (c)   All of the money paid for bingo cards or sheets, objects to
cover spaces, or other devices used in playing bingo is used only to pay
winners monetary and nonmonetary prizes and to provide refreshments.
         (d)   The total value of all prizes awarded during the game does not
exceed $100.
         (e)   No commission, wages, salary, reward, tip, donation, gratuity,
or other form of compensation, either directly or indirectly, and regardless of
the source, is paid to any bingo game operator for work or labor performed at
the site of the bingo game.
         (f)   The bingo game is not conducted during or within ten hours of
either of the following:
            1.   A bingo session during which a charitable bingo game is
conducted pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.07 through 2915.11 or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance;
            2.   A scheme of chance or a game of chance, or bingo described in
Ohio R.C. 2915.01(O)(2).
         (g)   All of the participants reside at the premises where the bingo
game is conducted.
         (h)   The bingo games are conducted on different days of the week and
not more than twice in a calendar week.
   (B)   The Attorney General or any local law enforcement agency may
investigate the conduct of a bingo game that purportedly is conducted for
purposes of amusement only if there is reason to believe that the purported
amusement bingo game does not comply with the requirements of either division
(A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section.  A local law enforcement agency may proceed
by action in the proper court to enforce this section if the local law
enforcement agency gives written notice to the Attorney General when commencing
the action.
(ORC 2915.12)
§ 630.10  PROHIBITIONS WHERE INSTANT BINGO GAME IS CONDUCTED.
   (A)   No charitable organization that conducts instant bingo shall do any of
the following:
      (1)   Fail to comply with the requirements of Ohio R.C. 2915.09(A)(1),
(A)(2), and (A)(3), or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (2)   Conduct instant bingo unless either of the following applies:
         (a)   That organization is, and has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the
organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a), is
described in IRC 501(c)(3), is a charitable organization as defined in Ohio
R.C. 2915.01, is in good standing in the state pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.08,
and is in compliance with Ohio R.C. Chapter 1716;
         (b)   That organization is, and has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a determination letter that is currently in effect stating that the
organization is, exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a), is
described in IRC 501(c)(7), (c)(8), (c)(10), or (c)(19) or is a veteran’s
organization described in IRC 501(c)(4), and conducts instant bingo under Ohio
R.C. 2915.13.
      (3)   Conduct instant bingo on any day, at any time, or at any premises
not specified on the organization’s license issued pursuant to Ohio R.C.
2915.08;
      (4)   Permit any person whom the organization knows or should have known
has been convicted of a felony or gambling offense in any jurisdiction to be a
bingo game operator in the conduct of instant bingo;
      (5)   Purchase or lease supplies used to conduct instant bingo or punch
board games from any person except a distributor licensed under Ohio R.C.
2915.081;
      (6)   Sell or provide any instant bingo ticket or card for a price
different from the price printed on it by the manufacturer on either the
instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare;
      (7)   Sell an instant bingo ticket or card to a person under 18 years of
age;
      (8)   Fail to keep unsold instant bingo tickets or cards for less than
three years;
      (9)   Pay any compensation to a bingo game operator for conducting
instant bingo that is conducted by the organization or for preparing, selling,
or serving food or beverages at the site of the instant bingo game, permit any
auxiliary unit or society of the organization to pay compensation to any bingo
game operator who prepares, sells, or serves food or beverages at an instant
bingo game conducted by the organization, or permit any auxiliary unit or
society of the organization to prepare, sell, or serve food or beverages at an
instant bingo game conducted by the organization, if the auxiliary unit or
society pays any compensation to the bingo game operators who prepare, sell, or
serve the food or beverages;
      (10)   Pay fees to any person for any services performed in relation to
an instant bingo game, except as provided in R.C. § 2915.093(D);
      (11)   Pay fees to any person who provides refreshments to the
participants in an instant bingo game;
      (12)   (a)   Allow instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold to bingo
game operators at a premises at which the organization sells instant bingo
tickets or cards or to be sold to employees of a D permit holder who are
working at a premises at which instant bingo tickets or cards are sold;
         (b)   Division (a)(12)(a) of this section does not prohibit a licensed
charitable organization or a bingo game operator from giving any person an
instant bingo ticket as a prize in place of a cash prize won by a participant
in an instant bingo game. In no case shall an instant bingo ticket or card be
sold or provided for a price different from the price printed on it by the
manufacturer on either the instant bingo ticket or card or on the game flare.
      (13)   Fail to display its bingo license, and the serial numbers of the
deal of instant bingo tickets or cards to be sold, conspicuously at each
premises at which it sells instant bingo tickets or cards;
      (14)   Possess a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards that was not
purchased from a distributor licensed under Ohio R.C. 2915.081 as reflected on
an invoice issued by the distributor that contains all of the information
required by Ohio R.C. 2915.10(E);
      (15)   Fail, once it opens a deal of instant bingo tickets or cards, to
continue to sell the tickets or cards in that deal until the tickets or cards
with the top two highest tiers of prizes in that deal are sold;
      (16)   Possess bingo supplies that were not obtained in accordance with
Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (B)   A charitable organization may purchase, lease, or use instant bingo
ticket dispensers to sell instant bingo tickets or cards.
   (C)   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2915.091(C), the Attorney General may adopt
rules in accordance with Ohio R.C. Chapter 119 that govern the conduct of
instant bingo by charitable organizations.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section or a rule adopted under
division (C) of this section is guilty of illegal instant bingo conduct. Except
as otherwise provided in this division, illegal instant bingo conduct is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.  If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
division (A) of this section or of such a rule adopted under division (C) of
this section, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(ORC 2915.091)
§ 630.11  RAFFLE DRAWINGS.
   (A)   (1)   Subject to division (A)(2) of this section, a charitable
organization, a public school, a chartered nonpublic school, a community
school, or a veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and
is described in IRC 501(c)(3), 501(c)(4), 501(c)(7), 501(c)(8), 501(c)(10), or
501(c)(19) may conduct a raffle to raise money for the organization or school
and does not need a license to conduct bingo in order to conduct a raffle
drawing that is not for profit.
      (2)   If a charitable organization that is described in division (A)(1)
of this section, but that is not also described in IRC 501(c)(3), conducts a
raffle, the charitable organization shall distribute at least 50% of the net
profit from the raffle to a charitable purpose described in Ohio R.C. 2915.01
(V) or to a department or agency of the federal government, the state, or any
political subdivision.
   (B)   A chamber of commerce may conduct not more than one raffle per year to
raise money for the chamber of commerce.
   (C)   Except as provided in division (A) or (B) of this section, no person
shall conduct a raffle drawing that is for profit or a raffle drawing that is
not for profit.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of illegal
conduct of a raffle. Except as otherwise provided in this division, illegal
conduct of a raffle is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the offender
previously has been convicted of a violation of division (C) of this section,
illegal conduct of a raffle is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(ORC 2915.092)
§ 630.12  INSTANT BINGO OTHER THAN AT BINGO SESSIONS.
   (A)   As used in this section, “retail income from all commercial activity”
means the income that a person receives from the provision of goods, services,
or activities that are provided at the location where instant bingo other than
at a bingo session is conducted, including the sale of instant bingo tickets. A
religious organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC
501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3), at not more than one location at which
it conducts its charitable programs, may include donations from its members and
guests as retail income.
   (B)   (1)   If a charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant
bingo other than at a bingo session, the charitable instant bingo organization
shall enter into a written contract with the owner or lessor of the location at
which the instant bingo is conducted to allow the owner or lessor to assist in
the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo session, identify each
location where the instant bingo other than at a bingo session is being
conducted, and identify the owner or lessor of each location.
      (2)   A charitable instant bingo organization that conducts instant bingo
other than at a bingo session is not required to enter into a written contract
with the owner or lessor of the location at which the instant bingo is
conducted provided that the owner or lessor is not assisting in the conduct of
the instant bingo other than at a bingo session and provided that the conduct
of the instant bingo other than at a bingo session at that location is not more
than five days per calendar year and not more than ten hours per day.
   (C)   Except as provided in division (F) of this section, charitable instant
bingo organization shall conduct instant bingo other than at a bingo session at
a location where the primary source of retail income from all commercial
activity at that location is the sale of instant bingo tickets.
   (D)   (1)   The owner or lessor of a location that enters into a contract
pursuant to division (B) of this section shall pay the full gross profit to the
charitable instant bingo organization, in return for the deal of instant bingo
tickets. The owner or lessor may retain the money that the owner or lessor
receives for selling the instant bingo tickets, provided, however, that after
the deal has been sold, the owner or lessor shall pay to the charitable instant
bingo organization the value of any unredeemed instant bingo prizes remaining
in the deal of instant bingo tickets. As used in this division, “full gross
profit” means the amount by which the total receipts of all instant bingo
tickets, if the deal has been sold in full, exceeds the amount that would be
paid out if all prizes were redeemed.
      (2)   The charitable instant bingo organization shall pay 6% of the total
gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo tickets for the purpose of
reimbursing the owner or lessor for expenses described in this division.
      (3)   As used in this division, “expenses” means those items provided for
in R.C. § 2915.01(GG)(4), (GG)(5), (GG)(6), (GG)(7), (GG)(8), (GG)(12), and
(GG)(13) and that percentage of the owner’s or lessor’s rent for the location
where instant bingo is conducted. Expenses, in the aggregate, shall not exceed
6% of the total gross receipts of any deal of instant bingo tickets.
   (E)   A charitable instant bingo organization shall provide the Attorney
General with all of the following information:
      (1)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has terminated a
contract entered into pursuant to division (B) of this section with an owner or
lessor of a location;
      (2)   That the charitable instant bingo organization has entered into a
written contract pursuant to division (B) of this section with a new owner or
lessor of a location;
      (3)   That the charitable instant bingo organization is aware of conduct
by the owner or lessor of a location at which instant bingo is conducted that
is in violation of Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915.
(ORC 2915.093)
   (F)   Division (C) of this section does not apply to a volunteer
firefighter’s organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under
IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(C)(3), that conducts instant bingo other
than at a bingo session on the premises where the organization conducts
firefighter training, that has conducted instant bingo continuously for at
least five years prior to July 1, 2003, and that, during each of those five
years, had gross receipts of at least $1,500,000.
(ORC 2915.093)
   (G)   (1)   A veteran’s organization, a fraternal organization, or a
sporting organization authorized to conduct a bingo session pursuant to Ohio
R.C. Chapter 2915 may conduct instant bingo other than at a bingo session if
all of the following apply:
         (a)   The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization limits the sale of instant bingo to 12 hours during any day,
provided that the sale does not begin earlier than 10:00 a.m. and ends not
later than 2:00 a.m.
         (b)   The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization limits the sale of instant bingo to its own premises and to its
own members and invited guests.
         (c)   The veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization is raising money for an organization that is described in IRC 509
(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an organization
that maintains its principal place of business in this state, that is exempt
from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c)(3),
and that is in good standing in this state and executes a written contract with
that organization as required in division (G)(2) of this section.
      (2)   If a veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization authorized to conduct instant bingo pursuant to division (G)(1) of
this section is raising money for another organization that is described in IRC
509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an
organization that maintains its principal place of business in this state, that
is exempt from federal income taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC
501(c), and that is in good standing in this state, the veteran’s organization,
fraternal organization, or sporting organization shall execute a written
contract with the organization that is described in IRC 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or
(a)(3) and is either a governmental unit or an organization that maintains its
principal place of business in this state, that is exempt from federal income
taxation under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c), and that is in good
standing in this state in order to conduct instant bingo. That contract shall
include a statement of the percentage of the net proceeds that the veteran’s,
fraternal, or sporting organization will be distributing to the charitable
organization that is described in IRC 509(a)(1), (a)(2), or (a)(3) and is
either a governmental unit or an organization that maintains its principal
place of business in this state, that is exempt from federal income taxation
under IRC 501(a) and described in IRC 501(c), and that is in good standing in
this state.
      (3)   (a)   If a veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or
sporting organization authorized to conduct instant bingo pursuant to division
(G)(1) of this section has been issued a liquor permit under Ohio R.C. Chapter
4303, that permit may be subject to suspension, revocation, or cancellation if
the veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting organization
violates a provision of this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915.
         (b)   No veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization that enters into a written contract pursuant to division (G)(2) of
this section shall violate any provision of this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter
2915, or permit, aid, or abet any other person in violating any provision of
this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915.
      (4)   A veteran’s organization, fraternal organization, or sporting
organization shall give all required proceeds earned from the conduct of
instant bingo to the organization with which the veteran’s organization,
fraternal organization, or sporting organization has entered into a written
contract.
      (5)   Whoever violates division (G) of this section is guilty of illegal
instant bingo conduct. Except as otherwise provided in this division, illegal
instant bingo conduct is a misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall
be as provided in §
202.99. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
division (G) of this section, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2915.13)
§ 630.13  RESTRICTIONS ON OWNER OR LESSOR OF LOCATION AT INSTANT BINGO.
   (A)   No owner or lessor of a location shall assist a charitable instant
bingo organization in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo
session at that location unless the owner or lessor has entered into a written
contract, as described in Ohio R.C. 2915.093, with the charitable instant bingo
organization to assist in the conduct of instant bingo other than at a bingo
session.
   (B)   The location of the lessor or owner shall be designated as a location
where the charitable instant bingo organization conducts instant bingo other
than at a bingo session.
   (C)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written contract
as prescribed in division (A) of this section shall violate any provision of
this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915, or permit, aid, or abet any other
person in violating any provision of this chapter or Ohio R.C. Chapter 2915.
   (D)   No owner or lessor of a location that enters into a written contract
as prescribed in division (A) of this section shall violate the terms of the
contract.
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates division (C) or (D) of this section is guilty
of illegal instant bingo conduct.  Except as otherwise provided in this
division, illegal instant bingo conduct is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
division (C) or (D) of this section, illegal instant bingo conduct is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If an owner or lessor of a location knowingly, intentionally, or
recklessly violates division (C) or (D) of this section, any license that the
owner or lessor holds for the retail sale of any goods on the owner’s or
lessor’s premises that is issued by the state or a political subdivision is
subject to suspension, revocation, or payment of a monetary penalty at the
request of the Attorney General.
(ORC 2915.094)
§ 630.14  SKILL-BASED AMUSEMENT MACHINES; PROHIBITED CONDUCT.
   (A)   No person shall give to another person any item described in division
(ff)(1), (2), (3), or (4) of §
630.01 in exchange for a noncash prize, toy, or novelty received as a reward
for playing or operating a skill- based amusement machine or for a free or
reduced-price game won on a skill-based amusement machine.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of skill-based
amusement machine prohibited conduct. A violation of division (A) of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree for each redemption of a prize
that is involved in the violation. If the offender previously has been
convicted of a violation of division (A) of this section, a violation of that
division is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2915.06)
   (C)   Any regulation of skill-based amusement machines shall be governed by
this chapter or R.C. Chapter 2915 and not by R.C. Chapter 1345.
(R.C. § 2915.061)
§ 630.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 636:  OFFENSES RELATING TO PERSONS
Section
636.001   Definitions
636.01   Negligent homicide
636.02   Assault
636.03   Negligent assault
636.04   Aggravated menacing
636.045   Menacing by stalking
636.05   Menacing
636.06   Unlawful restraint
636.075   Criminal child enticement
636.08   Coercion
636.09   Nonsupport of dependents
636.10   Reserved for future legislation
636.11   Endangering children
636.12   Interference with custody
636.125   Contributing to the unruliness or delinquency of a child
636.13   Reserved for future legislation
636.15   Threatening or harassing telecommunications
636.16   Placing harmful substance or objects in food or confection
636.17   Domestic violence
636.18   Reserved for future legislation
636.19   Reserved for future legislation
636.20   Safety of crowds attending live entertainment performances
636.21   Hazing
636.22   Illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products; transaction scans
636.23   Intimidation in connection with housing
636.24   Failing to provide for a functionally impaired person
636.25   Failure to perform viability testing
636.26   Unlawful collection of bodily substances
636.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Disorderly conduct, see §
648.04
   Drug offenses, see
Chapter 624
   False report of child abuse or neglect, see §
606.105
   Personal accountability for organizational conduct, see §
606.09
   “Physical harm to persons” defined, see §
606.01
   Sales of alcohol to underage persons; prohibitions and misrepresentations,
see §§
612.02,
612.10
   “Serious physical harm to persons” defined, see §
606.01
   Sex related offenses, see
Chapter 666
   Vehicular homicide and vehicular manslaughter, see §
434.08
Statutory reference:
   Juvenile Court, see Ohio R.C. Chapter 2151
   Parents’ liability for destructive acts of their children, see Ohio R.C.
3109.09
   Shelters for victims of domestic violence, see Ohio R.C. 3113.33 et seq.
§ 636.001  DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   As used in this chapter and any other provision of these Codified
Ordinances:
      “Another’s unborn” or “other person’s unborn.”  A member of the species
Homo sapiens who is or was carried in the womb of another during a period that
begins with fertilization and that continues unless and until live birth
occurs.
      “Unlawful termination of another’s pregnancy.”  Causing the death of an
unborn member of the species Homo sapiens who is or was carried in the womb of
another, as a result of injuries inflicted during the period that begins with
fertilization and that continues unless and until live birth occurs.
   (B)   Notwithstanding division (A) of this section, in no case shall the
definitions of the terms “another’s unborn,” “other person’s unborn” and
“unlawful termination of another’s pregnancy” that are set forth in division
(A) of this section be applied or construed in any of the following manners:
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(1) of this section, in
a manner so that the offense prohibits or is construed as prohibiting any
pregnant woman or her physician from performing an abortion with the consent of
the pregnant woman, with the consent of the pregnant woman implied by law in a
medical emergency, or with the approval of one otherwise authorized by law to
consent to medical treatment on behalf of the pregnant woman.  An abortion that
violates the conditions described in the immediately preceding sentence may be
punished as any violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.01, 2903.02, 2903.03, 2903.04,
2903.05, 2903.06, 2903.08, 2903.11, 2903.12, 2903.13, 2903.14, 2903.21 or
2903.22, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, as applicable.  An
abortion that does not violate the conditions described in the second
immediately preceding sentence but that does violate Ohio R.C. 2919.12, 2919.13
(B), 2919.15, 2919.151, 2919.17 or 2919.18, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, may be punished as a violation of such section, as
applicable.
      (2)   In a manner so that the offense is applied or is construed as
applying to a woman based on an act or omission of the woman that occurs while
she is or was pregnant and that results in any of the following:
         (a)   Her delivery of a stillborn baby.
         (b)   Her causing, in any other manner, the death in utero of a
viable, unborn human that she is carrying.
         (c)   Her causing the death of her child who is born alive but who
dies from one or more injuries that are sustained while the child is a viable,
unborn human.
         (d)   Her causing her child who is born alive to sustain one or more
injuries while the child is a viable, unborn human.
         (e)   Her causing, threatening to cause, or attempting to cause, in
any other manner, an injury, illness, or other psychological illness or
condition, regardless of its duration or gravity, to a viable, unborn human
that she is carrying.
(ORC 2903.09)
§ 636.01  NEGLIGENT HOMICIDE.
   (A)   No person shall negligently cause the death of another or the unlawful
termination of another’s pregnancy by means of a deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2923.11.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent homicide, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
(ORC 2903.05)
Statutory reference:
   Reckless homicide, felony offense, see Ohio R.C. 2903.041
§ 636.02  ASSAULT.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm to
another or to another’s unborn.
   (B)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to another or
to another’s unborn.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) or (B) of this section is guilty of
assault.  Except as provided in Ohio R.C. 2903.13(C), assault is a misdemeanor
of the first degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
   (D)   If an offender who is convicted of or pleads guilty to assault when it
is a misdemeanor also is convicted of or pleads guilty to a specification as
described in Ohio R.C. 2941.1423 (victim of the offense was a woman whom the
defendant knew was pregnant at the time of the offense) that was included in
the indictment, count in the indictment, or information charging the offense,
the court shall sentence the offender to a mandatory jail term as provided in
Ohio R.C. 2929.24(G).
(ORC 2903.13)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated and felonious assault, see Ohio R.C. 2903.11 and 2903.12
   Aggravated vehicular assault, felony, see Ohio R.C. 2903.08
   Felony offenses: assaulting functionally impaired person, peace officer,
investigator of the Bureau of Criminal Identification and Investigation,
firefighter, person performing emergency medical service, officer or employee
of a public children services agency or private child placing agency; assault
at a correctional institution; assault on school officials and school bus
drivers; health care professional, worker or security guard at a hospital under
certain circumstances; judge, magistrate, prosecutor or court official or
employee under certain circumstances, see Ohio R.C. 2903.13(C)
   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see Ohio R.C. 2903.15
   Persons who may seek relief under anti-stalking  protection order; ex parte
orders, see Ohio R.C. 2903.214
   Protection order as pretrial condition of release, see Ohio R.C. 2903.213
§ 636.03  NEGLIGENT ASSAULT.
   (A)   No person shall negligently, by means of a deadly weapon or dangerous
ordnance as defined in Ohio R.C. 2923.11, cause physical harm to another or to
another’s unborn.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of negligent assault, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
(ORC 2903.14)
§ 636.04  AGGRAVATED MENACING.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the offender
will cause serious physical harm to the person or property of the other person,
such other person’s unborn, or a member of such other person’s immediate
family. In addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief that the
offender will cause serious physical harm to the person or property of the
other person, the other person’s unborn, or a member of the other person’s
immediate family, the other person’s belief may be based on words or conduct of
the offender that are directed at or identify a corporation, association, or
other organization that employs the other person or to which the other person
belongs.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of aggravated menacing. Except
as otherwise provided in this division (B), aggravated menacing is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the victim of the offense is an officer or
employee of a public children services agency or a private child placing agency
and the offense relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance or
anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties, aggravated
menacing is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law or, if the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to an offense of
violence, the victim of that prior offense was an officer or employee of a
public children services agency or private child placing agency, and that prior
offense related to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated
performance of official responsibilities or duties, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
   (C)   As used in this section, “Organization” includes an entity that is a
governmental employer.
(ORC 2903.21)
§ 636.045  MENACING BY STALKING.
   (A)   Prohibited Conduct.
      (1)   (a)   No person by engaging in a pattern of conduct shall knowingly
cause another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to
the other person or a family or household member of the other person or cause
mental distress to the other person or a family or household member of the
other person. In addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief that
the offender will cause physical harm to the other person or the other person’s
family or household member or mental distress to the other person or the other
person’s family or household member, the other person’s belief or mental
distress may be based on words or conduct of the offender that are directed at
or identify a corporation, association, or other organization that employs the
other person or to which the other person belongs.
         (b)   No person, through the use of any form of written communication
or any electronic method of remotely transferring information, including but
not limited to any computer, computer network, computer program, computer
system, or telecommunication device, shall post a message or use any
intentionally written or verbal graphic gesture with purpose to do either of
the following:
            1.   Violate division (A)(1)(a) of this section;
            2.   Urge or incite another to commit a violation of division (A)
(1)(a) of this section.
         (c)   No person, with a sexual motivation, shall violate division (A)
(1)(a) or (A)(1)(b) of this section.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) of this section is guilty of
menacing by stalking.
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(2)(b) of this
section, menacing by stalking is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   Menacing by stalking is a felony, to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law, if any of the following applies:
            1.   The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.211 or a violation of Ohio R.C.
2911.211, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to either of these
offenses.
            2.   In committing the offense under division (A)(1)(a), (A)(1)(b)
or (A)(1)(c) of this section, the offender made a threat of physical harm to or
against the victim, or as a result of an offense committed under division (A)
(1)(b) or (A)(1)(c) of this section, a third person induced by the offender’s
posted message made a threat of physical harm to or against the victim.
            3.   In committing the offense under division (A)(1)(a), (A)(1)(b)
or (A)(1)(c) of this section, the offender trespassed on the land or premises
where the victim lives, is employed, or attends school, or as a result of an
offense committed under division (A)(1)(b) or (A)(1)(c) of this section, a
third person induced by the offender’s posted message trespassed on the land or
premises where the victim lives, is employed, or attends school.
            4.   The victim of the offense is a minor.
            5.   The offender has a history of violence towards the victim or
any other person or a history of other violent acts towards the victim or any
other person.
            6.   While committing the offense under division (A)(1)(a) of this
section or a violation of division (A)(1)(c) of this section based on conduct
in violation of division (A)(1)(a) of this section, the offender had a deadly
weapon on or about the offender’s person or under the offender’s control.
Division (A)(2)(b)6. of this section does not apply in determining the penalty
for a violation of division (A)(1)(b) of this section or a violation of
division (A)(1)(c) of this section based on conduct in violation of division
(A)(1)(b) of this section.
            7.   At the time of the commission of the offense, the offender was
the subject of a protection order issued under Ohio R.C. 2903.213 or Ohio R.C.
2903.214, regardless of whether or not the person to be protected under the
order is the victim of the offense or another person.
            8.   In committing the offense under division (A)(1)(a), (A)(1)(b)
or (A)(1)(c) of this section, the offender caused serious physical harm to the
premises at which the victim resides, to the real property on which that
premises is located, or to any personal property located on that premises, or
as a result of an offense committed under division (A)(1)(b) of this section or
an offense committed under division (A)(1)(c) of this section based on a
violation of division (A)(1)(b) of this section, a third person induced by the
offender’s posted message caused serious physical harm to that premises, that
real property, or any personal property on that premises.
            9.   Prior to committing the offense, the offender had been
determined to represent a substantial risk of physical harm to others as
manifested by evidence of then-recent homicidal or other violent behavior,
evidence of then-recent threats that placed another in reasonable fear of
violent behavior and serious harm, or other evidence of then-present
dangerousness.
            10.   The victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a
public children services agency or a private child placing agency and the
offense relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated
performance of official responsibilities or duties.
            11.   The offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an
officer or employee of a public children services agency or private child
placing agency, and that prior offense related to the officer’s or employee’s
performance or anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties.
      (3)   Ohio R.C. 2919.271 applies in relation to a defendant charged with
a violation of this section.
      (4)   As used in division (A) of this section:
         “Computer,” “computer network,” “computer program,” “computer system,”
and “telecommunications device” have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.
         “Emergency facility person” is the singular of “emergency facility
personnel” as defined in Ohio R.C. 2909.04
         “Emergency medical services person” is the singular of “emergency
medical services personnel” as defined in Ohio R.C. 2133.21.
         “Family or household member” means any of the following:
            1.   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
person against whom the act prohibited in division (A)(1) of this section is
committed:
               a.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a former spouse
of the person;
               b.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the person, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the person;
               c.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse,
or former spouse of the person, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
person.
            2.   The natural parent of any child of whom the person against
whom the act prohibited in division (A)(1) of this section is committed is the
other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent.
         “Mental distress” means any of the following:
            1.   Any mental illness or condition that involves some temporary
substantial incapacity;
            2.   Any mental illness or condition that would normally require
psychiatric treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental health
services, whether or not any person requested or received psychiatric
treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental health services.
         “Organization” includes an entity that is a governmental employer.
         “Pattern of conduct” means two or more actions or incidents closely
related in time, whether or not there has been a prior conviction based on any
of those actions or incidents. Actions or incidents that prevent, obstruct, or
delay the performance by a public official, firefighter, rescuer, emergency
medical services person, or emergency facility person of any authorized act
within the public official’s, firefighter’s, rescuer’s, emergency medical
services person’s, or emergency facility person’s official capacity, or the
posting of messages, use of intentionally written or verbal graphic gestures,
or receipt of information or data through the use of any form of written
communication or an electronic method of remotely transferring information,
including but not limited to a computer, computer network, computer program,
computer system, or telecommunications device, may constitute a “pattern of
conduct.”
         “Person living as a spouse” means a person who is living or has lived
with the person against whom the act prohibited in division (A)(1) of this
section is committed in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise is
cohabiting with that person, or who otherwise has cohabited with the person
within five years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the act in
question.
         “Post a message” means transferring, sending, posting, publishing,
disseminating, or otherwise communicating, or attempting to transfer, send,
post, publish, disseminate, or otherwise communicate, any message or
information, whether truthful or untruthful, about an individual, and whether
done under one’s own name, under the name of another, or while impersonating
another.
         “Public official” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2921.01.
         “Sexual motivation” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2971.01.
         “Third person” means, in relation to conduct as described in division
(A)(1)(b) of this section, an individual who is neither the offender nor the
victim of the conduct.
      (5)   The prosecution does not need to prove in a prosecution under
division (A) of this section that a person requested or received psychiatric
treatment, psychological treatment, or other mental heal services in order to
show that the person was caused mental distress as described in division (A)(4)
(e)2. of this section.
      (6)   (a)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to a person
solely because the person provided access or connection to or from an
electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that person’s
control, including having provided capabilities that are incidental to
providing access or connection to or from the electronic method of remotely
transferring the information, and that do not include the creation of the
content of the material that is the subject of the access or connection. In
addition, any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic
method of remotely transferring information not under that person’s control
shall not be liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block the
receipt or transmission through its service of any information that it believes
is or will be sent in violation of division (A) of this section.
         (b)   Division (A)(6)(a) of this section does not create an
affirmative duty for any person providing access or connection to or from an
electronic method of remotely transferring information not under that person’s
control to block the receipt or transmission through its service of any
information that it believes is or will be sent in violation of division (A) of
this section except as otherwise provided by law.
         (c)   Division (A)(6)(a) of this section does not apply to a person
who conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of division (A) of this section or who
knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.
(ORC 2903.211)
   (B)   Protection Order.  Consult Ohio R.C. 2903.213 for current provisions
regarding protection orders, consent agreements, anti-stalking protection
orders and orders issued by a court of another state.
   (C)   Violating a Protection Order, Consent Agreement, Anti-stalking
Protection Order or Order Issued by a Court of Another State.
      (1)   No person shall recklessly violate the terms of any of the
following:
         (a)   A protection order issued or consent agreement approved pursuant
to Ohio R.C. 2919.26 or Ohio R.C. 3113.31;
         (b)   A protection order issued pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2151.34,
2903.213 or 2903.214;
         (c)   A protection order issued by a court of another state.
      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of
violating a protection order.
         (b)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2)(c) or (d) of
this section, violating a protection order is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
         (c)   If the offender previously has been convicted of, pleaded guilty
to, or been adjudicated a delinquent child for a violation of a protection
order issued pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2151.34, 2903.213 or 2903.214, two or more
violations of Ohio R.C. 2903.21, 2903.211, 2903.22 or 2911.211, or a
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, that involved the
same person who is the subject of the protection order or consent agreement, or
one or more violations of this section or a substantially equivalent state law
or municipal ordinance, violating a protection order is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (d)   If the offender violates a protection order or consent agreement
while committing a felony offense, violating a protection order is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (e)   If the protection order violated by the offender was an order
issued pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2151.34 or 2903.214 that required electronic
monitoring of the offender pursuant to that section, the court may require in
addition to any other sentence imposed upon the offender that the offender be
electronically monitored for a period not exceeding five years by a law
enforcement agency designated by the court. If the court requires under this
division that the offender be electronically monitored, unless the court
determines that the offender is indigent and subject to the maximum amount
allowable and the rules promulgated by the Attorney General under Ohio R.C.
2903.214, the court shall order that the offender pay the costs of the
installation of the electronic monitoring device and the cost of monitoring the
electronic monitoring device. If the court determines that the offender is
indigent, the costs of the installation of the electronic monitoring device and
the cost of monitoring the electronic monitoring device may be paid out of
funds from the reparations fund created pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2743.191.  The
total amount paid from the Reparations Fund created pursuant to Ohio R.C.
2743.191 for electronic monitoring under Ohio R.C. 2151.34, 2903.214 and
2919.27 shall not exceed $300,000 per year.
      (3)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (C)(1)(c)
of this section that the protection order issued by a court of another state
does not comply with the requirements specified in 18 U.S.C. 2265(B) for a
protection order that must be accorded full faith a credit by a court of this
state or that it is not entitled to full faith and credit under 18 U.S.C. 2265
(c).
      (4)   As used in this section, “protection order issued by a court of
another state” means an injunction or another order issued by a criminal court
of another state for the purpose of preventing violent or threatening acts or
harassment against, contact or communication with, or physical proximity to
another person including a temporary order, and means an injunction or order of
that nature issued by a civil court of another state, including a temporary
order and a final order issued in an independent action or as a pendente lite
order in a proceeding for other relief, if the court issued it in response to a
complaint, petition or motion filed by or on behalf of a person seeking
protection.  The term does not include an order for support or for custody of a
child issued pursuant to the divorce and child custody laws of another state,
except to the extent that the order for support or for custody of a child is
entitled to full faith and credit under the laws of the United States.
(ORC 2919.27)
§ 636.05  MENACING.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly cause another to believe that the offender
will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other person, the
other person’s unborn,  or a member of the other person’s immediate family. In
addition to any other basis for the other person’s belief that the offender
will cause physical harm to the person or property of the other person, the
other person’s unborn, or a member of the other person’s immediate family, the
other person’s belief may be based on words or conduct of the offender that are
directed at or identify a corporation, association, or other organization that
employs the other person or to which the other person belongs.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of menacing. Except as
otherwise provided in this division (B), menacing is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the victim of the offense is an officer or employee of a public
children services agency or a private child placing agency and the offense
relates to the officer’s or employee’s performance or anticipated performance
of official responsibilities or duties, menacing is a misdemeanor of the first
degree or, if the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to an offense of violence, the victim of that prior offense was an officer or
employee of a public children services agency or private child placing agency,
and that prior offense related to the officer’s or employee’s performance or
anticipated performance of official responsibilities or duties, a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (C)   As used in this section, “Organization” includes an entity that is a
governmental employer.
(ORC 2903.22)
§ 636.06  UNLAWFUL RESTRAINT.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly restrain
another of his or her liberty.
   (B)   No person, without privilege to do so and with a sexual motivation,
shall knowingly restrain another of the other person’s liberty.
   (C)   As used in this section, “sexual motivation” has the same meaning as
in Ohio R.C. 2971.01.
(ORC 2905.03(A), (B), (D))
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful restraint, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
§ 636.075  CRIMINAL CHILD ENTICEMENT.
   (A)   No person, by any means and without privilege to do so, shall
knowingly solicit, coax, entice, or lure any child under 14 years of age to
accompany the person in any manner, including entering into any vehicle or onto
any vessel, whether or not the offender knows the age of the child, if both of
the following apply:
      (1)   The actor does not have the express or implied permission of the
parent, guardian, or other legal custodian of the child in undertaking the
activity.
      (2)   The actor is not a law enforcement officer, medic, firefighter, or
other person who regularly provides emergency services, and is not an employee
or agent of, or a volunteer acting under the direction of, any board of
education, or the actor is any such person, but at the time the actor
undertakes the activity, the actor is not acting within the scope of the
actor’s lawful duties in that capacity.
   (B)   No person, with a sexual motivation, shall violate division (A) of
this section.
   (C)   No person, for any unlawful purpose other than, or in addition to,
that proscribed by division (A) of this section, shall engage in any activity
described in division (A) of this section.
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A) of this
section that the actor undertook the activity in response to a bona fide
emergency situation or that the actor undertook the activity in a reasonable
belief that it was necessary to preserve the health, safety, or welfare of the
child.
   (E)   Whoever violates division (A), (B) or (C) of this section is guilty of
criminal child enticement, a misdemeanor of the first degree, and shall be
subject to the penalty provided in §
202.99. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this
section, a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, Ohio R.C.
2907.02, 2907.03, or former Ohio R.C. 2907.12, or Ohio R.C. 2905.01 or 2907.05
when the victim of that prior offense was under 17 years of age at the time of
the offense, criminal child enticement is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (F)   As used in this section:
      “Sexual motivation” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2971.01.
      “Vehicle” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
      “Vessel” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 1546.01.
(ORC 2905.05)
§ 636.08  COERCION.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to coerce another into taking or refraining
from action concerning which the other person has a legal freedom of choice,
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Threaten to commit any offense.
      (2)   Utter or threaten any slander against any person.
      (3)   Expose or threaten to expose any matter tending to subject any
person to hatred, contempt, or ridicule, or to damage any person’s personal or
business repute, or to impair any person’s credit.
      (4)   Institute or threaten criminal proceedings against any person.
      (5)   Take or withhold, or threaten to take or withhold official action,
or cause or threaten to cause official action to be taken or withheld.
   (B)   Divisions (A)(4) and (5) of this section shall not be construed to
prohibit a prosecutor or court from doing any of the following in good faith
and in the interests of justice:
      (1)   Offering or agreeing to grant, or granting immunity from
prosecution pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2945.44.
      (2)   In return for a plea of guilty to one or more offenses charged or
to one or more other or lesser offenses, or in return for the testimony of the
accused in a case to which the accused is not a party, offering or agreeing to
dismiss, or dismissing one or more charges pending against an accused, or
offering or agreeing to impose, or imposing a certain sentence or modification
of sentence.
      (3)   Imposing a community control sanction on certain conditions,
including without limitation requiring the offender to make restitution or
redress to the victim of the offense.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(3), (4),
or (5) of this section that the actor’s conduct was a reasonable response to
the circumstances which occasioned it, and that the actor’s purpose was limited
to any of the following:
      (1)   Compelling another to refrain from misconduct or to desist from
further misconduct.
      (2)   Preventing or redressing a wrong or injustice.
      (3)   Preventing another from taking action for which the actor
reasonably believed the other person to be disqualified.
      (4)   Compelling another to take action which the actor reasonably
believed the other person to be under a duty to take.
   (D)   As used in this section:
      “Community control sanction” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
2929.01.
      “Threat” includes a direct threat and a threat by innuendo.
(ORC 2905.12)
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of coercion, a misdemeanor of
the first degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
§ 636.09  NONSUPPORT OF DEPENDENTS.
   (A)   No person shall abandon, or fail to provide adequate support to:
      (1)   His or her spouse, as required by law;
      (2)   His or her legitimate or illegitimate child who is under age 18, or
mentally or physically disabled child who is under age 21;
      (3)   His or her aged or infirm parent or adoptive parent, who from lack
of ability and means is unable to provide adequately for his or her own
support.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall abandon, or fail to provide support as
established by a court order to, another person whom, by court order or decree,
the person:
         (a)   Is legally obligated to support; or
         (b)   Was legally obligated to support, and an amount for support:
            1.   Was due and owing prior to the date the person's duty to pay
current support terminated; and
            2.   Remains unpaid.
      (2)   The period of limitation under R.C. § 2901.13 applicable to
division (B)(1)(b) of this section shall begin to run on the date the person's
duty to pay current support terminates.
   (C)   No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage, or contribute to
a child or a ward of the juvenile court becoming a dependent child, as defined
in Ohio R.C. 2151.04, or a neglected child, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2151.03.
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of failure to provide
adequate support under division (A) of this section or a charge of failure to
provide support established by a court order under division (B) of this section
that the accused was unable to provide adequate support or the established
support, but did provide the support that was within his or her ability and
means.
   (E)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(3) of this
section that the parent abandoned the accused, or failed to support the accused
as required by law, while the accused was under age 18, or was mentally or
physically disabled and under age 21.
   (F)   It is not a defense to a charge under division (B) of this section
that the person whom a court has ordered the accused to support is being
adequately supported by someone other than the accused.
   (G)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, whoever violates
division (A) or (B) of this section is guilty of nonsupport of dependents, a
misdemeanor of the first degree, and shall be subject to the penalty provided
in §
202.99. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a
violation of division (A)(2) or (B) of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or if the offender has failed to
provide support under division (A)(2) or (B) of this section for a total
accumulated period of 26 weeks out of 104 consecutive weeks, whether or not the
26 weeks were consecutive, then a violation of division (A)(2) or (B) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a felony
violation of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, a violation of division (A)(2) or (B) of this section is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the offender is guilty of nonsupport of dependents by reason of
failing to provide support to his or her child as required by a child support
order issued on or after April 15, 1985, pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2151.23,
2151.231, 2151.232, 2151.33, 3105.21, 3109.05, 3111.13, 3113.04, 3113.31,
3115.401, or former Ohio R.C. 3115.31, the court, in addition to any other
sentence imposed, shall assess all court costs arising out of the charge
against the person and require the person to pay any reasonable attorney’s fees
of any adverse party other than the state, as determined by the court, that
arose in relation to the charge.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of
contributing to the nonsupport of dependents, a misdemeanor of the first degree
and shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
202.99.  Each day of a violation of division (C) of this section is a separate
offense.
(ORC 2919.21)
§ 636.11  ENDANGERING CHILDREN.
   (A)   No person, who is the parent, guardian, custodian, person having
custody or control, or person in loco parentis of a child under 18 years of age
or a mentally or physically disabled child under 21 years of age, shall create
a substantial risk to the health or safety of the child by violating a duty of
care, protection, or support.  It is not a violation of a duty of care,
protection, or support under this division when the parent, guardian,
custodian, or person having custody or control of a child treats the physical
or mental illness or disability of the child by spiritual means through prayer
alone, in accordance with the tenets of a recognized religious body.
   (B)   No person shall do any of the following to a child under 18 years of
age or a mentally or physically disabled child under 21 years of age:
      (1)   Abuse the child.
      (2)   Torture or cruelly abuse the child.
      (3)   Administer corporal punishment or other physical disciplinary
measure, or physically restrain the child in a cruel manner or for a prolonged
period, which punishment, discipline or restraint is excessive under the
circumstances and creates a substantial risk of serious physical harm to the
child.
      (4)   Repeatedly administer unwarranted disciplinary measures to a child
when there is a substantial risk that such conduct, if continued, will
seriously impair or retard the child’s mental health or development.
      (5)   Entice, coerce, permit, encourage, compel, hire, employ, use, or
allow the child to act, model, or in any other way participate in, or be
photographed for, the production, presentation, dissemination, or advertisement
of any material or performance that the offender knows or reasonably should
know is obscene, is sexually oriented matter, or is nudity-oriented matter.
      (6)   Allow the child to be on the same parcel of real property and
within 100 feet of, or, in the case of more than one housing unit on the same
parcel of real property, in the same housing unit and within 100 feet of, any
act in violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.04 or 2925.041 when the person knows that
the act is occurring, whether or not any person is prosecuted for or convicted
of the violation of Ohio R.C. 2925.04 or 2925.041 that is the basis of the
violation of this division.
   (C)   (1)   No person shall operate a vehicle, as defined by Ohio R.C.
4511.01, within the municipality and in violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, when one or more children under
18 years of age are in the vehicle.  Notwithstanding any other provision of
law, a person may be convicted at the same trial or proceeding of a violation
of this division and a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, that constitutes the basis of the charge of the
violation of this division.  For purposes of Ohio R.C. 4511.191 to 4511.197 and
all related provisions of law, a person arrested for a violation of this
division shall be considered to be under arrest for operating a vehicle while
under the influence of alcohol, a controlled substance, or a metabolite of a
controlled substance in the whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or
urine.
      (2)   As used in division (C)(1) of this section:
         (a)   “Controlled substance” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
3719.01.
         (b)   “Vehicle” has the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4511.01.
   (D)   (1)   Division (B)(5) of this section does not apply to any material
or performance that is produced, presented, or disseminated for a bona fide
medical, scientific, educational, religious, governmental, judicial, or other
proper purpose, by or to a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist,
teacher, person pursing bona fide studies for research, librarian, member of
the clergy, prosecutor, judge, or other person having a proper interest in the
material or performance.
      (2)   Mistake of age is not a defense to a charge under division (B)(5)
of this section.
      (3)   In a prosecution under division (B)(5) of this section, the trier
of fact may infer that an actor, model, or participant in the material or
performance involved is a juvenile if the material or performance, through its
title, text, visual representation, or otherwise, represents or depicts the
actor, model, or participant as a juvenile.
      (4)   As used in this division and division (B)(5) of this section:
         “Material,” “performance,” “obscene,” and “sexual activity” have the
same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2907.01.
         “Nudity-oriented matter” means any material or performance that shows
a minor in a state of nudity and that, taken as a whole by the average person
applying contemporary community standards, appeals to the prurient interest.
         “Sexually oriented matter” means any material or performance that
shows a minor participating or engaging in sexual activity, masturbation, or
bestiality.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of endangering children.
      (1)   If the offender violates division (A) or (B)(1) of this section,
endangering children is one of the following:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (E)(1)(b), (c), or (d),
a misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of an offense
under this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, or of any offense involving neglect, abandonment, or contributing to
the delinquency of or physical abuse of a child, except as otherwise provided
in division (E)(1)(c) or (d) of this section, endangering children is a felony
to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (c)   If the violation is a violation of division (A) of this section
and results in serious physical harm to the child involved, endangering
children is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (d)   If the violation is a violation of division (B)(1) of this
section and results in serious physical harm to the child involved, endangering
children is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   If the offender violates division (B)(2), (3), (4), (5) or (6) of
this section, endangering children is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the offender violates division (C) of this section, the offender
shall be punished as follows:
         (a)   Except as provided in (E)(3)(b) or C., endangering children in
violation of division (C) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   If the violation results in serious physical harm to the child
or if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this section
or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or of any
offense involving neglect, abandonment, or contributing to the delinquency of
or physical abuse of a child, except as otherwise provided in division (E)(3)
(c) of this section, endangering children in violation of division (C) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (c)   If the violation results in serious physical harm to the child
and if the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this
section, Ohio R.C. 2903.06, 2903.08, 2919.22(C) or former Ohio R.C. 2903.07 as
it existed prior to March 23, 2000, or Ohio R.C. 2903.04, in a case in which
the offender was subject to the sanctions described in division (D) of that
section, endangering children in violation of division (C) of this section is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
         (d)   In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine, or other
sentence, penalty or sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to
divisions (E)(3)(a), (b) or C. of this section or pursuant to any other
provision of law and in addition to any suspension of the offender’s driver’s
license or commercial driver’s license or permit or nonresident operating
privilege under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4506,  4509, 4510, or 4511, or any other
provision of law, the court also may impose upon the offender a class seven
suspension of the offender’s driver’s or commercial driver’s license or permit
or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in Ohio R.C.
4510.02(A)(7).
         (e)   In addition to any term of imprisonment, fine, or other
sentence, penalty or sanction imposed upon the offender pursuant to division
(E)(3)(a), (b), (c) or (d) of this section or pursuant to any other provision
of law for the violation of division (C) of this section, if as a part of the
same trial or proceeding the offender also is convicted of or pleads guilty to
a separate charge charging the violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the charge
of the violation of division (C) of this section, the offender also shall be
sentenced in accordance with Ohio R.C. 4511.19, or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, for that violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
   (F)   (1)   If a person violates division (C) of this section and if, at the
time of the violation, there were two or more children under 18 years of age in
the motor vehicle involved in the violation, the offender may be convicted of a
violation of division (C) of this section for each of the children, but the
court may sentence the offender for only one of the violations.
      (2)   (a)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation
of division (C) of this section but the person is not also convicted of and
does not also plead guilty to a separate charge of violating Ohio R.C. 4511.19
(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of
the charge of the violation of division (C) of this section, both the following
apply:
            1.   For purposes of the provisions of Ohio R.C. 4511.19, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that set forth the penalties and
sanctions for a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, the conviction of or plea of guilty to the
violation of division (C) of this section shall not constitute a violation of
Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
            2.   For purposes of the provisions of law that refers to a
conviction of or plea of guilty to a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, and that is not described in
division (F)(2)(a)1. of this section, the conviction of or plea of guilty to
the violation of division (C) of this section shall constitute a conviction or
plea of guilty to a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance.
         (b)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (C) of this section and the person also is convicted of or pleads
guilty to a separate charge of violating Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, that was the basis of the charge
of the violation of division (C) of this section, the conviction of or plea of
guilty to the violation of division (C) of this section shall not constitute,
for the purposes of any provision of law that refers to a conviction of or a
plea of guilty to a violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, a conviction of or a plea of guilty to a
violation of Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A) or a substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance.
(ORC 2919.22(A) - (E), (H))
Statutory reference:
   Community service, requirements, see Ohio R.C. 2919.22(F)
   License suspension, requirements, see Ohio R.C. 2919.22(G)
   Permitting child abuse, felony offense, see Ohio R.C. 2903.15
§ 636.12  INTERFERENCE WITH CUSTODY.
   (A)   No person, knowing that he or she is without privilege to do so or
being reckless in that regard, shall entice, take, keep, or harbor a person
identified in division (A)(1), (2) or (3) of this section from the parent,
guardian, or custodian of the person identified in division (A)(1), (2) or (3)
of this section:
      (1)   A child under the age of 18, or a mentally or physically disabled
child under the age of 21;
      (2)   A person committed by law to an institution for delinquent, unruly,
neglected, abused, or dependent children;
      (3)   A person committed by law to an institution for the mentally ill or
an institution for persons with intellectual disabilities.
   (B)   No person shall aid, abet, induce, cause, or encourage a child or a
ward of the juvenile court who has been committed to the custody of any person,
department, or public or private institution to leave the custody of that
person, department, or institution without legal consent.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge of enticing or taking under
division (A)(1) of this section that the actor reasonably believed that his or
her conduct was necessary to preserve the child’s health or safety.  It is an
affirmative defense to a charge of keeping or harboring under division (A) of
this section that the actor in good faith gave notice to law enforcement or
judicial authorities within a reasonable time after the child or committed
person came under his or her shelter, protection, or influence.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference with custody.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this subdivision, a violation of
division (A)(1) above is a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be subject
to the penalty provided in §
202.99. If the child who is the subject of a violation of division (A)(1) is
removed from the state or if the offender previously has been convicted of an
offense under this section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, a violation of division (A)(1) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.  If the child who is the subject of a
violation of division (A)(1) suffers physical harm as a result of the
violation, a violation of division (A)(1) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (A)(2) or (3) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   A violation of division (B) of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.  Each day of a violation of division (B) is a separate offense.
(ORC 2919.23)
§ 636.125  CONTRIBUTING TO THE UNRULINESS OR DELINQUENCY OF A CHILD.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      (1)   “Delinquent child.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2152.02.
      (2)   “Unruly child.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 2151.022.
   (b)   No person, including a parent, guardian, or other custodian of a
child, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Aid, abet, induce, cause, encourage, or contribute to a child or a
ward of the juvenile court becoming an unruly child or a delinquent child;
      (2)   Act in a way tending to cause a child or a ward of the juvenile
court to become an unruly child or a delinquent child;
      (3)   Act in a way that contributes to an adjudication of the child as a
delinquent child based on the child’s violation of a court order adjudicating
the child an unruly child for being an habitual truant;
      (4)   If the person is the parent, guardian, or custodian of a child who
has the duties under R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950 to register, register a new
residence address, and periodically verify a residence address, and, if
applicable, to send a notice of intent to reside, and if the child is not
emancipated, as defined in R.C. § 2919.121, fail to ensure that the child
complies with those duties under R.C. Chapters 2152 and 2950.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of contributing to the
unruliness or delinquency of a child, a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each
day of violation of this section is a separate offense.
(ORC 2919.24)
§ 636.15  THREATENING OR HARASSING TELECOMMUNICATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a
telecommunication, or knowingly permit a telecommunication to be made from a
telecommunications device under the person’s control, to another, if the caller
does any of the following:
      (1)   Makes the telecommunication with purpose to harass, intimidate, or
abuse any person at the premises to which the telecommunication is made,
whether or not actual communication takes place between the caller and a
recipient;
      (2)   Describes, suggests, requests, or proposes that the caller, the
recipient of the telecommunication, or any other person engage in sexual
activity, and the recipient or another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made has requested, in a previous telecommunication or in
the immediate telecommunication, that the caller not make a telecommunication
to the recipient or to the premises to which the telecommunication is made;
      (3)   During the telecommunication, violates Ohio R.C. 2903.21 or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance;
      (4)   Knowingly states to the recipient of the telecommunication that the
caller intends to cause damage to or destroy public or private property, and
the recipient, any member of the recipient’s family, or any other person who
resides at the premises to which the telecommunication is made owns, leases,
resides, or works in, will at the time of the destruction or damaging be near
or in, has the responsibility of protecting, or insures the property that will
be destroyed or damaged;
      (5)   Knowingly makes the telecommunication to the recipient of the
telecommunication, to another person at the premises to which the
telecommunication is made, or to those premises, and the recipient or another
person at those premises previously has told the caller not to make a
telecommunication to those premises or to any persons at those premises;
      (6)   Knowingly makes any comment, request, suggestion, or proposal to
the recipient of the telecommunication that is threatening, intimidating,
menacing, coercive, or obscene with the intent to abuse, threaten, or harass
the recipient;
      (7)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly interrupts the
telecommunication service of any person;
      (8)   Without a lawful business purpose, knowingly transmits to any
person, regardless of whether the telecommunication is heard in its entirety,
any file, document, or other communication that prevents that person from using
the person’s telephone service or electronic communication device;
      (9)   Knowingly makes any false statement concerning the death, injury,
illness, disfigurement, reputation, indecent conduct, or criminal conduct of
the recipient of the telecommunication or family or household member of the
recipient with purpose to abuse, threaten, intimidate, or harass the recipient;
      (10)   Knowingly incites another person through a telecommunication or
other means to harass or participate in the harassment of a person;
      (11)   Knowingly alarms the recipient by making a telecommunication
without a lawful purpose at an hour or hours known to be inconvenient to the
recipient and in an offensive or repetitive manner.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall make or cause to be made a telecommunication or
permit a telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under
the person’s control, with purpose to abuse, threaten, or harass another
person.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly post a text or audio statement or an
image on an internet web site or web page for the purpose of abusing,
threatening, or harassing another person.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of telecommunications
harassment.
      (2)   A violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(5), (A)(6), (A)
(7), (A)(8), (A)(9), (A)(10), or (A)(11) or (B) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree on a first offense and a felony on each
subsequent offense, which shall be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (C)(3), a violation
of division (A)(4) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree on a
first offense and a felony on each subsequent offense, to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.  If a violation of division (A)(4) of this section
results in economic harm of $1,000 or more, telecommunications harassment is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (D)   No cause of action may be assessed in any court of this municipality
against any provider of a telecommunications service, interactive computer
service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, or against any
officer, employee, or agent of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, for any
injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly arises out of the
provider’s, officer’s, employee’s, or agent’s provision of information,
facilities, or assistance in accordance with the terms of a court order that is
issued in relation to the investigation or prosecution of an alleged violation
of this section.  A provider of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, or an
officer, employee, or agent of a telecommunications service, interactive
computer service as defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230, or information service, is
immune from any civil or criminal liability for injury, death, or loss to
person or property that allegedly arises out of the provider’s, officer’s,
employees, or agent’s provision of information, facilities, or assistance in
accordance with the terms of a court order that is issued in relation to the
investigation or prosecution of an alleged violation of this section.
   (E)   (1)   This section does not apply to a person solely because the
person provided access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control, including
having provided capabilities that are incidental to providing access or
connection to or from the electronic method of remotely transferring the
information, and that do not include the creation of the content of the
material that is the subject of the access or connection. In addition, any
person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method of
remotely transferring information not under that person’s control shall not be
liable for any action voluntarily taken in good faith to block the receipt or
transmission through its service of any information that the person believes
is, or will be sent, in violation of this section.
      (2)   Division (E)(1) of this section does not create an affirmative duty
for any person providing access or connection to or from an electronic method
of remotely transferring information not under that person’s control to block
the receipt or transmission through its service of any information that it
believes is, or will be sent, in violation of this section except as otherwise
provided by law.
      (3)   Division (E)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
conspires with a person actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of this section or who knowingly
advertises the availability of material of that nature.
      (4)   A provider or user of an interactive computer service, as defined
in 47 U.S.C. § 230, shall neither be treated as the publisher or speaker of any
information provided by another information content provider, as defined in 47
U.S.C. § 230, nor held civilly or criminally liable for the creation or
development of information provided by another information content provider, as
defined in 47 U.S.C. § 230. Nothing in this division shall be construed to
protect a person from liability to the extent that the person developed or
created any content in violation of this section.
   (F)   Divisions (A)(5) to (A)(11) and (B)(2) of this section do not apply to
a person who, while employed or contracted by a newspaper, magazine, press
association, news agency, news wire service, cable channel or cable operator,
or radio or television station, is gathering, processing, transmitting,
compiling, editing, or disseminating information for the general public within
the scope of the person’s employment in that capacity or the person’s
contractual authority in that capacity.
   (G)   For the purpose of divisions (A) through (D) of this section, the
following definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or
requires a different meaning.
      “Cable operator” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 1332.21.
      “Caller” means the person described in division (A) of this section who
makes or causes to be made a telecommunication or who permits a
telecommunication to be made from a telecommunications device under that
person’s control.
      “Economic harm” means all direct, incidental and consequential pecuniary
harm suffered by a victim as a result of the criminal conduct.  The term
includes but is not limited to all of the following:
         (a)   All wages, salaries or other compensation lost as a result of
the criminal conduct;
         (b)   The cost of all wages, salaries or other compensation paid to
employees for time those employees are prevented from working as a result of
the criminal conduct;
         (c)   The overhead costs incurred from the time that a business is
shut down as a result of the criminal conduct;
         (d)   The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was
damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.
      “Family or household member.” Means any of the following:
         (a)   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in division
(A)(9) of this section is committed:
            1.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse, or a former spouse of
the recipient;
            2.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the recipient, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the recipient;
            3.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse, or
former spouse of the recipient, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
recipient.
         (b)   The natural parent of any child of whom the recipient of the
telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in division (A)(9) of this
section is committed is the other natural parent or is the putative other
natural parent.
      “Person living as a spouse.” Means a person who is living or has lived
with the recipient of the telecommunication against whom the act prohibited in
division (A)(9) of this section is committed in a common law marital
relationship, who otherwise is cohabiting with the recipient, or who otherwise
has cohabited with the recipient within five years prior to the date of the
alleged commission of the act in question.
      “Sexual activity” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2907.01.
      “Telecommunication” and “telecommunications device” have the same
meanings as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01.
   (H)   Nothing in this section prohibits a person from making a
telecommunication to a debtor that is in compliance with the “Fair Debt
Collection Practices Act,” 15 U.S.C. 1692, as amended, or the “Telephone
Consumer Protection Act,” 47 U.S.C. 227, as amended.
(ORC 2917.21)
§ 636.16  PLACING HARMFUL SUBSTANCE OR OBJECTS IN FOOD OR CONFECTION.
   (A)   No person shall do either of the following, knowing or having
reasonable cause to believe that any person may suffer physical harm or be
seriously inconvenienced or annoyed thereby:
      (1)   Place a pin, razor blade, glass, laxative, drug of abuse, or other
harmful or hazardous object or substance in any food or confection.
      (2)   Furnish to any person any food or confection which has been
adulterated in violation of division (A)(1) of this section.
(ORC 3716.11)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
(ORC 3716.99(C))
§ 636.17  DOMESTIC VIOLENCE.
   (A)   Prohibited Conduct.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly cause or attempt to cause physical harm
to a family or household member.
      (2)   No person shall recklessly cause serious physical harm to a family
or household member.
      (3)   No person, by threat of force, shall knowingly cause a family or
household member to believe that the offender will cause imminent physical harm
to the family or household member.
      (4)   (a)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of domestic violence,
and the court shall sentence the offender as provided in divisions (A)(4)(b) to
(A)(4)(e) of this section.
         (b)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(4)(c), (A)(4)(d) or
(A)(4)(e) of this section, a violation of division (A)(3) is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree and a violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
         (c)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(4)(d) of this
section, if the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been convicted of
domestic violence, a violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or
law of this or any other state or the United States that is substantially
equivalent to domestic violence, a violation of Ohio R.C. 2903.14, 2909.06,
2909.07, 2911.12, 2911.211 or 2919.22 if the victim of the violation was a
family or household member at the time of the violation, a violation of an
existing or former municipal ordinance or law of this or any other state or the
United States that is substantially equivalent to any of those sections if the
victim of the violation was a family or household member at the time of the
commission of the violation, or any offense of violence if the victim of the
offense was a family or household member at the time of the commission of the
offense,  a violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law, and a violation of division (A)(3) is a
misdemeanor of the second degree.
         (d)   If the offender previously has pleaded guilty to or been
convicted of two or more offenses of domestic violence or two or more
violations or offenses of the type described in division (A)(4)(c) of this
section involving a person who was a family or household member at the time of
the violations or offenses, a violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law, and a
violation of division (A)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
         (e)   Except as otherwise provided in division (A)(4)(c) or (A)(4)(d)
of this section, if the offender knew that the victim of the violation was
pregnant at the time of the violation, a violation of division (A)(1) or (A)(2)
of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law, and a
violation of division (A)(3) of this section is a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
      (5)   Notwithstanding any provision of law to the contrary, no court or
unit of state or local government shall charge any fee, cost, deposit or money
in connection with the filing of charges against a person alleging that the
person violated this section or a municipal ordinance substantially equivalent
to this section or in connection with the prosecution of any charges so filed.
      (6)   As used in this section:
         “Family or household member.”  Any of the following:
            1.   Any of the following who is residing or has resided with the
offender:
               a.   A spouse, a person living as a spouse as defined below, or
a former spouse of the offender;
               b.   A parent, a foster parent, or a child of the offender, or
another person related by consanguinity or affinity to the offender;
               c.   A parent or a child of a spouse, person living as a spouse,
or former spouse of the offender, or another person related by consanguinity or
affinity to a spouse, person living as a spouse, or former spouse of the
offender.
            2.   The natural parent of any child of whom the offender is the
other natural parent or is the putative other natural parent.
         “Person living as a spouse.”  A person who is living or has lived with
the offender in a common law marital relationship, who otherwise is cohabiting
with the offender, or who otherwise has cohabited with the offender within five
years prior to the date of the alleged commission of the act in question.
(ORC 2919.25)
   (B)   Temporary Protection Order.  Consult Ohio R.C. 2919.26 for current
provisions regarding protection orders.
   (C)   Violating a Protection Order, Consent Agreement, Anti-stalking
Protection Order or Order Issued by a Court of Another State.  See §
636.045 (C) for current provisions.
§ 636.20  SAFETY OF CROWDS ATTENDING LIVE ENTERTAINMENT PERFORMANCES.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      “Concert.”  A musical performance of which the primary component is a
presentation by persons singing or playing musical instruments, that is
intended by its sponsors mainly, but not necessarily exclusively, for the
listening enjoyment of the audience, and that is held in a facility. A
“concert” does not include any performance in which music is a part of the
presentation and the primary component of which is acting, dancing, a motion
picture, a demonstration of skills or talent other than singing or playing an
instrument, an athletic event, an exhibition or a speech.
      “Facility.”  Any structure that has a roof or partial roof and that has
walls that wholly surround the area on all sides, including, but not limited
to, a stadium, hall, arena, armory, auditorium, ballroom, exhibition hall,
convention center or music hall.
      “Live entertainment performance.” Any live speech; any live musical
performance, including a concert; any live dramatic performance; any live
variety show; and any other live performance with respect to which the primary
intent of the audience can be construed to be viewing the performers. A “live
entertainment performance” does not include any form of entertainment with
respect to which the person purchasing a ticket routinely participates in
amusements as well as views performers.
      “Person.”  Includes, in addition to an individual or entity specified in
Ohio R.C. 1.59(C), any governmental entity.
      “Restricted entertainment area.”  Any wholly or partially enclosed area,
whether indoors or outdoors, that has limited access through established
entrances or established turnstiles or similar devices.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall sell, offer to sell, or offer in return for a
donation, any ticket that is not numbered and that does not correspond to a
specific seat for admission to either of the following:
         (a)   A live entertainment performance that is not exempted under
division (D) of this section, that is held in a restricted entertainment area,
and for which more than 8,000 tickets are offered to the public;
         (b)   A concert that is not exempted under division (D) of this
section and for which more than 3,000 tickets are offered to the public.
      (2)   No person shall advertise any live entertainment performance as
described in division (B)(1)(a) of this section or any concert as described in
division (B)(1)(b) of this section, unless the advertisement contains the words
“Reserved Seats Only.”
   (C)   Unless exempted by division (D)(1) of this section, no person who owns
or operates any restricted entertainment area shall fail to open, maintain and
properly staff at least the number of entrances designated under division (E)
of this section for a minimum of 90 minutes prior to the scheduled start of any
live entertainment performance that is held in the restricted entertainment
area and for which more than 3,000 tickets are sold, offered for sale or
offered in return for a donation.
   (D)   (1)   A live entertainment performance, other than a concert, is
exempted from the provisions of divisions (B) and (C) of this section if both
of the following apply:
         (a)   The restricted entertainment area in which the performance is
held has at least eight entrances or, if both entrances and separate admission
turnstiles or similar devices are used, has at least eight turnstiles or
similar devices.
         (b)   The eight entrances or, if applicable, the eight turnstiles or
similar devices, are opened, maintained and properly staffed at least one hour
prior to the scheduled start of the performance.
      (2)   (a)   The officer responsible for public safety in the municipality
may, upon application of the sponsor of a concert covered by division (B) of
this section, exempt the concert from the provisions of that division if such
officer finds that the health, safety and welfare of the participants and
spectators would not be substantially affected by failure to comply with the
provisions of that division.  In determining whether to grant an exemption, the
officer shall consider the following factors:
            1.   The size and design of the facility in which the concert is
scheduled;
            2.   The size, age and anticipated conduct of the crowd expected to
attend the concert;
            3.   The ability of the sponsor to manage and control the expected
crowd.  If the sponsor of any concert desires to obtain an exemption under this
division, the sponsor shall apply to the appropriate official on a form
prescribed by that official. The official shall issue an order that grants or
denies the exemption within five day. after receipt of the application. The
sponsor may appeal any order that denies an exemption to the Court of Common
Pleas of the county in which the facility is located.
         (b)   If an official grants an exemption under division (D)(2)(a) of
this section, the official shall designate an on-duty law enforcement officer
to be present at the concert. The designated officer has authority to issue
orders to all security personnel at the concert to protect the health, safety
and welfare of the participants and spectators.
      (3)   Notwithstanding division (D)(2) of this section, in the case of a
concert held in a facility located on the campus of an educational institution
covered by Ohio R.C. 3345.04, a state university law enforcement officer
appointed pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3345.04 and 3345.21 shall do both of the
following:
         (a)   Exercise the authority to grant exemptions provided by division
(D)(2)(a) of this section in lieu of an official designated in that division;
         (b)   If the officer grants an exemption under division (D)(3)(a) of
this section, designate an on- duty state university law enforcement officer to
be present at the concert. The designated officer has authority to issue orders
to all security personnel at the concert to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the participants and spectators.
   (E)   (1)   Unless a live entertainment performance is exempted by division
(D)(1) of this section, the officer responsible for public safety within the
municipality shall designate, for purposes of division (C) of this section, the
minimum number of entrances required to be opened, maintained and staffed at
each live entertainment performance so as to permit crowd control and reduce
congestion at the entrances.  The designation shall be based on such factors as
the size and nature of the crowd expected to attend the live entertainment
performance, the length of time prior to the live entertainment performance
that crowds are expected to congregate at the entrances and the amount of
security provided at the restricted entertainment area.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (E)(1) of this section, a state university
law enforcement officer appointed pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3345.04 and 3345.21
shall designate the number of entrances required to be opened, maintained and
staffed in the case of a live entertainment performance that is held at a
restricted entertainment area located on the campus of an educational
institution covered by Ohio R.C. 3345.04.
   (F)   No person shall enter into any contract for a live entertainment
performance that does not permit or require compliance with this section.
   (G)   (1)   This section does not apply to a live entertainment performance
held in a restricted entertainment area if one admission ticket entitles the
holder to view or participate in three or more different games, rides,
activities or live entertainment performances occurring simultaneously at
different sites within the restricted entertainment area and if the initial
admittance entrance to the restricted entertainment area, for which the ticket
is required, is separate from the entrance to any specific live entertainment
performance and an additional ticket is not required for admission to the
particular live entertainment performance.
      (2)   This section does not apply to a symphony orchestra performance, a
ballet performance, horse races, dances or fairs.
   (H)   This section does not prohibit the Council from imposing additional
requirements, not in conflict with the section, for the promotion or holding of
live entertainment performances.
   (I)   Whoever violates division (B), (C) or (F) of this section is guilty of
a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If any individual suffers physical harm to
his or her person as a result of a violation of this section, the sentencing
court shall consider this factor in favor of imposing a term of imprisonment
upon the offender. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
(ORC 2917.40)
§ 636.21  HAZING.
   (A)   As used in this section, “hazing” means doing any act or coercing
another, including the victim, to do any act of initiation into any student or
other organization that causes or creates a substantial risk of causing mental
or physical harm to any person.
   (B)   (1)   No person shall recklessly participate in the hazing of another.
      (2)   No administrator, employee, or faculty member of any primary,
secondary, or post-secondary school or of any other educational institution,
public or private, shall recklessly permit the hazing of any person.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of hazing, a misdemeanor of
the first degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
(ORC 2903.31)
   (D)   (1)   Any person who is subjected to hazing, as defined in Ohio R.C.
2903.31(A), may commence a civil action for injury or damages, including mental
and physical pain and suffering, that result from the hazing. The action may be
brought against any participants in the hazing, any organization whose local or
national directors, trustees, or officers authorized, requested, commanded, or
tolerated the hazing, and any local or national director, trustee, or officer
of the organization who authorized, requested, commanded, or tolerated the
hazing. If the hazing involves students in a primary, secondary, or post-
secondary school, university, college, or any other educational institution, an
action may also be brought against any administrator, employee, or faculty
member of the school, university, college, or other educational institution who
knew or reasonably should have known of the hazing and who did not make
reasonable attempts to prevent it and against the school, university, college,
or other educational institution. If an administrator, employee, or faculty
member is found liable in a civil action for hazing, then notwithstanding Ohio
R.C. Chapter 2743, the school, university, college, or other educational
institution that employed the administrator, employee, or faculty member may
also be held liable.
      (2)   The negligence or consent of the plaintiff or any assumption of the
risk by the plaintiff is not a defense to an action brought pursuant to this
section. In an action against a school, university, college, or other
educational institution, it is an affirmative defense that the school,
university, college, or other institution was actively enforcing a policy
against hazing at the time the cause of action arose.
(ORC 2307.44)
   (E)   The penalty provided for in §
202.99 shall be in addition to the civil remedy provided for in division (D) of
this section.
(Ord. 14-83, passed 3-21-1983)
§ 636.22  ILLEGAL DISTRIBUTION OF CIGARETTES, OTHER TOBACCO PRODUCTS, OR
ALTERNATIVE NICOTINE PRODUCTS; TRANSACTION SCANS.
   (A)   Illegal Distribution of Cigarettes, Other Tobacco Products, or
Alternative Nicotine Products.
      (1)   As used in this section:
         “Age verification.” A service provided by an independent third party
(other than a manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of
cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers
used to roll cigarettes) that compares information available from a
commercially available database, or aggregate of databases, that regularly are
used by government and businesses for the purpose of age and identity
verification to personal information provided during an internet sale or other
remote method of sale to establish that the purchaser is 21 years of age or
older.
         “Alternative nicotine product.”
            1.   Subject to division 2. of this definition, an electronic
smoking device, vapor product, or any other product or device that consists of
or contains nicotine that can be ingested into the body by any means,
including, but not limited to, chewing, smoking, absorbing, dissolving, or
inhaling.
            2.   The phrase does not include any of the following:
               a.   Any cigarette or other tobacco product;
               b.   Any product that is a “drug” as that term is defined in 21
U.S.C. § 321(g)(1);
               c.   Any product that is a “device” as that term is defined in
21 U.S.C. § 321(h);
               d.   Any product that is a “combination product” as described in
21 U.S.C. § 353(g).
         “Cigarette.” Includes clove cigarettes and hand-rolled cigarettes.
         “Distribute.”  Means to furnish, give, or provide cigarettes, other
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes to the ultimate consumer of the cigarettes, other tobacco products,
alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes.
         “Electronic smoking device.” Means any device that can be used to
deliver aerosolized or vaporized nicotine or any other substance to the person
inhaling from the device including an electronic cigarette, electronic cigar,
electronic hookah, vaping pen, or electronic pipe. The phrase includes any
component, part, or accessory of such a device, whether or not sold separately,
and includes any substance intended to be aerosolized or vaporized during the
use of the device. The phrase does not include any product that is a drug,
device, or combination product, as those terms are defined or described in 21
U.S.C. §§ 321 and 353(g).
         “Proof of age.” Means a driver’s license, a commercial driver’s
license, a military identification card, a passport, or an identification card
issued under R.C. §§ 4507.50 to 4507.52 that shows that a person is 18 years of
age or older.
         “Tobacco product.” Means any product that is made or derived from
tobacco or that contains any form of nicotine, if it is intended for human
consumption or is likely to be consumed, whether smoked, heated, chewed,
absorbed, dissolved, inhaled, or ingested by any other means, including, but
not limited to, a cigarette, an electronic smoking device, a cigar, pipe
tobacco, chewing tobacco, snuff, or snus. The phrase also means any component
or accessory used in the consumption of a tobacco product, such as filters,
rolling papers, pipes, blunt or hemp wraps, and liquids used in electronic
smoking devices, whether or not they contain nicotine. The phrase does not
include any product that is a drug, device, or combination product, as those
terms are defined or described in 21 U.S.C. §§ 321 and 353(g).
         “Vapor product.” Means a product, other than a cigarette or other
tobacco product as defined in R.C. Chapter 5743, that contains or is made or
derived from nicotine and that is intended and marketed for human consumption,
including by smoking, inhaling, snorting, or sniffing. The phrase includes any
component, part, or additive that is intended for use in an electronic smoking
device, a mechanical heating element, battery, or electronic circuit and is
used to deliver the product. The phrase does not include any product that is a
drug, device, or combination product, as those terms are defined or described
in 21 U.S.C. §§ 321 and 353(g). The phrase includes any product containing
nicotine, regardless of concentration.
         “Vending machine.” Has the same meaning as “coin machine” in R.C. §
2913.01.
      (2)   No manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of
cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers
used to roll cigarettes, no agent, employee, or representative of a
manufacturer, producer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of cigarettes,
other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes, and no other person shall do any of the following:
         (a)   Give, sell, or otherwise distribute cigarettes, other tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes to
any person under 21 years of age;
         (b)   Give away, sell, or distribute cigarettes, other tobacco
products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll cigarettes in
any place that does not have posted in a conspicuous place a legibly printed
sign in letters at least one-half inch high stating that giving, selling, or
otherwise distributing cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or papers used to roll cigarettes to a person under 21 years of age
is prohibited by law;
         (c)   Knowingly furnish any false information regarding the name, age,
or other identification of any person under 21 years of age with purpose to
obtain cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or
papers used to roll cigarettes for that person;
         (d)   Manufacture, sell, or distribute in this state any pack or other
container of cigarettes containing fewer than 20 cigarettes or any package of
roll-your-own tobacco containing less than six-tenths of one ounce of tobacco;
         (e)   Sell cigarettes or alternative nicotine products in a smaller
quantity than that placed in the pack or other container by the manufacturer;
         (f)   Give, sell, or otherwise distribute alternative nicotine
products, papers used to roll cigarettes, or tobacco products other than
cigarettes over the internet or through another remote method without age
verification.
      (3)   No person shall sell or offer to sell cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products by or from a vending machine, except
in the following locations:
         (a)   An area within a factory, business, office, or other place not
open to the general public;
         (b)   An area to which persons under 21 years of age are not generally
permitted access;
         (c)   Any other place not identified in division (A)(3)(a) or (A)(3)
(b) of this section, upon all of the following conditions:
            1.   The vending machine is located within the immediate vicinity,
plain view, and control of the person who owns or operates the place, or an
employee of that person, so that all cigarettes, other tobacco product, and
alternative nicotine product purchases from the vending machine will be readily
observed by the person who owns or operates the place or an employee of that
person. For the purpose of this section, a vending machine located in any
unmonitored area, including an unmonitored coatroom, restroom, hallway, or
outer waiting area, shall not be considered located within the immediate
vicinity, plain view, and control of the person who owns or operates the place,
or an employee of that person.
            2.   The vending machine is inaccessible to the public when the
place is closed.
            3.   A clearly visible notice is posted in the area where the
vending machine is located that states the following in letters that are
legibly printed and at least one-half inch high: “It is illegal for any person
under the age of 21 to purchase tobacco or alternative nicotine products.”
      (4)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under division
(A)(2)(a) of this section:
         (a)   The person under 21 years of age was accompanied by a parent,
spouse who is 21 years of age or older, or legal guardian of the person under
21 years of age.
         (b)   The person who gave, sold, or distributed cigarettes, other
tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or papers used to roll
cigarettes to a person under 21 years of age under division (A)(2)(a) of this
section is a parent, spouse who is 21 years of age or older, or legal guardian
of the person under 21 years of age.
      (5)   It is not a violation of division (A)(2)(a) or (A)(2)(b) of this
section for a person to give or otherwise distribute to a person under 21 years
of age cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine products, or
papers used to roll cigarettes while the person under 21 years of age is
participating in a research protocol if all of the following apply:
         (a)   The parent, guardian, or legal custodian of the person under 21
years of age has consented in writing to the person under 21 years of age
participating in the research protocol.
         (b)   An institutional human subjects protection review board, or an
equivalent entity, has approved the research protocol.
         (c)   The person under 21 years of age is participating in the
research protocol at the facility or location specified in the research
protocol.
      (6)   (a)   Whoever violates division (A)(2)(a), (A)(2)(b), (A)(2)(d),
(A)(2)(e), or (A)(2)(f) or (A)(3) of this section is guilty of illegal
distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products. Except as otherwise provided in this division, illegal distribution
of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a
misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender previously has been convicted
of a violation of division (A)(2)(a), (A)(2)(b), (A)(2)(d), (A)(2)(e), or (A)
(2)(f) or (A)(3) of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, illegal distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products is a misdemeanor of the third
degree.
         (b)   Whoever violates division (A)(2)(c) of this section is guilty of
permitting a person under 21 years of age to use cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, permitting a person under 21 years of age to use cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a misdemeanor of
the fourth degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation
of division (A)(2)(c) of this section or a substantially equivalent state law
or municipal ordinance, permitting a person under 21 years of age to use
cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products is a
misdemeanor of the third degree.
      (7)   Any cigarettes, other tobacco products, alternative nicotine
products, or papers used to roll cigarettes that are given, sold, or otherwise
distributed to a person under 21 years of age in violation of this section and
that are used, possessed, purchased, or received by a person under 21 years of
age in violation of R.C. § 2151.87 are subject to seizure and forfeiture as
contraband under R.C. Chapter 2981.
(R.C. § 2927.02)
   (B)   Transaction Scan.
      (1)   As used in this division and division (C) of this section:
         “Card holder” means any person who presents a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card to a seller, or an agent or employee
of a seller, to purchase or receive cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products from a seller, agent or employee.
         “Identification card” means an identification card issued under Ohio
R.C. 4507.50 to 4507.52.
         “Seller” means a seller of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or
alternative nicotine products and includes any person whose gift of or other
distribution of cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products is subject to the prohibitions of division (A) of this section.
         “Transaction scan” means the process by which a seller or an agent or
employee of a seller checks, by means of a transaction scan device, the
validity of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification card
that is presented as a condition for purchasing or receiving cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products.
         “Transaction scan device” means any commercial device or combination
of devices used at a point of sale that is capable of deciphering in an
electronically readable format the information encoded on the magnetic strip or
bar code of a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an identification
card.
      (2)   (a)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may perform a
transaction scan by means of a transaction scan device to check the validity of
a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a
card holder as a condition for selling, giving away, or otherwise distributing
to the card holder cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products.
         (b)   If the information deciphered by the transaction scan performed
under division (B)(2)(a) of this section fails to match the information printed
on the driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented
by the card holder, or if the transaction scan indicates that the information
so printed is false or fraudulent, neither the seller nor any agent or employee
of the seller shall sell, give away, or otherwise distribute any cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products to the card holder.
         (c)   Division (B)(2)(a) of this section does not preclude a seller or
an agent or employee of a seller from using a transaction scan device to check
the validity of a document other than a driver’s or commercial driver’s license
or identification card, if the document includes a bar code or magnetic strip
that may be scanned by the device, as a condition for selling, giving away, or
otherwise distributing cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative
nicotine products to the person presenting the document.
      (3)   Rules adopted by the Registrar of Motor Vehicles under Ohio R.C.
4301.61(C) apply to the use of transaction scan devices for purposes of this
division (B) and division (C) of this section.
      (4)   (a)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall
electronically or mechanically record or maintain any information derived from
a transaction scan, except for the following:
            1.   The name and date of birth of the person listed on the
driver’s or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the
card holder;
            2.   The expiration date and identification number of the driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by the card
holder.
         (b)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use the
information that is derived from a transaction scan or that is permitted to be
recorded and maintained under division (B)(4)(a) of this section, except for
purposes of division (C) of this section.
         (c)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall use a
transaction scan device for a purpose other than the purpose specified in
division (C)(2)(a) of this section.
         (d)   No seller or agent or employee of a seller shall sell or
otherwise disseminate the information derived from a transaction scan to any
third party, including but not limited to selling or otherwise disseminating
that information for any marketing, advertising, or promotional activities, but
a seller or agent or employee of a seller may release that information pursuant
to a court order or as specifically authorized by division (C) of this section
or another section of these Codified Ordinances or the Ohio Revised Code.
      (5)   Nothing in this division (B) or division (C) of this section
relieves a seller or an agent or employee of a seller of any responsibility to
comply with any other applicable local, state or federal laws or rules
governing the sale, giving away, or other distribution of cigarettes, other
tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products.
      (6)   Whoever violates division (B)(2)(b) or (B)(4) of this section is
guilty of engaging in an illegal tobacco product or alternative nicotine
product transaction scan, and the court may impose upon the offender a civil
penalty of up to $1,000 for each violation.  The Clerk of the Court shall pay
each collected civil penalty to the County Treasurer for deposit into the
County Treasury.
(ORC 2927.021)
   (C)   Affirmative Defenses.
      (1)   A seller or an agent or employee of a seller may not be found
guilty of a charge of a violation of division (A) of this section in which the
age of the purchaser or other recipient of cigarettes, other tobacco products,
or alternative nicotine products is an element of the alleged violation, if the
seller, agent or employee raises and proves as an affirmative defense that all
of the following occurred:
         (a)   A card holder attempting to purchase or receive cigarettes,
other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine products presented a driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or an identification card.
         (b)   A transaction scan of the driver’s or commercial driver’s
license or identification card that the card holder presented indicated that
the license or card was valid.
         (c)   The cigarettes, other tobacco products, or alternative nicotine
products were sold, given away or otherwise distributed to the card holder in
reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and the completed
transaction scan.
      (2)   In determining whether a seller or an agent or employee of a seller
has proven the affirmative defense provided by division (C)(1) of this section,
the trier of fact in the action for the alleged violation of division (A) of
this section shall consider any written policy that the seller has adopted and
implemented and that is intended to prevent violations of division (A) of this
section.  For purposes of division (C)(1)(c) of this section, the trier of fact
shall consider that reasonable reliance upon the identification presented and
the completed transaction scan may require a seller or an agent or employee of
a seller to exercise reasonable diligence to determine, and that the use of a 
transaction scan device does not excuse a seller or an agent or employee of a
seller from exercising reasonable diligence to determine, the following:
         (a)   Whether a person to whom the seller or agent or employee of a
seller sells, gives away, or otherwise distributes cigarettes, other tobacco
products, or alternative nicotine products is 21 years of age or older;
         (b)   Whether the description and picture appearing on the driver’s or
commercial driver’s license or identification card presented by a card holder
is that of the card holder.
      (3)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense provided by
division (C)(1) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or a
deputy registrar who issued an identification card under Ohio R.C. 4507.50 to
4507.52 shall be permitted to submit certified copies of the records of that
issuance in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of or contractors with the
Bureau of Motor Vehicles in the action.
(ORC 2927.022)
   (D)   Shipment of Tobacco Products.
      (1)   As used in this division (D):
         (a)   “Authorized recipient of tobacco products” means a person who
is:
            1.   Licensed as a cigarette wholesale dealer under R.C. § 5743.15;
            2.   Licensed as a retail dealer as long as the person purchases
cigarettes with the appropriate tax stamp affixed;
            3.   An export warehouse proprietor as defined in § 5702 of the
Internal Revenue Code;
            4.   An operator of a customs bonded warehouse under 19 U.S.C. §
1311 or 19 U.S.C. § 1555;
            5.   An officer, employee, or agent of the federal government or of
this state acting in the person’s official capacity;
            6.   A department, agency, instrumentality, or political
subdivision of the federal government or of this state;
            7.   A person having a consent for consumer shipment issued by the
Tax Commissioner under R.C. § 5743.71.
         (b)   “Motor carrier.”  Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 4923.01.
      (2)   The purpose of this division (D) is to prevent the sale of
cigarettes to minors and to ensure compliance with the Master Settlement
Agreement, as defined in Ohio R.C. 1346.01.
      (3)   (a)   No person shall cause to be shipped any cigarettes to any
person in this municipality other than an authorized recipient of tobacco
products.
         (b)   No motor carrier or other person shall knowingly transport
cigarettes to any person in this municipality that the carrier or other person
reasonably believes is not an authorized recipient of tobacco products. If
cigarettes are transported to a home or residence, it shall be presumed that
the motor carrier, or other person knew that the person to whom the cigarettes
were delivered was not an authorized recipient of tobacco products.
      (4)   No person engaged in the business of selling cigarettes who ships
or causes to be shipped cigarettes to any person in this municipality in any
container or wrapping other than the original container or wrapping of the
cigarettes shall fail to plainly and visibly mark the exterior of the container
or wrapping in which the cigarettes are shipped with the words “cigarettes”.
      (5)   A court shall impose a fine of up to $1,000 for each violation of
division (D)(3)(a), (D)(3)(b) or (D)(4) of this section.
(ORC 2927.023)
   (E)   Furnishing false information to obtain tobacco products.
      (1)   No person who is 18 years of age or older but younger than 21 years
of age shall knowingly furnish false information concerning that person’s name,
age, or other identification for the purpose of obtaining tobacco products.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (E)(1) of this section is guilty of
furnishing false information to obtain tobacco products. Except as otherwise
provided in this division, furnishing false information to obtain tobacco
products is a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If the offender previously has
been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of division (E)(1) of this
section or a substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance,
furnishing false information to obtain tobacco products is a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
(R.C. § 2927.024)
§ 636.23  INTIMIDATION IN CONNECTION WITH HOUSING.
   (A)   No person, whether or not acting under color of law, shall by force or
threat of force willfully injure, intimidate, or interfere with, or attempt to
injure, intimidate, or interfere with any of the following:
      (1)   Any person because of race, color, religion, sex, familial status,
as defined in Ohio R.C. 4112.01, national origin, military status as defined in
that section, disability as defined in that section, or ancestry and because
that person is or has been selling, purchasing, renting, financing, occupying,
contracting, or negotiating for the sale, purchase, rental, financing, or
occupation of any housing accommodations, or applying for or participating in
any service, organization, or facility relating to the business of selling or
renting housing accommodations.
      (2)   Any person because that person is or has been doing, or in order to
intimidate that person or any other person or any class of persons from doing
either of the following:
         (a)   Participating, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, familial status, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4112.01, national
origin, military status as defined in that section, disability as defined in
that section, or ancestry, in any of the activities, services, organizations,
or facilities described in division (A)(1) of this section;
         (b)   Affording another person or class of persons opportunity or
protection so to participate.
      (3)   Any person because that person is or has been, or in order to
discourage that person or any other person from, lawfully aiding or encouraging
other persons to participate, without discrimination on account of race, color,
religion, sex, familial status as defined in Ohio R.C. 4112.01, national
origin, military status as defined in that section, disability as defined in
that section, or ancestry, in any of the activities, services, organizations,
or facilities described in division (A)(1) of this section, or participating
lawfully in speech or peaceful assembly opposing any denial of the opportunity
to so participate.
   (B)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
(ORC 2927.03)
§ 636.24  FAILING TO PROVIDE FOR A FUNCTIONALLY IMPAIRED PERSON.
   (A)   No caretaker shall knowingly fail to provide a functionally impaired
person under his or her care with any treatment, care, goods, or service that
is necessary to maintain the health of safety of the  functionally impaired
person when this failure results in physical harm or serious physical harm to
the functionally impaired person.
   (B)   No caretaker shall recklessly fail to provide a functionally impaired
person under his or her care with any treatment, care, goods, or service that
is necessary to maintain the health of safety of the functionally impaired
person when this failure results in serious physical harm to the functionally
impaired person.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
knowingly failing to provide for a functionally impaired person, a misdemeanor
of the first degree.  If the functionally impaired person under the offender’s
care suffers serious physical harm as a result of the violation of this
section, a violation of division (A) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
recklessly failing to provide for a functionally impaired person, a misdemeanor
of the first degree.  If the functionally impaired person under the offender’s
care suffers serious physical harm as a result of the violation of this
section, a violation of division (B) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2903.16)
   (D)   As used in this section:
      “Caretaker” means a person who assumes the duty to provide for the care
and protection of a functionally impaired person on a voluntary basis, by
contract, through receipt of payment for care and protection, as a result of a
family relationship, or by order of a court of competent jurisdiction. 
“Caretaker” does not include a person who owns, operates, or administers, or
who is an agent or employee of, a care facility, as defined in Ohio R.C.
2903.33.
      “Functionally impaired person” means any person who has a physical or
mental impairment that prevents the person from providing for his or her own
care or protection or whose infirmities caused by aging prevent the person from
providing for his or her own care or protection.
(ORC 2903.10)
§ 636.25  FAILURE TO PERFORM VIABILITY TESTING.
   (A)   Except in a medical emergency that prevents compliance with this
division, no physician shall perform or induce or attempt to perform or induce
an abortion on a pregnant woman after the beginning of the twentieth week of
gestation unless, prior to the performance or inducement of the abortion or the
attempt to perform or induce the abortion, the physician determines, in the
physician’s good faith medical judgment, that the unborn child is not viable,
and the physician makes that determination after performing a medical
examination of the pregnant woman and after performing or causing to be
performed those tests for assessing gestational age, weight, lung maturity, or
other tests that the physician, in that physician’s good faith medical
judgment, believes are necessary to determine whether an unborn child is
viable.
   (B)   Except in a medical emergency that prevents compliance with this
division, no physician shall perform or induce or attempt to perform or induce
an abortion on a pregnant woman after the beginning of the twentieth week of
gestation without first entering the determination made in division (A) of this
section and the associated findings of the medical examination and tests in the
medical record of the pregnant woman.
   (C)   The State Medical Board shall suspend a physician’s license to
practice medicine in this state for a period of not less than six months if the
physician violates this section.
(ORC 2919.18(A), (B), (D))
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to perform
viability testing, a misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as
provided in §
202.99.
§ 636.26  UNLAWFUL COLLECTION OF BODILY SUBSTANCES.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly collect any blood, urine, tissue, or other
bodily substance of another person without privilege or consent to do so.
   (B)   (1)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any of the
following:
         (a)   The collection of any bodily substance of a person by a law
enforcement officer, or by another person pursuant to the direction or advice
of a law enforcement officer, for purposes of a chemical test or tests of the
substance under R.C. § 1547.111(A)(1) or R.C. § 4511.191(A)(2) to determine the
alcohol, drug, controlled substance, metabolite of a controlled substance, or
combination content of the bodily substance;
         (b)   The collection of any bodily substance of a person by a peace
officer, or by another person pursuant to the direction or advice of a peace
officer, for purposes of a test or tests of the substance as provided in R.C. §
4506.17(A) to determine the person’s alcohol concentration or the presence of
any controlled substance or metabolite of a controlled substance.
      (2)   Division (B)(1) of this section shall not be construed as implying
that the persons identified in divisions (B)(1)(a) and (b) of this section do
not have privilege to collect the bodily substance of another person as
described in those divisions or as limiting the definition of “privilege” set
forth in R.C. § 2901.01.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of unlawful
collection of a bodily substance. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, unlawful collection of a bodily substance is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (A) of this section or a substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, unlawful collection of a bodily
substance is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2927.15)
§ 636.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 642:  OFFENSES RELATING TO PROPERTY
Section
642.01   Definitions
642.02   Theft
642.03   Degree of offense when certain property involved
642.035   Evidence of theft of rented property
642.04   Unauthorized use of a vehicle; vehicle trespass
642.05   Unauthorized use of property
642.06   Injuring vines, bushes, trees or crops
642.07   Desecration
642.08   Assaulting police dog or horse or assistance dog
642.09   Arson
642.10   Criminal damaging or endangering; vehicular vandalism
642.11   Criminal mischief
642.12   Criminal trespass
642.125   Aggravated trespass
642.13   Tampering with coin machines
642.14   Passing bad checks
642.145   Forging or selling forged identification cards
642.146   Criminal simulation
642.15   Misuse of credit cards
642.155   Recording credit card, telephone or Social Security numbers
642.16   Making or using slugs
642.17   Prima facie evidence of fraud in theft from livery or hostelry
642.18   Tampering with records
642.19   Securing writings by deception
642.20   Personating an officer
642.205   Diminishing or interfering with forfeitable property
642.21   Defrauding creditors
642.22   Receiving stolen property
642.24   Determining property value in theft offense
642.25   Determining property value in arson
642.26   Prosecutions for theft of utilities
642.27   Posting handbills, posters, placards
642.29   Insurance fraud
642.31   Misconduct involving a public transportation system
642.32   Medicaid fraud
642.33   Workers’ compensation fraud
642.34   Motion picture piracy
642.35   Railroad vandalism; criminal trespass; interference with operation of
train; grade crossing device vandalism
Cross-reference:
   Alteration, injury, removal of traffic control devices, see §
414.08
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   “Physical harm to property” defined, see §
606.01
   “Property” defined, see §
606.01
   “Serious physical harm to property” defined, see §
606.01
   Detention of shoplifters and those committing motion picture piracy;
protection of institutional property, see §
606.23
   Disposition of unclaimed or forfeited property held by Police Department,
see §
606.24
   Endangering aircraft and airport operations, see §
672.12
   Possessing criminal tools, see §
672.14
Statutory reference:
   Determining property value or amount of physical harm in arson, see Ohio
R.C. 2909.11
   Parents’ liability for destructive acts of their children, see Ohio R.C.
3109.09
   Value of written instrument or evidence of debt, see Ohio R.C. 1.07
§ 642.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   “Active duty service member.” Any member of the armed forces of the United
States performing active duty under Title 10 of the United States Code.
   “Anhydrous ammonia.” A compound formed by the combination of two gaseous
elements, nitrogen and hydrogen, in the manner described below. Anhydrous
ammonia is one part nitrogen to three parts hydrogen (NH3). Anhydrous ammonia
by weight is fourteen parts nitrogen to three parts hydrogen, which is
approximately 82% nitrogen to 18% hydrogen.
   “Assistance dog” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 955.011.
   “Cable television service.”  Any services provided by or through the
facilities of any cable television system or other similar closed circuit
coaxial cable communications system, or any microwave or similar transmission
service used in connection with any cable television system or other similar
closed circuit coaxial cable communications system.
   “Coin machine.”  Any mechanical or electronic device designed to do both of
the following:
      (1)   Receive a coin or bill, or token made for that purpose;
      (2)   In return for the insertion or deposit of a coin, bill, or token,
automatically dispense property, provide a service, or grant a license.
   “Computer.”  An electronic device that performs logical, arithmetic, and
memory functions by the manipulation of electronic or magnetic impulses. 
“Computer” includes, but is not limited to, all input, output, processing,
storage, computer program, or communication facilities that are connected, or
related, in a computer system or network to an electronic device of that
nature.
   “Computer contaminant.”  Means a computer program that is designed to
modify, damage, destroy, disable, deny or degrade access to, allow unauthorized
access to, functionally impair, record, or transmit information within a
computer, computer system, or computer network without the express or implied
consent of the owner or other person authorized to give consent and that is of
a type or kind described in divisions (1) through (4) of this definition or of
a type or kind similar to a type or kind described in divisions (1) through (4)
of this definition:
      (1)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “viruses” and
“worms” that are self- replicating or self-propagating and that are designed to
contaminate other computer programs, compromise computer security, consume
computer resources, modify, destroy, record, or transmit data, or disrupt the
normal operation of the computer, computer system, or computer network;
      (2)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “Trojans” or “Trojan
horses” that are not self-replicating or self-propagating and that are designed
to compromise computer security, consume computer  resources, modify, destroy,
record, or transmit data, or disrupt the normal operation of the computer,
computer system, or computer network;
      (3)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “zombies” that are
designed to use a computer without the knowledge and consent of the owner, or
other person authorized to give consent, and that are designed to send large
quantities of data to a targeted computer network for the purpose of degrading
the targeted computer’s or network’s performance, or denying access through the
network to the targeted computer or network, resulting in what is commonly
known as “denial of service” or “distributed denial of service” attacks;
      (4)   A group of computer programs commonly known as “trap doors”, “back
doors”, or “root kits” that are designed to bypass standard authentication
software and that are designed to allow access or use of a computer without the
knowledge or consent of the owner, or other person authorized to give consent.
   “Computer hacking.”
      (1)   “Computer hacking” means any of the following:
         (a)   Gaining access or attempting to gain access to all or part of a
computer, computer system, or a computer network without express or implied
authorization with the intent to defraud or with intent to commit a crime;
         (b)   Misusing computer or network services including but not limited
to mail transfer programs, file transfer programs, proxy servers, and web
servers by performing functions not authorized by the owner of the computer,
computer system, or computer network or other person authorized to give
consent. As used in this division, “misuse of computer and network services”
includes but is not limited to the unauthorized use of any of the following:
            1.   Mail transfer programs to send mail to persons other than the
authorized users of that computer or computer network;
            2.   File transfer program services or proxy servers to access
other computers, computer systems, or computer networks;
            3.   Web servers to redirect users to other web pages or web
servers.
         (c)   1.   Subject to division (1)(c)2. of this definition, using a
group of computer programs commonly known as “port scanners” or “probes” to
intentionally access any computer, computer system, or computer network without
the permission of the owner of the computer, computer system, or computer
network or other person authorized to give consent. The group of computer
programs referred to in this division includes but is not limited to those
computer programs that use a computer network to access a computer, computer
system, or another computer network to determine any of the following: the
presence or types of computers or computer systems on a network; the computer
network’s facilities and capabilities; the availability of computer or network
services; the presence or versions of computer software including but not
limited to operating systems, computer services, or computer contaminants; the
presence of a known computer software deficiency that can be used to gain
unauthorized access to a computer, computer system, or computer network; or any
other information about a computer, computer system, or computer network not
necessary for the normal and lawful operation of the computer initiating the
access.
            2.   The group of computer programs referred to in division (1)
(c)1. of this definition does not include standard computer software used for
the normal operation, administration, management, and test of a computer,
computer system, or computer network including but not limited to domain name
services, mail transfer services, and other operating system services, computer
programs commonly called “ping”, “tcpdump”, and “traceroute” and other network
monitoring and management computer software, and computer programs commonly
knows as “nslookup” and “whois” and other systems administration computer
software.
         (d)   The intentional use of a computer, computer system, or a
computer network in a manner that exceeds any right or permission granted by
the owner of the computer, computer system, or computer network or other person
authorized to give consent.
      (2)   “Computer hacking” does not include the introduction of a computer
contaminant, as defined in this section, into a computer, computer system,
computer program, or computer network.
   “Computer network.”  A set of related and remotely-connected computers and
communication facilities that includes more than one computer system that has
the capability to transmit among the connected computers and communication
facilities through the use of computer facilities.
   “Computer program.”  An ordered set of data representing coded instructions
or statements that, when executed by a computer, causes the computer to process
data.
   “Computer services.”  Includes, but is not limited to, the use of a computer
system, computer network, computer program, data that is prepared for computer
use, or data that is contained within a computer system or computer network.
   “Computer software.”  Computer programs, procedures, and other documentation
associated with the operation of a computer system.
   “Computer system.”  A computer and related devices, whether connected or
unconnected, including, but not limited to, data input, output, and storage
devices, data communications links, and computer programs and data that make
the system capable of performing specified special purpose data processing
tasks.
   “Counterfeit telecommunications device.”  A telecommunications device that,
alone or with another telecommunications device, has been altered, constructed,
manufactured, or programmed to acquire, intercept, receive, or otherwise
facilitate the use of a telecommunications service or information service
without the authority or consent of the provider of the telecommunications
service or information service.  The phrase includes but is not limited to a
clone telephone, clone microchip, tumbler telephone, or tumbler microchip; a
wireless scanning device capable of acquiring, intercepting, receiving, or
otherwise facilitating the use of telecommunications service or information
service without immediate detection; or a device, equipment, hardware, or
software designed for, or capable of, altering or changing the electronic
serial number in a wireless telephone.
   “Create a substantial risk of serious physical harm to any person.” 
Includes the creation of a substantial risk of serious physical harm to any
emergency personnel.
   “Credit card.”  Includes, but is not limited to, a card, code, device, or
other means of access to a customer’s account for the purpose of obtaining
money, property, labor, or services on credit, or for initiating an electronic
fund transfer at a point-of-sale terminal, an automated teller machine, or a
cash dispensing machine. It also includes a county procurement card issued
under Ohio R.C. 301.29.
   “Dangerous drug.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4729.01.
   “Data.”  A representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts, or
instructions that are being or have been prepared in a formalized manner and
that are intended for use in a computer, computer system, or computer network.
   “Deception.”  To knowingly deceive another or cause another to be deceived
by any false or misleading representation, by withholding information, by
preventing another from acquiring information, or by any other conduct, act, or
omission that creates, confirms, or perpetuates a false impression in another,
including a false impression as to law, value, state of mind, or other
objective or subjective fact.
   “Defraud.”  To knowingly obtain, by deception, some benefit for oneself or
another, or to knowingly cause, by deception, some detriment to another.
   “Deprive.”  To do any of the following:
      (1)   To withhold property of another permanently, or for a period that
appropriates a substantial portion of its value or use, or with purpose to
restore it only upon payment of a reward or other consideration;
      (2)   To dispose of property so as to make it unlikely that the owner
will recover it;
      (3)   To accept, use, or appropriate money, property, or services, with
purpose not to give proper consideration in return for the money, property, or
services, and without reasonable justification or excuse for not giving proper
consideration.
   “Disabled adult.”  A person who is 18 years of age or older and has some
impairment of body or mind that makes the person unable to work at any
substantially remunerative employment that the person otherwise would be able
to perform and that will, with reasonable probability, continue for a period of
at least 12 months without any present indication of recovery from the
impairment, or who is 18 years of age or older and has been certified as
permanently and totally disabled by an agency of this state or the United
States that has the function of so classifying persons.
   “Drug abuse offense.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2925.01.
   “Elderly person.”  A person who is 65 years of age or older.
   “Electronic fund transfer.”  Has the same meaning as in 92 Stat. 3728, 15
U.S.C. 1693a, as amended.
   “Emergency personnel.”  Means any of the following persons:
      (1)   A peace officer, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2935.01;
      (2)   A member of a fire department or other firefighting agency of a
municipal corporation, township, township fire district, joint fire district,
other political subdivision, or combination of political subdivisions;
      (3)   A member of a private fire company, as defined in Ohio R.C. 9.60,
or a volunteer firefighter;
      (4)    A member of a joint ambulance district or joint emergency medical
services district;
      (5)   An emergency medical technician-basic, emergency medical
technician-intermediate, emergency medical technician-paramedic, ambulance
operator, or other member of an emergency medical service that is owned of
operated by a political subdivision or a private entity;
      (6)   The State Fire Marshal, the Chief Deputy State Fire Marshal, or an
Assistant State Fire Marshal;
      (7)   A fire prevention officer of a political subdivision or an arson,
fire, or similar investigator of a political subdivision.
   “Federally-licensed firearms dealer.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
5502.63.
   “Firearm” and “dangerous ordnance.”  Have the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
2923.11.
   “Forge.”  To fabricate or create, in whole or in part and by any means, any
spurious writing, or to make, execute, alter, complete, reproduce, or otherwise
purport to authenticate any writing, when the writing in fact is not
authenticated by that conduct.
   “Gain access.”  To approach, instruct, communicate with, store data in,
retrieve data from, or otherwise make use of any resources of a computer,
computer system, or computer network, or any cable service or cable system both
as defined in Ohio R.C. 2913.04.
   “Information service.”
      (1)   Subject to division (2) of this definition, the offering of a
capability for generating, acquiring, storing, transforming, processing,
retrieving, utilizing, or making available information via telecommunications,
including but not limited to electronic publishing.
      (2)   “Information service” does not include any use of a capability of a
type described in division (1) of this definition for the management, control,
or operation of a telecommunications system or the management of a
telecommunications service.
   “Internet.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 341.42.
   “Motor vehicle.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
   “Occupied structure.”  Means any house, building, outbuilding, watercraft,
aircraft, railroad car, truck, trailer, tent, or other structure, vehicle, or
shelter, or any portion thereof, to which any of the following applies:
      (1)   It is maintained as a permanent or temporary dwelling, even though
it is temporarily unoccupied and whether nor not any person is actually
present;
      (2)   At the time, it is occupied as the permanent or temporary
habitation of any person, whether or not any person is actually present;
      (3)   At the time, it is specially adapted for the overnight
accommodation of any person, whether or not any person is actually present;
      (4)   At the time, any person is present or likely to be present in it.
   “Owner.”  Unless the context requires a different meaning, any person, other
than the actor, who is the owner of, who has possession or control of, or who
has any license or interest in property or services, even though the ownership,
possession, control, license, or interest is unlawful.
   “Police dog or horse” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2921.321.
   “Political subdivision.”  Has the same meaning  as in Ohio R.C. 2744.01.
   “Rented property.”  Personal property in which the right of possession and
use of the property is for a short and possibly indeterminate term in return
for consideration; the rentee generally controls the duration of possession of
the property within any applicable minimum or maximum term; and the amount of
consideration is generally determined by the duration of possession of the
property.
   “Services.”  Includes labor, personal services, professional services,
rental services, public utility services including wireless service as defined
in Ohio R.C. 128.01(F)(1), common carrier services, and food, drink,
transportation, entertainment, and cable television services and, for purposes
of Ohio R.C. 2913.04 or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
includes cable services as defined in that section.
   “Slug.”  An object that, by virtue of its size, shape, composition, or other
quality, is capable of being inserted or deposited in a coin machine as an
improper substitute for a genuine coin, bill, or token made for that purpose.
   “State.”  Has the same meaning  as in Ohio R.C. 2744.01.
   “Telecommunication.”  The origination, emission, dissemination,
transmission, or reception of data, images, signals, sounds, or other
intelligence or equivalence or intelligence of any nature over any
communications system by any method, including but not limited to a fiber
optic, electronic, magnetic, optical, digital or analog method.
   “Telecommunications device.”  Any instrument, equipment, machine, or other
device that facilitates telecommunication, including but not limited to a
computer, computer network, computer chip, computer circuit, scanner,
telephone, cellular telephone, pager, personal communications device,
transponder, receiver, radio, modem, or device that enables the use of a modem.
   “Telecommunications service.”  The providing, allowing, facilitating, or
generating of any form of telecommunication through the use of a
telecommunications device over a telecommunications system.
   “Theft offense.”  Any of the following:
      (1)   A violation of Ohio R.C. 2911.01, 2911.02, 2911.11, 2911.12,
2911.13, 2911.31, 2911.32, 2913.02, 2913.03, 2913.04, 2913.041, 2913.11,
2913.21, 2913.31, 2913.32, 2913.33, 2913.34, 2913.40, 2913.42, 2913.43,
2913.44, 2913.45, 2913.47, 2913.48, former Ohio R.C. 2913.47 or 2913.48, Ohio
R.C. 2913.51, 2915.05, 2921.41;
      (2)   A violation of an existing or former municipal ordinance or law of
this or any other state or of the United States substantially equivalent to any
section listed in division (1) of this definition, or a violation of Ohio R.C.
2913.41, 2913.81 or 2915.06 as it existed prior to July 1, 1996;
      (3)   An offense under an existing or former municipal ordinance or law
of this or any other state or the United States involving robbery, burglary,
breaking and entering, theft,  embezzlement, wrongful conversion, forgery,
counterfeiting, deceit, or fraud;
      (4)   A conspiracy to commit, attempt to commit, or complicity in
committing any offense under division (1), (2), or (3) of this definition.
   “Utter.”  To issue, publish, transfer, use, put or send into circulation,
deliver, or display.
   “Writing.”  Any computer software, document, letter, memorandum, note,
paper, plate, data, film, or other thing having in or upon it any written,
type-written, or printed matter, and any token, stamp, seal, credit card,
badge, trademark, label, or other symbol of value, right, privilege, license,
or identification.
(ORC 2909.01, 2913.01)
§ 642.02  THEFT.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to deprive the owner of property or services,
shall knowingly obtain or exert control over either the property or services in
any of the following ways:
      (1)   Without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give
consent;
      (2)   Beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of the owner or
person authorized to give consent;
      (3)   By deception;
      (4)   By threat;
      (5)   By intimidation.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of theft.  Except as otherwise
provided in this division, a violation of this section is petty theft, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99. If any of the following criteria are met, then a violation of this
section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law:
      (1)   If the value of the property or services is $1,000 or more;
      (2)   If the property stolen is any of the property listed in Ohio R.C.
2913.71;
      (3)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person, disabled adult,
active duty service member, or spouse of an active duty service member;
      (4)   If the property stolen is a firearm or dangerous ordnance;
      (5)   If the property stolen is a motor vehicle;
      (6)   If the property stolen is any dangerous drug, or if the offender
previously has been convicted of a felony drug abuse offense;
      (7)   If the property stolen is a police dog or horse or an assistance
dog and the offender knows or should know that the property stolen is a police
dog or horse or a service dog;
      (8)   If the property stolen is anhydrous ammonia; or
      (9)   If the property stolen is a special purchase article as defined in
R.C. § 4737.04 or is a bulk merchandise container as defined in R.C. §
4737.012.
   (C)   In addition to the penalties described in division (B) of this
section, if the offender committed the violation by causing a motor vehicle to
leave the premises of an establishment at which gasoline is offered for retail
sale without the offender making full payment for gasoline that was dispensed
into the fuel tank of the motor vehicle or into another container, the court
may do one of the following:
      (1)   Unless division (C)(2) of this section applies, suspend for not
more than six months the offenders driver’s license, probationary driver’s
license, commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, or
nonresident operating privilege;
      (2)   If the offender’s driver’s license, probationary driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, or nonresident
operating privilege has previously been suspended pursuant to division (C)(1)
of this section, or any other substantially equivalent state or local law,
impose a class seven suspension of the offender’s license, permit, or privilege
from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)(7), provided that the
suspension shall be at least six months;
      (3)   The court, in lieu of suspending the offender’s driver’s or
commercial driver’s license, probationary driver’s license, temporary
instruction permit, or nonresident operating privilege pursuant to division (C)
(1) or (C)(2) of this section, instead may require the offender to perform
community service for a number of hours determined by the court.
   (D)   In addition to the penalties described in division (B) of this
section, if the offender committed the violation by stealing rented property or
rental services, the court may order that the offender make restitution
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2929.18 or Ohio R.C. 2929.28. Restitution may include,
but is not limited to, the cost of repairing or replacing the stolen property,
or the cost of repairing the stolen property and any loss of revenue resulting
from deprivation of the property due to theft of rental services that is less
than or equal to the actual value of the property at the time it was rented.
Evidence of intent to commit theft of rented property or rental services shall
be determined pursuant to the provisions of Ohio R.C. 2913.72.
   (E)   The sentencing court that suspends an offender’s license, permit, or
nonresident operating privilege under division (C) of this section may grant
the offender limited driving privileges during the period of the suspension in
accordance with Ohio R.C. Chapter 4510.
(ORC 2913.02)
Statutory reference:
   Felony theft provisions, see Ohio R.C. 2913.02(B)
§ 642.03  DEGREE OF OFFENSE WHEN CERTAIN PROPERTY INVOLVED.
   Regardless of the value of the property involved, and regardless of whether
the offender previously has been convicted of a theft offense, a violation of §
642.02 or §
642.22 is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law if the property
involved is any of the following:
   (A)   A credit card;
   (B)   A printed form for a check or other negotiable instrument, that on its
face identifies the drawer or maker for whose use it is designed or identifies
the account on which it is to be drawn, and that has not been executed by the
drawer or maker or on which the amount is blank;
   (C)   A motor vehicle identification license plate as prescribed by Ohio
R.C. 4503.22, a temporary license placard or windshield sticker as prescribed
by Ohio R.C. 4503.182, or any comparable license plate, placard, or sticker as
prescribed by the applicable law of another state or the United States;
   (D)   A blank form for a certificate of title or a manufacturer’s or
importer’s certificate to a motor vehicle, as prescribed by Ohio R.C. 4505.07;
   (E)   A blank form for any license listed in Ohio R.C. 4507.01.
(ORC 2913.71)
§ 642.035  EVIDENCE OF THEFT OF RENTED PROPERTY.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      (1)   “Renter.”  A person who owns rented property.
      (2)   “Rentee.”  A person who pays consideration to a renter for the use
of rented property.
   (B)   Each of the following shall be considered evidence of intent to commit
theft of rented property or rental services:
      (1)   At the time of entering into the rental contract, the rentee
presented the renter with identification that was materially false, fictitious,
or not current with respect to name, address, place of employment, or other
relevant information.
      (2)   After receiving a notice demanding the return of the rented
property as provided in division (C) of this section, the rentee neither
returned the rented property nor made arrangements acceptable with the renter
to return the rented property.
   (C)   To establish that a rentee has an intent to commit theft of rented
property or rental services under division (B)(2) above, a renter may issue a
notice to a rentee demanding the return of the rented property.  The renter
shall mail the notice by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the
rentee at the address the rentee gave when the rental contract was executed, or
to the rentee at the last address the rentee or the rentee’s agent furnished in
writing to the renter.
   (D)   A demand for the return of the rented property is not a prerequisite
for the prosecution of a rentee for theft of rented property or rental
services.  The evidence specified in division (B) above does not constitute the
only evidence that may be considered as evidence of intent to commit theft of
rented property or rental services.
(ORC 2913.72)
§ 642.04  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF A VEHICLE; VEHICLE TRESPASS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor vehicle,
motorcycle, motorboat, or other motor-propelled vehicle without the consent of
the owner or person authorized to give consent.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly use or operate an aircraft, motor vehicle,
motorboat, or other motor- propelled vehicle without the consent of the owner
or person authorized to give consent, and either remove it from this state, or
keep possession of it for more than 48 hours.
   (C)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section:
      (1)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor, though mistaken,
reasonably believed that he or she was authorized to use or operate the
property.
      (2)   At the time of the alleged offense, the actor reasonably believed
that the owner or person empowered to give consent would authorize the actor to
use or operate the property.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unauthorized use of a
vehicle.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division (D)(1), a violation
of division (A) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  The
penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99. If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled adult and
if the victim incurs a loss as a result of the violation, a violation of
division (A) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (2)   A violation of division (B) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2913.03)
Statutory reference:
   Theft offense involving motor vehicle, offender to pay towing and storage
fees, see Ohio R.C. 2913.82
§ 642.05  UNAUTHORIZED USE OF PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly use or operate the property of another
without the consent of the owner or person authorized to give consent.
   (B)   No person, in any manner and by any means, including but not limited
to computer hacking, shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access to,
or cause access to be gained to any computer, computer system, computer
network, cable service, cable system, telecommunications device,
telecommunications service, or information service without the consent of, or
beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of, the owner of the
computer, computer system, computer network, cable service, cable system,
telecommunications device, telecommunications service, or information service
or other person authorized to give consent.
   (C)   Except as permitted under R.C. § 5503.101, no person shall knowingly
gain access to, attempt to gain access to, cause access to be granted to, or
disseminate information gained from access to the law enforcement automated
database system created pursuant to Ohio R.C. 5503.10 without the consent of,
or beyond the scope of the express or implied consent of, the chair of the Law
Enforcement Automated Data System Steering Committee.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly gain access to, attempt to gain access to,
cause access to be granted to, or disseminate information gained from access to
the Ohio law enforcement gateway established and operated pursuant to Ohio R.C.
109.57(C)(1) without the consent of, or beyond the scope of the express or
implied consent of, the Superintendent of the Bureau of Criminal Identification
and Investigation.
   (E)   The affirmative defenses contained in Ohio R.C. 2913.03(C) are
affirmative defenses to a charge under this section.
   (F)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of property.  Except as otherwise provided in this division,
unauthorized use of property is a misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty
shall be as provided in §
202.99.
      (1)   If unauthorized use of property is committed for the purpose of
devising or executing a scheme to defraud or to obtain property or services,
unauthorized use of property is whichever of the following is applicable:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided below, unauthorized use of property
is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (b)   If the value of the property or services or the loss to the
victim is $1,000 or more, it is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (2)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled
adult, unauthorized use of property is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (G)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of computer, cable, or telecommunication property, a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (H)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of the law enforcement automated database system, a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (I)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of
unauthorized use of the Ohio law enforcement gateway, a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
   (J)   As used in this section:
      “Cable operator” means any person or group of persons that does either of
the following:
         (a)   Provides cable service over a cable system and directly through
one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in that cable system;
         (b)   Otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any
arrangement, the management and operation of a cable system.
      “Cable service” means any of the following:
         (a)   The one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or
of information that a cable operator makes available to all subscribers
generally;
         (b)   Subscriber interaction, if any, that is required for the
selection or use of video programming or of information that a cable operator
makes available to all subscribers generally, both as described in division (J)
(1)(a) above;
         (c)   Any cable television service.
      “Cable system” means any facility, consisting of a set of closed
transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control
equipment that is designed to provide cable service that includes video
programming and that is provided to multiple subscribers within a community. 
“Cable system” does not include any of the following:
         (a)   Any facility that serves only to retransmit the television
signals of one or more television broadcast stations;
         (b)   Any facility that serves subscribers without using any public
right-of-way;
         (c)   Any facility of a common carrier that, under 47 U.S.C. 522(7)
(c), is excluded from the term “cable system” as defined in 47 U.S.C. 522(7);
         (d)   Any open video system that complies with 47 U.S.C. 573;
         (e)   Any facility of any electric utility used solely for operating
its electric utility system.
(ORC 2913.04)
Statutory reference:
   Telecommunications: fraud and unlawful use of a device, felony offenses, see
Ohio R.C. 2913.05 and 2913.06
§ 642.06  INJURING VINES, BUSHES, TREES OR CROPS.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall recklessly cut down,
destroy, girdle, or otherwise injure a vine, bush, shrub, sapling, tree, or
crop standing or growing on the land of another or upon public land.
   (B)   In addition to the penalty provided in division (C) of this section,
whoever violates this section is liable in treble damages for the injury
caused.
(ORC 901.51)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
§ 642.07  DESECRATION.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall purposely deface, damage,
pollute or otherwise physically mistreat any of the following:
      (1)   Any public monument;
      (2)   Any historical or commemorative marker, or any structure, Indian
mound or earthwork, cemetery, thing or site of great historical or
archeological interest;
      (3)   A place of worship, its furnishings, or religious artifacts or
sacred texts within the place of worship or within the grounds upon which the
place of worship is located;
      (4)   A work of art or museum piece;
      (5)   Any other object of reverence or sacred devotion.
   (B)   As used in this section, “cemetery” means any place of burial and
includes burial sites that contain American Indian burial objects placed with
or containing American Indian human remains.
(ORC 2927.11)
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of desecration. A violation of
division (A)(1), (2), (4) or (5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. A violation of division (A)(3) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
§ 642.08  ASSAULTING POLICE DOG OR HORSE OR ASSISTANCE DOG.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to
a police dog or horse in either of the following circumstances:
      (1)   The police dog or horse is assisting a law enforcement officer in
the performance of the officer’s official duties at the time the physical harm
is caused or attempted.
      (2)   The police dog or horse is not assisting a law enforcement officer
in the performance of the officer’s official duties at the time the physical
harm is caused or attempted, but the offender has actual knowledge that the dog
or horse is a police dog or horse.
   (B)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:
      (1)   Taunt, torment, or strike a police dog or horse;
      (2)   Throw an object or substance at a police dog or horse;
      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct a police dog or horse, or interfere with
or obstruct a law enforcement officer who is being assisted by a police dog or
horse, in a manner that does any of the following:
         (a)   Inhibits or restricts the law enforcement officer’s control of
the police dog or horse;
         (b)   Deprives the law enforcement officer of control of the police
dog or horse;
         (c)   Releases the police dog or horse from its area of control;
         (d)   Enters the area of control of the police dog or horse without
the consent of the law enforcement officer, including placing food or any other
object or substance into that area;
         (e)   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the police dog or horse to
assist a law enforcement officer;
      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical
injury or death to a police dog or horse;
      (5)   If the  person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog, fail to
reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in
a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or attempting to bite or
otherwise endanger a police dog or horse that at the time of the conduct is
assisting a law enforcement officer in the performance of the officer’s duties
or that the person knows is a police dog or horse.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly cause, or attempt to cause, physical harm to
an assistance dog in either of the following circumstances:
      (1)   The dog is assisting or serving a blind, deaf or hearing impaired,
or mobility impaired person at the time the physical harm is caused or
attempted.
      (2)   The dog is not assisting or serving a blind, deaf or hearing
impaired, or mobility impaired person at the time the physical harm is caused
or attempted, but the offender has actual knowledge that the dog is an
assistance dog.
   (D)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following:
      (1)   Taunt, torment, or strike an assistance dog;
      (2)   Throw an object or substance at an assistance dog;
      (3)   Interfere with or obstruct an assistance dog, or interfere with or
obstruct a blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person who is
being assisted or served by an assistance dog, in a manner that does any of the
following:
         (a)   Inhibits or restricts the assisted or served person’s control of
the dog;
         (b)   Deprives the assisted or served person of control of the dog;
         (c)   Releases the dog from its area of control;
         (d)   Enters the area of control of the dog without the consent of the
assisted or served person, including placing food or any other object or
substance into that area;
         (e)   Inhibits or restricts the ability of the dog to assist the
assisted or served person;
      (4)   Engage in any conduct that is likely to cause serious physical
injury or death to an assistance dog;
      (5)   If the person is the owner, keeper, or harborer of a dog, fail to
reasonably restrain the dog from taunting, tormenting, chasing, approaching in
a menacing fashion or apparent attitude of attack, or attempting to bite or
otherwise endanger an assistance dog that at the time of the conduct is
assisting or serving a blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility impaired
person or that the person knows is an assistance dog.
   (E)   This section does not apply to a licensed veterinarian whose conduct
is in accordance with Ohio R.C. Chapter 4741.
   (F)   This section only applies to an offender who knows or should know at
the time of the violation that the police dog or horse or assistance dog that
is the subject of a violation under this section is a police dog or horse or
assistance dog.
   (G)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      “Assistance dog”, “blind” and “mobility impaired person” have the same
meaning as in Ohio R.C. 955.011.
      “Physical harm” means any injury, illness, or other psychological
impairment, regardless of its gravity or duration.
      “Police dog or horse” means a dog or horse that has been trained and may
be used to assist law enforcement officers in the performance of their official
duties.
      “Serious physical harm” means any of the following:
         (a)   Any physical harm that carries a substantial risk of death.
         (b)   Any physical harm that causes permanent maiming or that involves
some temporary, substantial maiming.
         (c)   Any physical harm that causes acute pain of a duration that
results in substantial suffering.
(ORC 2921.321(A) - (D), (F) - (H))
   (H)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
assaulting a police dog or horse.  Except as otherwise provided in this
division, assaulting a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.  If the violation results in physical harm to the police dog or horse
other than death or serious physical harm, assaulting a police dog or horse is
a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the violation results in serious
physical harm to the police dog or horse or results in its death, assaulting a
police dog or horse is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
harassing a police dog or horse.  Except as otherwise provided this division,
harassing a police dog or horse is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
violation results in physical harm to the police dog or horse but does not
result in its death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing a police dog
or horse is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the violation results in
serous physical harm to the police dog or horse or results in its death,
harassing a police dog or horse is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of
assaulting an assistance dog.  Except as otherwise provided in this division,
assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the
violation results in physical harm to the assistance dog other than death or
serious physical harm, assaulting an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.  If the violation results in serious physical harm to the
assistance dog or results in its death, assaulting an assistance dog is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (4)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of
harassing an assistance dog. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
harassing an assistance dog is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
violation results in physical harm to the assistance dog but does not result in
the death or in serious physical harm to it, harassing an assistance dog is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation results in serious physical
harm to the assistance dog or results in its death, harassing an assistance dog
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (5)   In addition to any other sanctions or penalty imposed for the
offense under this section, Ohio R.C. Chapter 2929 or any other provision of
the Ohio Revised Code or this code, whoever violates division (A), (B), (C), or
(D) of this section is responsible for the payment of all of the following:
         (a)   Any veterinary bill or bill for medication incurred as a result
of the violation by the Police Department regarding a violation of division (A)
or (B) of this section or by the blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility
impaired person assisted or served by the assistance dog regarding a violation
of division (C) or (D) of this section;
         (b)   The cost of any damaged equipment that results from the
violation;
         (c)   If the violation did not result in the death of the police dog
or horse or the assistance dog that was the subject of the violation and if, as
a result of that dog or horse being the subject of the violation, the dog or
horse needs further training or retraining to be able to continue in the
capacity of a police dog or horse or an assistance dog, the cost of any further
training or retraining of that dog or horse by a law enforcement officer or by
the blind, deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person assisted or
served by the assistance dog;
         (d)   If the violation resulted in the death of the police dog or
horse or the assistance dog that was the subject of the violation or resulted
in serious physical harm to that dog or horse to the extent that the dog or
horse needs to be replaced on either a temporary or a permanent basis, the cost
of replacing that dog or horse an of any further training of a new police dog
or horse or a new assistance dog by a law enforcement officer or by the blind,
deaf or hearing impaired, or mobility impaired person assisted or served by the
assistance dog, which replacement or training is required because of the death
of or the serious physical harm to the dog or horse that was the subject of the
violation.
§ 642.09  ARSON.
   (A)   No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall knowingly do any of
the following:
      (1)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
property of another without the other person’s consent;
      (2)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
property of the offender or another, with purpose to defraud;
      (3)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to the
statehouse or a courthouse, school building, or other building or structure
that is owned or controlled by the state, any political subdivision, or any
department, agency, or instrumentality of the state or a political subdivision,
and that is used for public purposes;
      (4)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm, through the
offer or the acceptance of an agreement for hire or other consideration, to any
property of another without the other person’s consent or to any property of
the offender or another with purpose to defraud;
      (5)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any park,
preserve, wildlands, brush- covered land, cut-over land, forest, timberland,
greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is owned or controlled by
another person, the state, or a political subdivision without the consent of
the other person, the state, or the political subdivision;
      (6)   With purpose to defraud, cause, or create a substantial risk of,
physical harm to any park, preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over
land, forest, timberland, greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is
owned or controlled by the offender, another person, the state, or a political
subdivision.
   (B)   No person, by means of fire or explosion, shall knowingly do any of
the following:
      (1)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
structure of another that is not an occupied structure;
      (2)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm, through the
offer or the acceptance of an agreement for hire or other consideration, to any
structure of another that is not an occupied structure;
      (3)   Cause, or create a substantial risk of, physical harm to any
structure that is not an occupied structure and that is in or on any park,
preserve, wildlands, brush-covered land, cut-over land, forest, timberland,
greenlands, woods, or similar real property that is owned or controlled by
another person, the state, or a political subdivision.
   (C)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B)(1)
or (B)(2) of this section that the defendant acted with the consent of the
other person.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B)(3) of
this section that the defendant acted with the consent of the other person, the
state, or the political subdivision.
   (D)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of arson.
      (2)   A violation of division (A)(1) or (B)(1) of this section is one of
the following:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(2)(b) of this
section, a misdemeanor of the first degree;
         (b)   If the value of the property or the amount of the physical harm
involved is $1,000 or more, a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.
      (3)   A violation of division (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), (A)(5), (A)(6), (b)
(2) or (B)(3) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(ORC 2909.03)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated arson, felony provisions, see R.C. § 2909.02
   Convicted arsonist to make restitution to public agency, see R.C. § 2929.28
§ 642.10  CRIMINAL DAMAGING OR ENDANGERING; VEHICULAR VANDALISM.
   (A)   Criminal Damaging or Endangering.
      (1)   No person shall cause or create a substantial risk of physical harm
to any property of another without the other person’s consent:
         (a)   Knowingly, by any means; or
         (b)   Recklessly, by means of fire, explosion, flood, poison gas,
poison, radioactive material, caustic or corrosive material, or other
inherently dangerous agency or substance.
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (A) is guilty of criminal damaging
or endangering, a misdemeanor of the second degree.  If violation of this
division (A) creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging
or endangering is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the property involved
in a violation of this division (A) is an aircraft, an aircraft engine,
propeller, appliance, spare part, or any other equipment or implement used or
intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if the violation
creates a risk of physical harm to any person, criminal damaging or endangering
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  If the property
involved in a violation of this division (A) is an aircraft, an aircraft
engine, propeller, appliance, spare part, or any other equipment or implement
used or intended to be used in the operation of an aircraft and if the
violation creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person or if the
property involved in a violation of this division (A) is an occupied aircraft,
criminal damaging or endangering is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
(ORC 2909.06)
   (B)   Vehicular Vandalism.
      (1)   As used in this division (B):
         “Alley,” “street,” and “vehicle” have the same meanings as in Ohio
R.C. 4511.01.
         “Highway” means any highway as defined in Ohio R.C. 4511.01 or any
lane, road, street, alley, bridge, or overpass.
         “Vessel” and “waters in this state” have the same meanings as in Ohio
R.C. 1546.01.
      (2)   No person shall knowingly, and by any means, drop or throw any
object at, onto, or in the path of any of the following:
         (a)   Any vehicle on a highway;
         (b)   Any boat or vessel on any of the waters in this state.
      (3)   Whoever violates this division (B) is guilty of vehicular
vandalism.  Except as otherwise provided in this division (B)(3), vehicular
vandalism is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation of this
division (B) creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person or the
violation of this division (B) causes serious physical harm to property,
vehicular vandalism is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
If the violation of this division (B) causes physical harm to any person or
serious physical harm to any person, vehicular vandalism is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2909.09)
Statutory reference:
   Disrupting public services, felony offense, see Ohio R.C. 2909.04
   Railroad grade crossing device vandalism, see Ohio R.C. 2909.101
   Railroad vandalism, see Ohio R.C. 2909.10
   Vandalism, felony offense, see Ohio R.C. 2909.05
§ 642.11  CRIMINAL MISCHIEF.
   (A)   No person shall:
      (1)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage,
destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with the either of the following:
         (a)   The property of another;
         (b)   One’s own residential real property with the purpose to decrease
the value of or enjoyment of the residential real property, if both of the
following apply:
            1.   The residential real property is subject to a mortgage.
            2.   The person has been served with a summons and complaint in a
pending residential mortgage loan foreclosure action relating to that real
property. As used in this division, “pending” includes the time between
judgment entry and confirmation of sale.
      (2)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of property of
another, employ a tear gas device, stink bomb, smoke generator, or other device
releasing a substance that is harmful or offensive to persons exposed, or that
tends to cause public alarm;
      (3)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage,
destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with a bench mark, triangulation
station, boundary marker, or other survey station, monument, or marker;
      (4)   Without privilege to do so, knowingly move, deface, damage,
destroy, or otherwise improperly tamper with any safety device, the property of
another, or the property of the offender when required or placed for the safety
of others, so as to destroy or diminish its effectiveness or availability for
its intended purpose;
      (5)   With purpose to interfere with the use or enjoyment of the property
of another, set a fire on the land of another or place personal property that
has been set on fire on the land of another, which fire or personal property is
outside and apart from any building, other structure, or personal property that
is on that land.
      (6)   Without privilege to do so, and with intent to impair the
functioning of any computer, computer system, computer network, computer
software, or computer program, knowingly do any of the following:
         (a)   In any manner or by any means, including but not limited to,
computer hacking, alter, damage, destroy, or modify a computer, computer
system, computer network, computer software, or computer program or data
contained in a computer, computer system, computer network, computer software,
or computer program;
         (b)   Introduce a computer contaminant into a computer, computer
system, computer network, computer software, or computer program.
   (B)   As used in this section, “safety device” means any fire extinguisher,
fire hose, or fire axe, or any fire escape, emergency exit, or emergency escape
equipment, or any life line, life-saving ring, life preserver, or life boat or
raft, or any alarm, light, flare, signal, sign, or notice intended to warn of
danger or emergency, or intended for other safety purposes, or any guard
railing or safety barricade, or any traffic sign or signal, or any railroad
grade crossing sign, signal, or gate, or any first aid or survival equipment,
or any other device, apparatus, or equipment intended for protecting or
preserving the safety of persons or property.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal mischief, and
shall be punished as provided in division (C)(1) or (C)(2) of this section.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of
this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree. Except as otherwise provided
in this division, if the violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4),
or (A)(5) of this section creates a risk of physical harm to any person,
criminal mischief committed in violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3),
(A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the
property involved in the violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4),
or (A)(5) of this section is an aircraft, an aircraft engine, propeller,
appliance, spare part, fuel, lubricant, hydraulic fluid, any other equipment,
implement, or material used or intended to be used in the operation of an
aircraft, or any cargo carried or intended to be carried in an aircraft and if
the violation creates any risk of physical harm to any person, or if the
aircraft in question is an occupied aircraft, criminal mischief committed in
violation of division (A)(1), (A)(2), (A)(3), (A)(4), or (A)(5) of this section
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (A)(6) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.  If the value of the computer, computer system, computer
network, computer software, computer program, or data involved in the violation
of division (A)(6) of this section or the loss to the victim resulting from the
violation is $1,000 or more, or if the computer, computer system, computer
network, computer software, computer program, or data involved in the violation
of division (A)(6) is used or intended to be used in the operation of an
aircraft and the violation creates any risk of physical harm to any person, or
if the aircraft in question is an occupied aircraft, criminal mischief
committed in violation of division (A)(6) of this section is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2909.07)
§ 642.12  CRIMINAL TRESPASS.
   (A)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another;
      (2)   Knowingly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, the
use of which is lawfully restricted to certain persons, purposes, modes, or
hours, when the offender knows the offender is in violation of any such
restriction or is reckless in that regard;
      (3)   Recklessly enter or remain on the land or premises of another, as
to which notice against unauthorized access or presence is given by actual
communication to the offender, or in a manner prescribed by law, or by posting
in a manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential
intruders, or by fencing or other enclosure manifestly designed to restrict
access;
      (4)   Being on the land or premises of another, negligently fail or
refuse to leave upon being notified by signage posted in a conspicuous place or
otherwise being notified to do so by the owner or occupant, or the agent or
servant of either.
   (B)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the land or
premises involved was owned, controlled, or in custody of a public agency.
   (C)   It is no defense to a charge under this section that the offender was
authorized to enter or remain on the land or premises involved, when the
authorization was secured by deception.
   (D)   As used in this section, “land” or “premises” includes any land,
building, structure, or place belonging to, controlled by, or in custody of
another, and any separate enclosure or room, or portion thereof.
(ORC 2911.21)
   (E)   Criminal Trespass on a Place of Public Amusement.
      (1)   As used in this division (E), “place of public amusement” means a
stadium, theater, or other facility, whether licensed or not, at which a live
performance, sporting event, or other activity takes place for entertainment of
the public and to which access is made available to the public, regardless of
whether admission is charged.
      (2)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly enter or
remain on any restricted portion of a place of public amusement and, as a
result of that conduct, interrupt or cause the delay of the live performance,
sporting event, or other activity taking place at the place of public amusement
after a printed written notice has been given as provided in division (E)(4)(a)
of this section that the general public is restricted from access to that
restricted portion of the place of public amusement. A restricted portion of a
place of public amusement may include, but is not limited to, a playing field,
an athletic surface, or a stage located at the place of public amusement.
      (3)   An owner or lessee of a place of public amusement, an agent of the
owner or lessee, or a performer or participant at a place of public amusement
may use reasonable force to restrain and remove a person from a restricted
portion of the place of public amusement if the person enters or remains on the
restricted portion of the place of public amusement and, as a result of that
conduct, interrupts or causes the delay of the live performance, sporting
event, or other activity taking place at the place of public amusement. This
division does not provide immunity from criminal liability for any use of force
beyond reasonable force by an owner or lessee of a place of public amusement,
an agent of either the owner or lessee, or a performer or participant at a
place of public amusement.
      (4)   (a)   Notice has been given that the general public is restricted
from access to a portion of a place of public amusement if a printed written
notice of the restricted access has been conspicuously posted or exhibited at
the entrance to that portion of the place of public amusement. If a printed
written notice is posted or exhibited as described in this division regarding a
portion of a place of public amusement, in addition to that posting or
exhibition, notice that the general public is restricted from access to that
portion of the place of public amusement also may be given, but is not required
to be given, by either of the following means:
            1.   By notifying the person personally, either orally or in
writing, that access to that portion of the place of public amusement is
restricted;
            2.   By broadcasting over the public address system of the place of
public amusement an oral warning that access to that portion of the place of
public amusement is restricted.
         (b)   If notice that the general public is restricted from access to a
portion of a place of public amusement is provided by the posting or exhibition
of a printed written notice as described in division (E)(4)(a) of this section,
the municipality, in a criminal prosecution for a violation of division (E)(2)
of this section, is not required to prove that the defendant received actual
notice that the general public is restricted from access to a portion of a
place of public amusement.
      (5)   (a)   Whoever violates division (E)(2) of this section is guilty of
criminal trespass on a place of public amusement, a misdemeanor of the first
degree.
         (b)   In addition to any jail term, fine, or other sentence, penalty,
or sanction it imposes upon the offender pursuant to division (E)(5)(a) of this
section, a court may require an offender who violates this section to perform
not less than 30 and not more than 120 hours of supervised community service
work.
(ORC 2911.23)
   (F)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of criminal
trespass, a misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as provided
in §
202.99.
§ 642.125  AGGRAVATED TRESPASS.
   (A)   No person shall enter or remain on the land or premises of another
with purpose to commit on that land or those premises a misdemeanor, the
elements of which involve causing physical harm to another person or causing
another person to believe that the offender will cause physical harm to him or
her.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of aggravated trespass, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
(ORC 2911.211)
§ 642.13  TAMPERING WITH COIN MACHINES.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to commit theft or to defraud, shall knowingly
enter, force an entrance into, tamper with, or insert any part of an instrument
into any coin machine.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with coin
machines, a misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as provided
in §
202.99. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of this
section or of any theft offense as defined in Ohio R.C. 2913.01, tampering with
coin machines is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2911.32)
§ 642.14  PASSING BAD CHECKS.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      “Check” includes any form of debit from a demand deposit account,
including but not limited to any of the following:
         (a)   A check, bill of exchange, draft, order of withdrawal, or
similar negotiable or non- negotiable instrument;
         (b)   An electronic check, electronic transaction, debit card
transaction, check card transaction, substitute check, web check, or any form
of automated clearing house transaction.
      “Issue a check” means causing any form of debit from a demand deposit
account.
   (B)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall issue or transfer or cause
to be issued or transferred a check or other negotiable instrument, knowing
that it will be dishonored or knowing that a person has ordered or will order
stop payment on the check or other negotiable instrument.
   (C)   For purposes of this section, a person who issues or transfers a check
or other negotiable instrument is presumed to know that it will be dishonored
if either of the following occurs:
      (1)   The drawer has no account with the drawee at the time of issue or
the stated date, whichever is later.
      (2)   The check or other negotiable instrument was properly refused
payment for insufficient funds upon presentment within 30 days after issue or
the stated date, whichever is later, and the liability of the drawer, indorser,
or any party who may be liable thereon is not discharged by payment or
satisfaction within ten days after receiving notice of dishonor.
   (D)   For purposes of this section, a person who issues or transfers a
check, bill of exchange, or other draft is presumed to have the purpose to
defraud if the drawer fails to comply with Ohio R.C. 1349.16 by doing any of
the following when opening a checking account intended for personal, family, or
household purposes at a financial institution:
      (1)   Falsely stating that he or she has not been issued a valid driver’s
or commercial driver’s license or identification card issued under Ohio R.C.
4507.50;
      (2)   Furnishing the license or card, or another identification document
that contains false information;
      (3)   Making a false statement with respect to the drawer’s current
address or any additional relevant information reasonably required by the
financial institution.
   (E)   In determining the value of the payment for purposes of division (F)
of this section, the court may aggregate all checks and other negotiable
instruments that the offender issued or transferred or caused to be issued or
transferred in violation of division (B) of this section within a period of 180
consecutive days.
   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of passing bad checks.  Except
as otherwise provided in this division, passing bad checks is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.  If the check or checks or other negotiable instrument or instruments
are issued or transferred to a single vendor or single other person for the
payment of $1,000 or more, or if the check or checks or other negotiable
instrument or instruments are issued or transferred to multiple vendors or
persons for the payment of $1,500 or more, passing bad checks is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2913.11)
§ 642.145  FORGING OR SELLING FORGED IDENTIFICATION CARDS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly do either of the following:
      (1)   Forge an identification card.
      (2)   Sell or otherwise distribute a card that purports to be an
identification card, knowing it was forged.
   (B)   As used in this section, “identification card” means a card that
includes personal information or characteristics of an individual, a purpose of
which is to establish the identity of the bearer described on the card, whether
the words “identity,” “identification,” “identification card,” or other similar
words appear on the card.
   (C)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of forging
identification cards or selling or distributing forged identification cards. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division, forging identification cards or
selling or distributing forged identification cards is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation of
division (A) of this section or a substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance, forging identification cards or selling or distributing
forged identification cards is a misdemeanor of the first degree and, in
addition, the court shall impose upon the offender a fine not less than $250.
The penalty shall be as provided in § 202.99.
      (2)   If the victim of a violation of this section is an elderly person,
R.C. § 2913.31(C)(2)(b) applies and the offense shall be prosecuted under R.C.
§ 2913.31.
(ORC 2913.31(B), (C)(2))
Statutory reference:
   Forgery, felony provisions, see Ohio R.C. 2913.31(A), (C)(1)
§ 642.146  CRIMINAL SIMULATION.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud, or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Make or alter any object so that it appears to have value because
of antiquity, rarity, curiosity, source, or authorship, which it does not in
fact possess.
      (2)   Practice deception in making, retouching, editing, or reproducing
any photograph, movie film, video tape, phonograph record, or recording tape.
      (3)   Falsely or fraudulently make, simulate, forge, alter, or
counterfeit any wrapper, label, stamp, cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor
Control Commission under Ohio R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303, falsely or
fraudulently cause to be made, simulated, forged, altered, or counterfeited any
wrapper, label, stamp, cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission
under Ohio R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303, or use more than once any wrapper,
label, stamp, cork or cap prescribed by the Liquor Control Commission under
Ohio R.C. Chapters 4301 and 4303.
      (4)   Offer, or possess with the purpose to offer, any object that the
person knows to have been simulated as provided in divisions (A)(1), (2) or (3)
of this section.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of criminal simulation. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division, criminal simulation is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99. If the loss to the victim is $1,000 or more, criminal simulation is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2913.32)
§ 642.15  MISUSE OF CREDIT CARDS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Practice deception for the purpose of procuring the issuance of a
credit card, when a credit card is issued in actual reliance thereon;
      (2)   Knowingly buy or sell a credit card from or to a person other than
the issuer;
      (3)   As an officer, employee, or appointee of a political subdivision or
as a public servant as defined under R.C. § 2921.01, knowingly misuse a credit
card account held by a political subdivision.
   (B)   No person, with purpose to defraud, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Obtain control over a credit card as security for a debt;
      (2)   Obtain property or services by the use of a credit card, in one or
more transactions, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the card
has expired or been revoked, or was obtained, is retained, or is being used in
violation of law;
      (3)   Furnish property or services upon presentation of a credit card,
knowing that the card is being used in violation of law;
      (4)   Represent or cause to be represented to the issuer of a credit card
that property or services have been furnished, knowing that the representation
is false.
   (C)   No person, with purpose to violate this section, shall receive,
possess, control, or dispose of a credit card.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misuse of credit cards.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (D)(3) of this section, a
violation of division (A), (B)(1), or (C) of this section is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this division or division (D)(3) of
this section, a violation of division (B)(2), (3), or (4) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the cumulative retail value of the
property and services involved in one or more violations of division (B)(2),
(3), or (4) of this section which violations involve one or more credit card
accounts and occur within a period of 90 consecutive days commencing on the
date of the first violation, is $1,000 or more, misuse of credit cards is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the victim of the offense is an elderly person or disabled
adult, and if the offense involves a violation of division (B)(1) or (B)(2) of
this section, misuse of credit cards is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(ORC 2913.21)  (Ord. 14-83, passed 3-21-1983)
§ 642.155  RECORDING CREDIT CARD, TELEPHONE OR SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBERS.
   (A)   No person shall record or cause to be recorded either of the
following:
      (1)   A credit card account number of the other party to a transaction,
when a check, bill of exchange or other draft is presented for payment; or
      (2)   The telephone number or Social Security account number of the other
party to a transaction, when payment is made by credit card charge agreement,
check, bill of exchange or other draft.
   (B)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to a transaction, if all
of the following conditions are met:
      (1)   The credit card account number, Social Security account number or
telephone number is recorded for a legitimate business purpose, including
collection purposes.
      (2)   The other party to the transaction consents to the recording of the
credit card account number, Social Security account number or telephone number.
      (3)   The credit card account number, Social Security account number or
telephone number that is recorded during the course of the transaction is not
disclosed to any third party for any purposes other than collection purposes
and is not used to market goods or services unrelated to the goods or services
purchased in the transaction.
   (C)   Nothing in this section prohibits the recording of the number of a
credit card account when given in lieu of a deposit to secure payment in the
event of default, loss, damage or other occurrence, or requires a person to
accept a check presented for payment, if the other party to the transaction
refuses to consent to the recording of the number of the party’s Social
Security account or license to operate a motor vehicle.
(ORC 1349.17)
   (D)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
§ 642.16  MAKING OR USING SLUGS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Insert or deposit a slug in a coin machine, with purpose to
defraud;
      (2)   Make, possess, or dispose of a slug, with purpose of enabling
another to defraud by inserting or depositing it in a coin machine.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making or using slugs, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
(ORC 2913.33)
§ 642.17  PRIMA FACIE EVIDENCE OF FRAUD IN THEFT FROM LIVERY OR HOSTELRY.
   In a prosecution of a person for a theft offense that alleges that the
person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she was facilitating a
fraud, hired or rented an aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat,
sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy, or other property or equipment, kept
or operated any of the same that has been hired or rented, or engaged
accommodations at a hotel, motel, inn, campground, or other hostelry, it is
prima facie evidence of purpose to defraud if the person did any of the
following:
   (A)   Used deception to induce the rental agency to furnish the person with
the aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat, sailboat, camper, trailer,
horse, buggy, or other property or equipment, or used deception to induce the
hostelry to furnish the person with accommodations;
   (B)   Hired or rented any aircraft, motor vehicle, motorcycle, motorboat,
sailboat, camper, trailer, horse, buggy, or other property or equipment, or
engaged accommodations, knowing that he or she is without sufficient means to
pay the hire or rental;
   (C)   Absconded without paying the hire or rental;
   (D)   Knowingly failed to pay the hire or rental as required by the contract
of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the failure;
   (E)   Knowingly failed to return hired or rented property as required by the
contract of hire or rental, without reasonable excuse for the failure.
(ORC 2913.41)
§ 642.18  TAMPERING WITH RECORDS.
   (A)   No person, knowing that he or she has no privilege to do so, and with
purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she is facilitating a fraud, shall do
any of the following:
      (1)   Falsify, destroy, remove, conceal, alter, deface, or mutilate any
writing, computer software, data, or record;
      (2)   Utter any writing or record, knowing it to have been tampered with
as provided in division (A)(1) of this section.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of tampering with records.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(3) of this section, if the
offense does not involve data or computer software, tampering with records is
whichever of the following is applicable:
         (a)   If division (B)(1)(b) of this section does not apply, it is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
         (b)   If the writing or record is a will unrevoked at the time of the
offense, it is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (B)(3) of this section, if the
offense involves a violation of division (A) of this section involving data or
computer software, tampering with records is whichever of the following is
applicable:
         (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2)(b) of this
section, it is a misdemeanor of the first degree;
         (b)   If the value of the data or computer software involved in the
offense or the loss to the victim is $1,000 or more or if the offense is
committed for the purpose of devising or executing a scheme to defraud or to
obtain property or services and the value of the property or services or the
loss to the victim is $5,000 or more, it is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (3)   If the writing, data, computer software, or record is kept by or
belongs to a local, state, or federal governmental entity, it is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2913.42)
§ 642.19  SECURING WRITINGS BY DECEPTION.
   (A)   No person, by deception, shall cause another to execute any writing
that disposes of or encumbers property, or by which a pecuniary obligation is
incurred.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of securing writings by
deception.  Except as otherwise provided in this division, securing writings by
deception is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  The penalty shall be as
provided in §
202.99. If the value of the property or the obligation involved is $1,000 or
more, securing writings by deception is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate to state law.  If the victim of the offense is an elderly person,
disabled adult, active duty service member, or spouse of an active duty service
member, securing writings by deception is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(ORC 2913.43)
§ 642.20  PERSONATING AN OFFICER.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that he or she is
facilitating a fraud, or with purpose to induce another to purchase property or
services, shall personate a law enforcement officer, or an inspector,
investigator, or agent of any governmental agency.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of personating an officer, a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
(ORC 2913.44)
§ 642.205  DIMINISHING OR INTERFERING WITH FORFEITABLE PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall destroy, damage, remove, or transfer property that is
subject to forfeiture or otherwise take any action in regard to property that
is subject to forfeiture with purpose to do any of the following:
      (1)   Prevent or impair the state’s or political subdivision’s lawful
authority to take the property into its custody or control under Ohio R.C.
Chapter 2981 or to continue holding the property under its lawful custody or
control;
      (2)   Impair or defeat the court’s continuing jurisdiction over the
person and property;
      (3)   Devalue property that the person knows, or has reasonable cause to
believe, is subject to forfeiture proceedings under Ohio R.C. Chapter 2981.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of interference with or
diminishing forfeitable property. Except as otherwise provided in this division
(B), interference with or diminishing forfeitable property is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the value of the property is $1,000 or more, interference
with or diminishing forfeitable property is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(ORC 2981.07)
§ 642.21  DEFRAUDING CREDITORS.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud one or more of his or her
creditors, shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Remove, conceal, destroy, encumber, convey, or otherwise deal with
any of his or her property;
      (2)   Misrepresent or refuse to disclose to a fiduciary appointed to
administer or manage his or her affairs or estate, the existence, amount, or
location of any of his or her property, or any other information regarding the
property which he or she is legally required to furnish to the fiduciary.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of defrauding creditors. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division, defrauding creditors is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99. If the value of the property involved is $1,000 or more, defrauding
creditors is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2913.45)
§ 642.22  RECEIVING STOLEN PROPERTY.
   (A)   No person shall receive, retain or dispose of property of another
knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that the property has been
obtained through commission of a theft offense.
   (B)   It is not a defense to a charge of receiving stolen property in
violation of this section that the property was obtained by means other than
through the commission of a theft offense if the property was explicitly
represented to the accused person as being obtained through the commission of a
theft offense.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of receiving stolen property.
Except as otherwise provided in this division, receiving stolen property is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. If any of the following criteria are met, then
a violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law:
      (1)   The value of the property involved is $1,000 or more;
      (2)   The property involved is any of the property listed in R.C. §
2913.71;
      (3)   The property involved is a firearm or dangerous ordnance, as
defined in R.C. § 2923.11;
      (4)   The property involved is a motor vehicle as defined in R.C. §
4501.01;
      (5)   The property involved is any dangerous drug, as defined in R.C. §
4729.01; or
      (6)   The property involved in violation of this section is a special
purchase article as defined in R.C. § 4737.04 or a bulk merchandise container
as defined in R.C. § 4737.012.
(ORC 2913.51)
§ 642.24  DETERMINING PROPERTY VALUE IN THEFT OFFENSE.
   (A)   If more than one item of property or services is involved in a theft
offense or in a violation of Ohio R.C. 1716.14(A) involving a victim who is an
elderly person or disabled adult, or any substantially equivalent municipal
ordinance, the value of the property or services involved for the purpose of
determining the value as required by Ohio R.C. 2913.61(A) is the aggregate
value of all property or services involved in the offense.
   (B)   (1)   When a series of offenses under Ohio R.C. 2913.02, or a series
of violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate,
or complicity in violations of Ohio R.C. 1716.14(A), Ohio R.C. 2913.02,
2913.03, or 2913.04, Ohio R.C. 2913.21(B)(1) or (B)(2), or Ohio R.C. 2913.31 or
2913.43 involving a victim who is an elderly person or disabled adult, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, is
committed by the offender in the offender’s same employment, capacity, or
relationship to another, all of those offenses shall be tried as a single
offense. When a series of offenses under R.C. § 2913.02, or a series of
violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to violate, or
complicity in violations of R.C. § 2913.02 or 2913.43 involving a victim who is
an active duty service member or spouse of an active duty service member, or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, is
committed by the offender in the offender’s same employment, capacity, or
relationship to another, all of those offenses shall be tried as a single
offense. The value of the property or services involved in the series of
offenses for the purpose of determining the value as required by Ohio R.C.
2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property and services involved in all
offenses in the series.
      (2)   If an offender commits a series of offenses under Ohio R.C. 2913.02
that involves a common course of conduct to defraud multiple victims, all of
the offenses may be tried as a single offense.  If an offender is being tried
for the commission of a series of violations of, attempts to commit a violation
of, conspiracies to violate, or complicity in violations of Ohio R.C. 1716.14
(A), Ohio R.C. 2913.02, 2913.03, or 2913.04, Ohio R.C. 2913.21(B)(1) or (B)(2),
or Ohio R.C. 2913.31 or 2913.43, whether committed against one victim or more
than one victim, involving a victim who is an elderly person or disabled adult,
or any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, 
pursuant to a scheme or course of conduct, all of those offenses may be tried
as a single offense.  If an offender is being tried for the commission of a
series of violations of, attempts to commit a violation of, conspiracies to
violate, or complicity in violations of R.C. § 2913.02 or 2913.43, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance to any of these offenses, whether
committed against one victim or more than one victim, involving a victim who is
an active duty service member or spouse of an active duty service member
pursuant to a scheme or course of conduct, all of those offenses may be tried
as a single offense. If the offenses are tried as a single offense, the value
of the property or services involved for the purpose of determining the value
as required by Ohio R.C. 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all property and
services involved in all of the offenses in the course of conduct.
      (3)   When a series of two or more offenses under Ohio R.C. 2913.40,
2913.48, or 2921.41 is committed by the offender in the offender’s same
employment, capacity, or relationship to another, all of those offenses may be
tried as a single offense.  If the offenses are tried as a single offense, the
value of the property or services involved for the purpose of determining the
value as required by Ohio R.C. 2913.61(A) is the aggregate value of all
property and services involved in all of the offenses in the series of two or
more offenses.
      (4)   In prosecuting a single offense under division (B)(1), (B)(2) or
(B)(3) of this section, it is not necessary to separately allege and prove each
offense in the series.  Rather, it is sufficient to allege and prove that the
offender, within a given span of time, committed one or more theft offenses or
violations of Ohio R.C. 2913.40, 2913.48, or 2921.41 in the offender’s same
employment, capacity, or relationship to another as described in division (B)
(1) or (B)(3) of this section, or committed one or more theft offenses that
involve a common course of conduct to defraud multiple victims or a scheme or
course of conduct as described in division (B)(2) of this section. While it is
not necessary to separately allege and prove each offense in the series in
order to prosecute a single offense under division (B)(1), (B)(2), or (B)(3) of
this section, it remains necessary in prosecuting them as a single offense to
prove the aggregate value of the property or services in order to meet the
requisite statutory offense level sought by the prosecution.
   (C)   The following criteria shall be used in determining the value of
property or services involved in a theft offense:
      (1)   The value of an heirloom, memento, collector’s item, antique,
museum piece, manuscript, document, record, or other thing that has intrinsic
worth to its owner and that either is irreplaceable or is replaceable only on
the expenditure of substantial time, effort, or money, is the amount which
would compensate the owner for its loss.
      (2)   The value of personal effects and household goods, and of
materials, supplies, equipment, and fixtures used in the profession, business,
trade, occupation, or avocation of its owner, which property is not covered
under division (C)(1) of this section, and which retains substantial utility
for its purpose regardless of its age or condition, is the cost of replacing
such property with new property of like kind and quality.
      (3)   The value of any real or personal property that is not covered
under division (C)(1) or (2) of this section, and the value of services, is the
fair market value of the property or services.  As used in this section, “fair
market value” is the money consideration which a buyer would give and a seller
would accept for property or services, assuming that the buyer is willing to
buy and the seller is willing to sell, that both are fully informed as to all
facts material to the transaction, and that neither is under any compulsion to
act.
   (D)   Without limitation on the evidence which may be used to establish the
value of property or services involved in a theft offense:
      (1)   When the property involved is personal property held for sale at
wholesale or retail, the price at which the property was held for sale is prima
facie evidence of its value.
      (2)   When the property involved is a security or commodity traded on an
exchange, the closing price or, if there is no closing price, the asked price,
given in the latest marked quotation prior to the offense, is prima facie
evidence of the value of the security or commodity.
      (3)   When the property involved is livestock, poultry, or raw
agricultural products for which a local market price is available, the latest
local market price prior to the offense is prima facie evidence of the value of
the livestock, poultry, or products.
      (4)   When the property involved is a negotiable instrument, the face
value is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.
      (5)   When the property involved is a warehouse receipt, bill of lading,
pawn ticket, claim check, or other instrument entitling the holder or bearer to
receive property, the face value or, if there is no face value, the value of
the property covered by the instrument less any payment necessary to receive
the property, is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.
      (6)   When the property involved is a ticket of admission, ticket for
transportation, coupon, token, or other instrument entitling the holder or
bearer to receive property or services, the face value or, if there is no face
value, the value of the property or services which may be received by the
instrument is prima facie evidence of the value of the instrument.
      (7)   When the services involved are gas, electricity, water, telephone,
transportation, shipping, or other services for which the rate is established
by law, the duly established rate is prima facie evidence of the value of the
services.
      (8)   When the services involved are services for which the rate is not
established by law, and the offender has been notified prior to the offense of
the rate for the services, either in writing, or orally, or by posting in a
manner reasonably calculated to come to the attention of potential offenders,
the rate contained in the notice is prima facie evidence of the value of the
services.
(ORC 2913.61(B) - (E))
§ 642.25  DETERMINING PROPERTY VALUE IN ARSON.
   (A)   The following criteria shall be used in determining the value of
property or amount of physical harm involved in a violation of §
642.06(a)(1) or (b)(1):
      (1)   If the property is an heirloom, memento, collector’s item, antique,
museum piece, manuscript, document, record, or other thing that is either
irreplaceable or is replaceable only on the expenditure of substantial time,
effort, or money, the value of the property or the amount of physical harm
involved is the amount that would compensate the owner for its loss.
      (2)   If the property is not covered under division (A)(1) of this
section, and the physical harm is such that the property can be restored
substantially to its former condition, the amount of physical harm involved is
the reasonable cost of restoring the property.
      (3)   If the property is not covered under division (A)(1) of this
section, and the physical harm is such that the property cannot be restored
substantially to its former condition, the value of the property, in the case
of personal property, is the cost of replacing the property with new property
of like kind and quality, and in the case of real property or real property
fixtures, is the difference in the fair market value of the property
immediately before and immediately after the offense.
   (B)   As used in this section, “fair market value” has the same meaning as
in Ohio R.C. 2913.61.
   (C)   Prima facie evidence of the value of property, as provided in Ohio
R.C. 2913.61(D), may be used to establish the value of property pursuant to
this section.
(ORC 2909.11(B) - (D))
§ 642.26  PROSECUTIONS FOR THEFT OF UTILITIES.
   (A)   In a prosecution for a theft offense, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2913.01,
that involves alleged tampering with a gas, electric, steam or water meter,
conduit or attachment of a utility that has been disconnected by the utility,
proof that a meter, conduit or attachment of a utility has been tampered with
is prima facie evidence that the person who is obligated to pay for the service
rendered through the meter, conduit or attachment, and who is in possession or
control of the meter, conduit or attachment at the time the tampering occurred
has caused the tampering with intent to commit a theft offense.
   (B)   In a prosecution for a theft offense, as defined in Ohio R.C. 2913.01,
that involves the alleged reconnection of a gas, electric, steam or water
meter, conduit or attachment of a utility that has been disconnected by the
utility, proof that a meter, conduit or attachment disconnected by a utility
has been reconnected without the consent of the utility is prima facie evidence
that the person in possession or control of the meter, conduit or attachment at
the time of the reconnection has reconnected the meter, conduit or attachment
with intent to commit a theft offense.
   (C)   As used in this section:
      “Utility” means any electric light company, gas company, natural gas
company, pipe-line company, water-works company or heating or cooling company,
as defined in Ohio R.C. 4905.03(C), (D), (E), (F), (G), or (H), its lessees,
trustees or receivers, or any similar utility owned or operated by a political
subdivision.
      “Tamper” means to interfere with, damage or bypass a utility meter,
conduit or attachment with the intent to impede the correct registration of a
meter or the proper functions of a conduit or attachment so as to reduce the
amount of utility service that is registered on the meter.
(ORC 4933.18)
   (D)   Each electric light company, gas company, natural gas company,
pipeline company, waterworks company or heating or cooling company, as defined
by Ohio R.C. 4905.03(C), (D), (E), (F), (G), or (H), or its lessees, trustees
or receivers, and each similar utility owned or operated by a political
subdivision, shall notify its customers, on an annual basis, that tampering
with or bypassing a meter constitutes a theft offense that could result in the
imposition of criminal sanctions.
(ORC 4933.19)
§ 642.27  POSTING HANDBILLS, POSTERS, PLACARDS.
   No person shall, without first obtaining the consent of the owner or
occupant, paste, stick, nail or post handbills, placards or posters, or make,
print or mark any word, letter or advertisement of any kind, upon any private
house, store or other building or upon any fence, wall, railing, telephone or
electric light pole or other private property; or paste, stick, nail or mark
any word, character or letter or advertisement upon any public building,
bridge, fence, railing or sidewalk or any other property within the city,
except in compliance with the requirements of law in posting of legal notices
and except on his own property.
§ 642.29  INSURANCE FRAUD.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      “Data” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2913.01 and additionally
includes any other representation of information, knowledge, facts, concepts,
or instructions that are being or have been prepared in a formalized manner.
      “Deceptive” means that a statement, in whole or in part, would cause
another to be deceived because it contains a misleading representation,
withholds information, prevents the acquisition of information, or by any other
conduct, act, or omission creates, confirms, or perpetuates a false impression,
including, but not limited to, a false impression as to law, value, state of
mind, or other objective or subjective fact.
      “Insurer” means any person that is authorized to engage in the business
of insurance in this state under Ohio R.C. Title 39, the Ohio Fair Plan
Underwriting Association created under Ohio R.C. 3929.43, any health insuring
corporation, and any legal entity that is self-insured and provides benefits to
its employees or members.
      “Policy” means a policy, certificate, contract, or plan that is issued by
an insurer.
      “Statement” includes but is not limited to any notice, letter, or
memorandum; proof of loss; bill of lading; receipt for payment; invoice,
account, or other financial statement; estimate of property damage; bill for
services; diagnosis or prognosis; prescription; hospital, medical, or dental
chart or other record; x-ray, photograph, videotape, or movie film; test
result; other evidence of loss, injury, or expense; computer- generated
document; and data in any form.
   (B)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Present to, or cause to be presented to, an insurer any written or
oral statement that is part of, or in support of, an application for insurance,
a claim for payment pursuant to a policy, or a claim for any other benefit
pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement, or any part of the statement,
is false or deceptive;
      (2)   Assist, aid, abet, solicit, procure, or conspire with another to
prepare or make any written or oral statement that is intended to be presented
to an insurer as part of, or in support of, an application for insurance, a
claim for payment pursuant to a policy, or a claim for any other benefit
pursuant to a policy, knowing that the statement, or any part of the statement,
is false or deceptive.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of insurance fraud.  Except as
otherwise provided in this division, insurance fraud is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99. If the amount of the claim that is false or deceptive is $1,000 or
more, insurance fraud is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (D)   This section shall not be construed to abrogate, waive, or modify Ohio
R.C. 2317.02(A).
(ORC 2913.47)
§ 642.31  MISCONDUCT INVOLVING A PUBLIC TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM.
   (A)   As used in this section, “public transportation system” means a county
transit system operated in accordance with Ohio R.C. 306.01 to 306.13, a
regional transit authority operated in accordance with Ohio R.C. 306.30 to
306.71, or a regional transit commission operated in accordance with Ohio R.C.
306.80 to 306.90.
   (B)   No person shall evade the payment of the known fares of a public
transportation system.
   (C)   No person shall alter any transfer, pass, ticket or token of a public
transportation system with the purpose of evading the payment of fares or of
defrauding the system.
   (D)   No person shall do any of the following while in any facility or on
any vehicle of a public transportation system:
      (1)   Play sound equipment without the proper use of a private earphone;
      (2)   Smoke, eat or drink in any area where the activity is clearly
marked as being prohibited; or
      (3)   Expectorate upon a person, facility or vehicle.
   (E)   No person shall write, deface, draw or otherwise mark on any facility
or vehicle of a public transportation system.
   (F)   No person shall fail to comply with a lawful order of a public
transportation system police officer, and no person shall resist, obstruct or
abuse a public transportation police officer in the performance of the
officer’s duties.
   (G)   Notwithstanding any other provision of law, 75% of each fine paid to
satisfy a sentence imposed for a violation of any of the provisions of this
section shall be deposited into the treasury of the County and 25% shall be
deposited with the county transit board, regional transit authority or regional
transit commission that operates the public transportation system involved in
the violation, unless the Board of County Commissioners operates the public
transportation system, in which case 100% of each fine shall be deposited into
the treasury of the County.
(ORC 2917.41)
   (H)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of
misconduct involving a public transportation system, a misdemeanor of the first
degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
§ 642.32  MEDICAID FRAUD.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      “Provider” means any person who has signed a provider agreement with the
Ohio Department of Medicaid to provide goods or services pursuant to the
Medicaid program or any person who has signed an agreement with a party to such
a provider agreement under which the person agrees to provide goods or services
that are reimbursable under the Medicaid program.
      “Provider agreement” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
      “Recipient” means any individual who receives goods or services from a
provider under the Medicaid program.
      “Records” means any medical, professional, financial or business records
relating to the treatment or care of any recipient, to goods or services
provided to any recipient, or to rates paid for goods or services provided to
any recipient, and any records that are required by the rules of the Medicaid
Director to be kept for the Medicaid program.
      “Statement or representation” means any oral, written, electronic,
electronic impulse or magnetic communication that is used to identify an item
of goods or a service for which reimbursement may be made under the Medicaid
program or that states income and expense and is or may be used to determine a
rate of reimbursement under the Medicaid program.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly make or cause to be made a false or
misleading statement or representation for use in obtaining reimbursement from
the Medicaid program.
   (C)   No person, with purpose to commit fraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Contrary to the terms of the person’s provider agreement, charge,
solicit, accept or receive for goods or services that the person provides under
the Medicaid program any property, money or other consideration in addition to
the amount of reimbursement under the Medicaid program and the person’s
provider agreement for the goods or services and any cost-sharing expenses
authorized by R.C. § 5162.20 or rules adopted by the Medicaid Director
regarding the Medicaid program.
      (2)   Solicit, offer or receive any remuneration, other than any cost-
sharing expenses authorized by R.C. § 5162.20 or rules adopted by the Medicaid
Director regarding the Medicaid program, in cash or in kind, including but not
limited to a kickback or rebate, in connection with the furnishing of goods or
services for which whole or partial reimbursement is or may be made under the
Medicaid program.
   (D)   No person, having submitted a claim for or provided goods or services
under the Medicaid program, shall do either of the following for a period of at
least six years after a reimbursement pursuant to that claim, or a
reimbursement for those goods or services, is received under the Medicaid
program:
      (1)   Knowingly alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or remove any records
that are necessary to fully disclose the nature of all goods or services for
which the claim was submitted, or for which reimbursement was received, by the
person; or
      (2)   Knowingly alter, falsify, destroy, conceal or remove any records
that are necessary to disclose fully all income and expenditures upon which
rates of reimbursements were based for the person.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of medicaid fraud.  Except as
otherwise provided in this division, medicaid fraud is a misdemeanor of the
first degree.  The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99. If the value of the property, services or funds obtained in violation
of this section is $1,000 or more, medicaid fraud is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
   (F)   Upon application of the governmental agency, office or other entity
that conducted the investigation and prosecution in a case under this section,
the court shall order any person who is convicted of a violation of this
section for receiving any reimbursement for furnishing goods or services under
the Medicaid program to which the person is not entitled to pay to the
applicant its cost of investigating and prosecuting the case.  The costs of
investigation and prosecution that a defendant is ordered to pay pursuant to
this division shall be in addition to any other penalties for the receipt of
that reimbursement that are provided in this section, Ohio R.C. 2913.40 or
5164.35, or any other provision of law.
   (G)   The provisions of this section are not intended to be exclusive
remedies and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or civil remedy for
any act that is in violation of this section.
(ORC 2913.40)
   (H)   Medicaid Eligibility Fraud.
      (1)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following in an application
for enrollment in the Medicaid program or in a document that requires a
disclosure of assets for the purpose of determining eligibility for the
Medicaid program:
         (a)   Make or cause to be made a false or misleading statement;
         (b)   Conceal an interest in property;
         (c)   1.   Except as provided in division (H)(1)(c)2. of this section,
fail to disclose a transfer of property that occurred during the period
beginning 36 months before submission of the application or document and ending
on the date the application or document was submitted;
            2.   Fail to disclose a transfer of property that occurred during
the period beginning 60 months before submission of the application or document
and ending on the date the application or document was submitted and that was
made to an irrevocable trust a portion of which is not distributable to the
applicant for or recipient of Medicaid or to a revocable trust.
      (2)   (a)   Whoever violates this division (H) is guilty of Medicaid
eligibility fraud. Except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation
of this division (H) is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the value of the
Medicaid services paid as a result of the violation is $1,000 or more, a
violation of this division (H) is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
         (b)   In addition to imposing a sentence under division (H)(2)(a) of
this section, the court shall order that a person who is guilty of Medicaid
eligibility fraud make restitution in the full amount of any Medicaid services
paid on behalf of an applicant for or recipient of Medicaid for which the
applicant or recipient was not eligible, plus interest at the rate applicable
to judgments on unreimbursed amounts from the date on which the Medicaid
services were paid to the date on which restitution is made.
         (c)   The remedies and penalties provided in this division (H) are not
exclusive and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or civil remedy for
any act that is in violation of this division (H).
      (3)   This division (H) does not apply to a person who fully disclosed in
an application for Medicaid or in a document that requires a disclosure of
assets for the purpose of determining eligibility for Medicaid all of the
interests in property of the applicant for or recipient of Medicaid, all
transfers of property by the applicant for or recipient of Medicaid, and the
circumstances of all those transfers.
      (4)   Any amounts of Medicaid services recovered as restitution under
this division (H) and any interest on those amounts shall be credited to the
general revenue fund, and any applicable federal share shall be returned to the
appropriate agency or department of the United States.
      (5)   For the purpose of this division (H), the following definitions
shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different
meaning.
         “Medicaid services” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 5164.01.
         “Property” means any real or personal property or other asset in which
a person has any legal title or interest.
(ORC 2913.401)
§ 642.33  WORKERS’ COMPENSATION FRAUD.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to defraud or knowing that the person is
facilitating a fraud shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Receive workers’ compensation benefits to which the person is not
entitled;
      (2)   Make or present or cause to be made or presented a false or
misleading statement with the purpose to secure payment for goods or services
rendered under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4121, 4123, 4127, or 4131 or to secure
workers’ compensation benefits;
      (3)   Alter, falsify, destroy, conceal, or remove any record or document
that is necessary to fully establish the validity of any claim filed with, or
necessary to establish the nature and validity of all goods and services for
which reimbursement or payment was received or is requested from the Bureau of
Workers’ Compensation, or a self-insuring employer under Ohio R.C. Chapter
4121, 4123, 4127, or 4131;
      (4)   Enter into an agreement or conspiracy to defraud the Bureau of
Workers’ Compensation or a self-insuring employer by making or presenting or
causing to be made or presented a false claim for workers’ compensation
benefits;
      (5)   Make or present or cause to be made or presented a false statement
concerning manual codes, classification or employees, payroll, paid
compensation, or number of personnel, when information of that nature is
necessary to determine the actual workers’ compensation premium or assessment
owed to the Bureau by an employer;
      (6)   Alter, forge, or create a workers’ compensation certificate or
falsely show current or correct workers’ compensation coverage;
      (7)   Fail to secure or maintain workers’ compensation coverage as
required by Ohio R.C. Chapter 4123 with the intent to defraud the Bureau of
Workers’ Compensation.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of workers’ compensation
fraud.  Except as otherwise provided in this division, workers’ compensation
fraud is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the value of premiums and
assessments unpaid pursuant to actions described in divisions (A)(5), (A)(6),
or (A)(7) of this section, or goods, services, property, or money stolen is
$1,000 or more, workers’ compensation fraud is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (C)   Upon application of the governmental body that conducted the
investigation and prosecution of a violation of this section, the court shall
order the person who is convicted of the violation to pay the governmental body
its costs of investigating and prosecuting the case.  These costs are in
addition to any other costs or penalty provided under federal, state or local
law.
   (D)   The remedies and penalties provided in this section are not exclusive
remedies and penalties and do not preclude the use of any other criminal or
civil remedy or penalty for any act that is in violation of this section.
   (E)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      “Claim” means any attempt to cause the Bureau of Workers’ Compensation,
an independent third party with whom the administrator or an employer contracts
under Ohio R.C. 4121.44, or a self-insuring employer to make payment or
reimbursement for workers’ compensation benefits.
      “Employer,” “employee,” and “self-insuring employer” have the same
meanings as in Ohio R.C. 4123.01.
      “Employment” means participating in any trade, occupation, business,
service, or profession for substantial gainful remuneration.
      “False” means wholly or partially untrue or deceptive.
      “Goods” includes but is not limited to medical supplies, appliances,
rehabilitative equipment, and any other apparatus or furnishing provided or
used in the care, treatment, or rehabilitation of a claimant for workers’
compensation benefits.
      “Records” means any medical, professional, financial, or business record
relating to the treatment or care of any person, to goods or services provided
to any person, or to rates paid for goods or services provided to any person,
or any record that the administrator of workers’ compensation requires pursuant
to rule.
      “Remuneration” includes but is not limited to wages, commissions,
rebates, and any other reward or consideration.
      “Services” includes but is not limited to any service provided by any
health care provider to a claimant for workers’ compensation benefits and any
and all services provided by the Bureau as part of workers’ compensation
insurance coverage.
      “Statement” includes but is not limited to any oral, written, electronic,
electronic impulse, or magnetic communication notice, letter, memorandum,
receipt for payment, invoice, account, financial statement, bill for services;
a diagnosis, prognosis, prescription, hospital, medical, or dental chart or
other record; and a computer generated document.
      “Workers’ compensation benefits” means any compensation or benefits
payable under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4121, 4123, 4127, or 4131.
(ORC 2913.48)
§ 642.34  MOTION PICTURE PIRACY.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      “Audiovisual recording function” means the capability of a device to
record or transmit a motion picture or any part of a motion picture by means of
any technology existing on, or developed after, March 9, 2004.
      “Facility” means a movie theater.
   (B)   No person, without the written consent of the owner or lessee of the
facility and of the licensor of the motion picture, shall knowingly operate an
audiovisual recording function of a device in a facility in which the motion
picture is being shown.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of motion
picture piracy, a misdemeanor of the first degree on the first offense and a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law on each subsequent offense.
   (D)   This section does not prohibit or restrict a lawfully authorized
investigative, law enforcement, protective, or intelligence gathering employee
or agent of the government of this state or a political subdivision of this
state, or of the federal government, when acting in an official capacity, from
operating an audiovisual recording function of a device in any facility in
which a motion picture is being shown.
   (E)   Division (B) of this section does not limit or affect the application
of any other prohibition in this code or the Ohio Revised Code. Any act that is
a violation of both division (B) of this section and another provision of this
code or the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this section, under the
other provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code, or under both this
section and the other provision of this code or the Ohio Revised Code.
(ORC 2913.07)
§ 642.35  RAILROAD VANDALISM; CRIMINAL TRESPASS; INTERFERENCE WITH OPERATION OF
TRAIN; GRADE CROSSING DEVICE VANDALISM.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly, and by any means, drop or throw any object
at, onto, or in the path of, any railroad rail, railroad track, locomotive,
engine, railroad car, or other vehicle of a railroad company while such vehicle
is on a railroad track.
   (B)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall climb upon or into any
locomotive, engine, railroad car, or other vehicle of a railroad company when
it is on a railroad track.
   (C)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall disrupt, delay, or
prevent the operation of any train or other vehicle of a railroad company while
such vehicle is on a railroad track.
   (D)   No person, without privilege to do so, shall knowingly enter or remain
on the land or premises of a railroad company.
   (E)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of railroad
vandalism. Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of criminal
trespass on a locomotive, engine, railroad car, or other railroad vehicle.
Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of interference with
the operation of a train. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
railroad vandalism; criminal trespass on a locomotive, engine, railroad car, or
other railroad vehicle; and interference with the operation of a train each is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the violation of division (A), (B), or
(C) of this section causes serious physical harm to property or creates a
substantial risk of physical harm to any person, causes physical harm to any
person, or causes serious physical harm to any person, the violation is a
felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (F)   Whoever violates division (D) of this section is guilty of criminal
trespass on the land or premises of a railroad company, a misdemeanor of the
fourth degree.
(R.C. § 2909.10)
   (G)   No person shall knowingly deface, damage, obstruct, remove, or
otherwise impair the operation of any railroad grade crossing warning signal or
other protective device, including any gate, bell, light, crossbuck, stop sign,
yield sign, advance warning sign, or advance pavement marking.
   (H)   Whoever violates division (G) of this section is guilty of railroad
grade crossing device vandalism. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
railroad grade crossing device vandalism is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
If the violation of division (G) of this section causes serious physical harm
to property or creates a substantial risk of physical harm to any person,
causes physical harm to any person, or causes serious physical harm to any
person, railroad grade crossing device vandalism is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(R.C. § 2909.101)
CHAPTER 648:  PEACE DISTURBANCES
Section
648.01   Riot
648.02   Failure to disperse
648.03   Justifiable use of force to suppress riot
648.04   Disorderly conduct
648.05   Disturbing a lawful meeting
648.06   Misconduct at an emergency
648.07   Inducing panic
648.08   Making false alarms
648.09   Noise regulation
648.095   Noise disturbances
648.10   Minors curfew
648.11   Operation of off-the-road vehicles
648.12   Disturbing the peace
648.13   Inciting to violence
648.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Arson, see §
642.09
   Assault, see §§
636.02,
636.03
   Barking or howling dogs, see §
618.07
   “Deadly force” defined, see §
606.01
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Desecration, see §
642.07
   Detention of disorderly persons, see §
606.23
   Fireworks, see §
672.10
   “Force” defined, see §
606.01
   Interfering with civil rights, see §
606.20
   Liquor sale to intoxicated person, see §
612.03
   Menacing, see §§
636.04 et seq.
   Noisy mufflers, see §
438.21
   “Peeling”; cracking exhaust noises, see §
432.35
   Pointing and discharging firearms and other weapons, see §
672.12
   Resisting arrest, see §
606.16
   Sirens, whistles and bells on motor vehicles, see §
438.20
   Trespass, see §§
642.12,
642.125
Statutory reference:
   Cordoning off riot areas; prohibiting sales of firearms and explosives, see
Ohio R.C. 3761.16
   Power to regulate peace disturbances, see Ohio R.C. 715.49
   Riot and civil disorder assistance by State Highway Patrol, see Ohio R.C.
5503.02
   Suspension of beer and liquor sales during emergency, see Ohio R.C. 4301.251
§ 648.01  RIOT.
   (A)   No person shall participate with four or more others in a course of
disorderly conduct in violation of Ohio R.C. 2917.11 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance:
      (1)   With purpose to commit or facilitate the commission of a
misdemeanor, other than disorderly conduct;
      (2)   With purpose to intimidate a public official or employee into
taking or refraining from official action, or with purpose to hinder, impede,
or obstruct a function of government;
      (3)   With purpose to hinder, impede, or obstruct the orderly process of
administration or instruction at an educational institution, or to interfere
with or disrupt lawful activities carried on at the institution.
   (B)   No person shall participate with four or more others with purpose to
do an act with unlawful force or violence, even though the act might otherwise
be lawful.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of riot, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(ORC 2917.03)
   (D)   For the purposes of prosecuting violations of this section, the
prosecution is not required to allege or prove that the offender expressly
agreed with four or more others to commit any act that constitutes a violation
this section prior to or while committing those acts.
(ORC 2917.031)
Statutory reference:
   Aggravated riot, felony provisions, see Ohio R.C. 2917.02
§ 648.02  FAILURE TO DISPERSE.
   (A)   Where five or more persons are participating in a course of disorderly
conduct in violation of Ohio R.C. 2917.11 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance, and there are other persons in the vicinity whose presence
creates the likelihood of physical harm to persons or property or of serious
public inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm, a law enforcement officer or other
public official may order the participants and the other persons to disperse. 
No person shall knowingly fail to obey the order.
   (B)   Nothing in this section requires persons to disperse who are peaceably
assembled for a lawful purpose.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to disperse, a
first degree misdemeanor. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
(ORC 2917.04)
§ 648.03  JUSTIFIABLE USE OF FORCE TO SUPPRESS RIOT.
   A law enforcement officer or firefighter engaged in suppressing a riot or in
protecting persons or property during a riot:
   (A)   Is justified in using force, other than deadly force, when and to the
extent he or she has probable cause to believe such force is necessary to
disperse or apprehend rioters;
   (B)   Is justified in using force, including deadly force, when and to the
extent he or she has probable cause to believe such force is necessary to
disperse or apprehend rioters whose conduct is creating a substantial risk of
serious physical harm to persons.
(ORC 2917.05)
§ 648.04  DISORDERLY CONDUCT.
   (A)   No person shall recklessly cause inconvenience, annoyance, or alarm to
another, by doing any of the following:
      (1)   Engaging in fighting, in threatening harm to persons or property,
or in violent or turbulent behavior;
      (2)   Making unreasonable noise or an offensively coarse utterance,
gesture, or display, or communicating unwarranted and grossly abusive language
to any person;
      (3)   Insulting, taunting, or challenging another, under circumstances in
which that conduct is likely to provoke a violent response;
      (4)   Hindering or preventing the movement of persons on a public street,
road, highway, or right- of-way, or to, from, within, or upon public or private
property, so as to interfere with the rights of others, and by any act that
serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender;
      (5)   Creating a condition that is physically offensive to persons or
that presents a risk of physical harm to persons or property, by any act that
serves no lawful and reasonable purpose of the offender.
   (B)   No person while voluntarily intoxicated shall do either of the
following:
      (1)   In a public place or in the presence of two or more persons, engage
in conduct likely to be offensive or to cause inconvenience, annoyance, or
alarm to persons of ordinary sensibilities, which conduct the offender, if he
or she were not intoxicated, should know is likely to have such effect on
others;
      (2)   Engage in conduct or create a condition that presents a risk of
physical harm to himself, herself or another, or to the property of another.
   (C)   Violation of any statute or ordinance of which an element is operating
a motor vehicle, locomotive, watercraft, aircraft, or other vehicle while under
the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse is not a violation of division
(B) of this section.
   (D)   If a person appears to an ordinary observer to be intoxicated, it is
probable cause to believe that the person is voluntarily intoxicated for
purposes of division (B) of this section.
   (E)   As used in this section:
      “Committed in the vicinity of a school” has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 2925.01.
      “Emergency facility” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2909.04.
      “Emergency facility person” is the singular of “emergency facility
personnel” as defined in Ohio R.C. 2909.04.
      “Emergency medical services person” is the singular of “emergency medical
services personnel” as defined in Ohio R.C. 2133.21.
(ORC 2917.11)
   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disorderly conduct, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
§ 648.05  DISTURBING A LAWFUL MEETING.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting,
procession, or gathering, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Do any act which obstructs or interferes with the due conduct of
the meeting, procession, or gathering.
      (2)   Make any utterance, gesture, or display which outrages the
sensibilities of the group.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disturbing a lawful
meeting, a misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as provided in
§
202.99.
(ORC 2917.12)
§ 648.06  MISCONDUCT AT AN EMERGENCY.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following:
      (1)   Hamper the lawful operations of any law enforcement officer,
firefighter, rescuer, medical person, emergency medical services person, or
other authorized person engaged in the person’s duties at the scene of a fire,
accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind;
      (2)   Hamper the lawful activities of any emergency facility person who
is engaged in the person’s duties in an emergency facility;
      (3)   Fail to obey the lawful order of any law enforcement officer
engaged in the law enforcement officer’s duties at the scene of or in
connection with a fire, accident, disaster, riot, or emergency of any kind.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit access or deny
information to any news media representative in the lawful exercise of the news
media representative’s duties.
   (C)   As used in this section:
      “Emergency facility” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2909.04.
      “Emergency facility person” is the singular of “emergency facility
personnel” as defined in Ohio R.C. 2909.04.
      “Emergency medical services person” is the singular of “emergency medical
services personnel” as defined in Ohio R.C. 2133.21.
(ORC 2917.13)
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of misconduct at an emergency,
a misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
§ 648.07  INDUCING PANIC.
   (A)   No person shall cause the evacuation of any public place, or otherwise
cause serious public inconvenience or alarm, by doing any of the following:
      (1)   Initiating or circulating a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false.
      (2)   Threatening to commit any offense of violence.
      (3)   Committing any offense, with reckless disregard of the likelihood
that its commission will cause serious public inconvenience or alarm.
   (B)   Division (A)(1) of this section does not apply to any person
conducting an authorized fire or emergency drill.
   (C)   (1)   It is not a defense to a charge under this section that pertains
to a purported or threatened use of a weapon of mass destruction that the
offender did not possess or have the ability to use a weapon of mass
destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of mass destruction was
not a weapon of mass destruction.
      (2)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any other section
of the Ohio Revised Code or these Codified Ordinances may be prosecuted under
this section, the other section, or both sections.
   (D)   As used in this section;
      “Biological agent” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2917.33.
      “Economic harm” means any of the following:
         (a)   All direct, incidental and consequential pecuniary harm suffered
by a victim as a result of the criminal conduct.  “Economic harm” as described
in this division includes but is not limited to all of the following:
            1.   All wages, salaries or other compensation lost as a result of
the criminal conduct;
            2.   The cost of all wages, salaries or other compensation paid to
employees for time those employees are prevented from working as a result of
the criminal conduct;
            3.   The overhead costs incurred from the time that a business is
shut down as a result of the criminal conduct;
            4.   The loss of value to tangible or intangible property that was
damaged as a result of the criminal conduct.
         (b)   All costs incurred by the state or any political subdivision as
a result of, or in making any response to, the criminal conduct that
constituted the violation of this section or Ohio R.C. 2917.32, or any
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, including but not limited to all
costs so incurred by any law enforcement officers, firefighters, rescue
personnel, or emergency medical services personnel of the state or the
political subdivision.
      “Emergency medical services personnel” has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 2133.21.
      “School” means any school operated by a board of education or any school
for which the State Board of Education prescribes minimum standards under Ohio
R.C. 3301.07, whether or not any instruction, extracurricular activities, or
training provided by the school is being conducted at the time a violation of
this section is committed.
      “Weapon of mass destruction” means any of the following:
         (a)   Any weapon that is designed or intended to cause death or
serious physical harm through the release, dissemination, or impact of toxic or
poisonous chemicals, or other precursors;
         (b)   Any weapon involving a disease organism or biological agent;
         (c)   Any weapon that is designed to release radiation or
radioactivity at a level dangerous to human life;
         (d)   Any of the following, except to the extent that the item or
device in question is expressly excepted from the definition of “destructive
device” pursuant to 18 U.S.C. 921(A)(4) and regulations issued under that
section:
            1.   Any explosive, incendiary, or poison gas bomb, grenade, rocket
having a propellant charge of more than four ounces, missile having an
explosive or incendiary charge of more than one-quarter ounce, mine, or similar
device;
            2.   Any combination of parts either designed or intended for use
in converting any item or device into any item or device described in division
(d)1. of this definition and from which an item or device described in that
division may be readily assembled.
(ORC 2917.31)
   (E)   (1)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inducing panic.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(3), inducing panic is
a misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
      (3)   If violation of this section results in physical harm to any
person, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law.  If a violation of this section results in economic harm of $1,000 or
more, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law. 
If the public place involved in a violation of division (A)(1) is a school and
if the violation results in economic harm, inducing panic is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.  If a violation of this section
pertains to a purported, threatened or actual use of a weapon of mass
destruction, inducing panic is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
§ 648.08  MAKING FALSE ALARMS.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Initiate or circulate a report or warning of an alleged or
impending fire, explosion, crime, or other catastrophe, knowing that the report
or warning is false and likely to cause public inconvenience or alarm.
      (2)   Knowingly cause a false alarm of fire or other emergency to be
transmitted to or within any organization, public or private, for dealing with
emergencies involving a risk of physical harm to persons or property.
      (3)   Report to any law enforcement agency an alleged offense or other
incident within its concern, knowing that the offense did not occur.
   (B)   This section does not apply to any person conducting an authorized
fire or emergency drill.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of making false alarms. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division, making false alarms is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99. If a violation of this section results in economic harm of $1,000 or
more, making false alarms is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state
law. If a violation of this section pertains to a purported, threatened, or
actual use of a weapon of mass destruction, making false alarms is a felony to
be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (D)   (1)   It is not a defense to a charge under this section that pertains
to a purported or threatened use of a weapon of mass destruction that the
offender did not possess or have the ability to use a weapon of mass
destruction or that what was represented to be a weapon of mass destruction was
not a weapon of mass destruction.
      (2)   Any act that is a violation of this section and any other section
of the Ohio Revised Code or these Codified Ordinances may be prosecuted under
this section, the other section, or both sections.
   (E)   As used in this section, “economic harm” and “weapon of mass
destruction” have the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2917.31.
(ORC 2917.32)
§ 648.09  NOISE REGULATION.
   (A)   Homeowners’ Outdoor Equipment.  No person shall use engine or motor-
powered garden, lawn or maintenance tools intended for repetitive use in
landscaping in residential areas, typically capable of being used by
homeowners, including garden tools, riding tractors, walking tractors and power
mowers, between the hours of 8:00 p.m. of any day and 8:00 a.m. of the
following day.
   (B)   Construction at Night.  No person shall operate any construction
equipment or any other engine or motor-powered equipment, and no person shall
erect, construct, demolish, excavate, alter or repair any building or
structure, between 7:00 p.m. of any day and 7:00 a.m. of the following day, or
on Sundays or legal holidays.
   (C)   Mufflers on Gas and Diesel Engines.  No person, being an owner, agent
or employee, operator or person in charge, shall use or operate any gas,
gasoline or diesel engine on public or private property unless such engine is
equipped with a proper operating muffler.
   (D)   Unnecessary Noise.  The following acts are hereby declared to be loud,
disturbing and unnecessary noises and are hereby prohibited:
      (1)   Vehicles.  The use of a vehicle so out of repair as to create load
and unnecessary noise;
      (2)   Signal Devices.  The sounding of a horn or signal device on a
vehicle that creates an unreasonably loud or harsh sound, or the sounding of
any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time, except as a
danger signal;  and
      (3)   Tires.  The operation of a vehicle in a manner causing an
unreasonably loud, unusual or excessive noise to be created by contact of a
tire of the vehicle upon the surface upon which the vehicle is operated by
rapid acceleration, turning, backing, starting or stopping.
   (E)   Exceptions.  The following uses and activities are exempt from noise
level regulations:
      (1)   Noises of safety signals, warning devices and emergency pressure
relief valves;
      (2)   Noises resulting from an authorized emergency or public safety
vehicle when responding to an emergency call or acting in time of emergency;
      (3)   Noises resulting from emergency work;
      (4)   Noises resulting from authorized public activities approved by
Council; and
      (5)   Noises resulting from the use of snow removal equipment.
   (F)   Logging Operations.  No person shall conduct logging operations
between 7:00 p.m. of any day and 7:00 a.m. of the following day, or on Sundays
or legal holidays.
(Ord. 73-78, passed 9-5-1978; Ord. 149-94, passed 1-3-1995)
§ 648.095  NOISE DISTURBANCES.
   (A)   Generally.  No person shall unreasonably make, continue, cause to be
made or continued or permit any noise disturbance.  As used in this section
“noise disturbance” means any sound which endangers or injures the safety or
health of humans or which annoys or disturbs a reasonable person of normal
sensitivities.
   (B)   Motor Vehicles.  No person shall use a motor vehicle so as to disturb
the good order and quiet of the city by racing the motor of such motor vehicle;
unnecessarily suddenly stopping or starting such motor vehicle; making or
causing the emittance from the exhaust system of loud, cracking or chattering
noise unusual to its normal operation; making or causing the tires of such
vehicle to squeal, peel or leave tire marks; or making or causing any other
loud or unseemly noise.
   (C)   Radios, Tape Players, Compact Disc Players or Other Sound-Amplifying
Devices.
      (1)   No person shall play or operate any radio, music player, audio
system, tape player, compact disc player or other sound-amplifying device or
system in such a manner or at such a volume as to annoy or disturb the quiet,
comfort or repose of neighboring inhabitants, or at a volume which is plainly
audible to persons other than those who are in the room in which such device or
system is being played or operated, or to persons beyond the boundaries of the
zoning lot upon which such device or system is being played or operated.
      (2)   No operator or passenger of a motor vehicle shall play or operate,
or permit the playing or operation of, any radio, music player, audio system,
tape player, compact disc player or other sound- amplifying device or system
which can be heard outside the vehicle from fifty or more feet away when the
vehicle is being operated upon a public street, highway or any other public
place.
(Ord. 89-102, passed 8-21-1989; Ord. 37-96, passed 4-15-1996)
§ 648.10  MINORS CURFEW.
   (A)   No minor of the age and during the hours specified in division (B) of
this section shall loaf, wander, stroll or play in, upon or about any public
street, highway, alley, park or other public way or place or ride aimlessly on
or about any public street, highway, park or alley in the city in any vehicle.
   (B)   No minor of the age and during the hours hereinafter specified shall
be in, upon or about any public street, highway, park, alley or other public
place unless the minor is:
      (1)   Accompanied by the minor’s parent or guardian;
      (2)   On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian,
without any detour or stop;
      (3)   In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel;
      (4)   Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home
from an employment activity, without any detour or stop;
      (5)   Involved in an emergency;
      (6)   On the sidewalk abutting the minor's residence or abutting the
residence of a next-door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the
police department about the minor’s presence;
      (7)   Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational
activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the city, a civic organization,
or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to
or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school,
religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by
the city, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes
responsibility for the minor;
      (8)   Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States
Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the
right of assembly; or
      (9)   Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed
in accordance with state law.
 
Age           Hours
Through 12    Darkness to 6:30 a.m.
13 through 15 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
16 through 17 11:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m., Sunday through Thursday; midnight to 6:
              00 a.m., Friday and Saturday
 
   (C)   No parent, guardian or person having legal care or custody of any
minor shall permit or encourage such minor to be in or upon any public street,
highway, alley, park or other public way or place in the city in violation of
this section.
   (D)   Whenever any police officer charged with the duty of enforcing the
laws of the state and the city discovers or has called to his attention any
minor in, about or upon any public street, highway, alley, park or other public
way or place, or in any vehicle in, upon or about, or riding aimlessly about,
any public street, highway, alley, park or other public way or place during the
hours when such presence of a minor is prohibited by this section, the police
officer shall make an immediate investigation thereof.  If he finds the
presence of such minor at the place and under the conditions and at the time
such minor is so found is prohibited by this section, the officer shall cause
such minor to be taken to his or her place of residence and a citation shall
thereupon be served upon such minor and his or her parent, guardian or other
person having legal custody and care of such minor for violations of this
section.  If he finds that the parent, guardian or other person having legal
care and custody of such minor has violated this section, he shall serve upon
him or her a citation therefor, which citation shall command both the parent,
guardian or custodian and the minor to appear in the Mayor’s Court.
§ 648.11  OPERATION OF OFF-THE-ROAD VEHICLES.
   (A)   No person shall operate a dirt bike, motor bike, snowmobile, all-
purpose vehicle or other off-the- road vehicle upon any public way or upon
private property in such proximity to any residence or dwelling or place
ordinarily used for human habitation in such a manner as to make or cause to be
made any unreasonable noise of such a character, intensity or duration as to
disturb the peace and quiet of any inhabitant of such place or be detrimental
to the life or health of any individual therein.
   (B)   No parent, guardian or person having legal care or custody of a minor
shall permit or encourage such minor to be in or upon any public way or upon
private property so as to be in violation of division (A) of this section.
(Ord. 79-79, passed 8-15-1979; Ord. 28-81, passed 5-4-1981)
§ 648.12  DISTURBING THE PEACE.
   No person shall disturb the good order and quiet of the municipality by
clamors or noises, by intoxication, drunkenness, fighting, quarreling,
wrangling or committing assault or assault and battery, or by otherwise
violating the public peace by indecent and disorderly conduct or by lewd and
lascivious behavior.
(Ord. 89-102, passed 8-21-1989)
§ 648.13  INCITING TO VIOLENCE.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly engage in conduct designed to urge or incite
another to commit any offense of violence when either of the following apply:
      (1)   The conduct takes place under circumstances that create a clear and
present danger that any offense of violence will be committed.
      (2)   The conduct proximately results in the commission of any offense of
violence.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of inciting to violence.  If
the offense of violence that the other person is being urged or incited to
commit is a misdemeanor, inciting to violence is a misdemeanor of the first
degree.  The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99. If the offense of violence that the other person is being urged or
incited to commit is a felony, inciting to violence is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2917.01)
§ 648.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 660:  SAFETY, SANITATION AND HEALTH
Section
660.01   Venting of heaters and burners
660.02   Spreading contagion
660.03   Unlawful deposits; littering
660.04   Noxious odors; filthy accumulations; polluting and diverting
watercourses
660.05   Duty to keep sidewalks in repair and clean
660.06   Abandoned refrigerators and airtight containers
660.07   Storage of junk vehicles and heavy equipment or machinery
660.08   Open burning
660.085   Burning of hazardous waste
660.09   Barricades and warning lights
660.10   Sidewalk obstructions; damage or injury
660.11   Notice to fill lots, remove putrid substances
660.12   Depositing poison
660.13   Polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs)
660.14   Smoking in places of public assembly
660.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Animal nuisances, see §
618.13
   Exterior property maintenance generally, see
Chapter 1348
   Garbage and rubbish collection and disposal, see
Chapter 1060
   Inducing panic, see §
648.07
   Littering from motor vehicles, see §
432.41
   Loads dropping or leaking; tracking mud; removal required, see §
440.06
   Placing harmful substance or objects in food or confection, see §
636.16
   Placing injurious material or obstruction in street, see §
412.01
   Rabies quarantine, see §
618.11
   Riot, see §§
648.01 et seq.
   Safety and equipment for motor vehicles, see
Chapter 438
   Security cameras and 911 access at automated teller machines, see
Chapter 1308
   Weapons and explosives, see
Chapter 672
   Willfully leaving vehicles on private or public property, see §
452.05
Statutory reference:
   Excavation liability, see Ohio R.C. 723.49 et seq.
   Nuisances, see Ohio R.C. Chapter 3767
§ 660.01  VENTING OF HEATERS AND BURNERS.
   (A)   The use of a brazier, salamander, space heater, room heater, furnace,
water heater, or other burner or heater using wood, coal, coke, fuel oil,
kerosene, gasoline, natural gas, liquid petroleum gas or similar fuel, and
tending to give off carbon monoxide or other harmful gases must comply with the
following provisions:
      (1)   When used in living quarters, or in any enclosed building or space
in which persons are usually present, shall be used with a flue or vent so
designed, installed, and maintained as to vent the products of combustion
outdoors; except in storage, factory, or industrial buildings which are
provided with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide
poisoning.
      (2)   When used as a portable or temporary burner or heater at a
construction site, or in a warehouse, shed, or structure in which persons are
temporarily present, shall be vented as provided in division (A)(1) or used
with sufficient ventilation to avoid the danger of carbon monoxide poisoning.
   (B)   This section does not apply to domestic ranges, laundry stoves, gas
logs installed in a fireplace with an adequate flue, or hot plates, unless the
same are used as space or room heaters.
   (C)   No person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in
charge, or occupant of premises, negligently permit the use of a burner or
heater in violation of the standards for venting and ventilation provided in
this section.
   (D)   Division (A) above does not apply to any kerosene-fired space or room
heater that is equipped with an automatic extinguishing tip-over device, or to
any natural gas-fired or liquid petroleum gas-fired space or room heater that
is equipped with an oxygen depletion safety shut-off system, and that has its
fuel piped from a source outside the building in which it is located, that are
approved by an authoritative source recognized by the State Fire Marshal in the
State Fire Code adopted by him or her under Ohio R.C. 3737.82.
   (E)   The State Fire Marshal may make rules to ensure the safe use of
unvented kerosene, natural gas, or liquid petroleum gas heaters exempted from
division (A) above when used in assembly buildings, business buildings, high
hazard buildings, institutional buildings, mercantile buildings, and type R-
1 and R-2 residential buildings, as these groups of buildings are defined in
rules adopted by the Board of Building Standards under Ohio R.C. 3781.10.  No
person shall negligently use, or, being the owner, person in charge or occupant
of premises, negligently permit the use of a heater in violation of any rules
adopted under this division.
   (F)   The State Fire Marshal may make rules prescribing standards for
written instructions containing ventilation requirements and warning of any
potential fire hazards that may occur in using a kerosene, natural gas, or
liquid petroleum gas heater.  No person shall sell or offer for sale any
kerosene, natural gas, or liquid petroleum gas heater unless the manufacturer
provides with the heater written instructions that comply with any rules
adopted under this division.
   (G)   No product labeled as a fuel additive for kerosene heaters and having
a flash point below 100°F or 37.8°C shall be sold, offered for sale, or used in
any kerosene space heater.
   (H)   No device that prohibits any safety feature on a kerosene, natural
gas, or liquid petroleum gas space heater from operating shall be sold, offered
for sale, or used in connection with any kerosene, natural gas, or liquid
petroleum gas space heater.
   (I)   No person shall sell or offer for sale any kerosene-fired, natural
gas, or liquid petroleum gas-fired heater that is not exempt from division (A)
above, unless it is marked conspicuously by the manufacturer on the container
with the phrase “Not Approved For Home Use.”
   (J)   No person shall use a cabinet-type, liquid petroleum gas-fired heater
having a fuel source within the heater, inside any building, except as
permitted by the State Fire Marshal in the State Fire Code adopted by him or
her under Ohio R.C. 3737.82.
(ORC 3701.82)
   (K)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.  The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
(ORC 3701.99(B))
§ 660.02  SPREADING CONTAGION.
   (A)   No person, knowing or having reasonable cause to believe that he or
she is suffering from a dangerous, contagious disease, shall knowingly fail to
take reasonable measures to prevent exposing himself or herself to other
persons, except when seeking medical aid.
   (B)   No person, having charge or care of a person whom he or she knows or
has reasonable cause to believe is suffering from a dangerous, contagious
disease, shall recklessly fail to take reasonable measures to protect others
from exposure to the contagion, and to inform health authorities of the
existence of the contagion.
   (C)   No person, having charge of a public conveyance or place of public
accommodation, amusement, resort, or trade, and knowing or having reasonable
cause to believe that persons using such conveyance or place have been or are
being exposed to a dangerous, contagious disease, shall negligently fail to
take reasonable measures to protect the public from exposure to the contagion,
and to inform health authorities of the existence of the contagion.
(ORC 3701.81)
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
(ORC 3701.99(C))
§ 660.03  UNLAWFUL DEPOSITS; LITTERING.
   (A)   Deposit of Dead Animals, Offal, Etc., Upon Land or Water.  No person
shall put the carcass of a dead animal or the offal from a slaughterhouse,
butcher’s establishment, packing house or fish house, or spoiled meat, spoiled
fish or other putrid substance, or the contents of a privy vault, upon or into
a lake, river, bay, creek, pond, canal, road, street, alley, lot, field,
meadow, public ground, market place or  common. No owner or occupant of any
premises shall knowingly permit the aforementioned substances to remain therein
or neglect to remove or abate the nuisance occasioned thereby within twenty-
four hours after knowledge of the existence thereof or after notice thereof in
writing from the Director of Public Safety.
   (B)   Littering. 
      (1)   No person shall place or dispose of in any manner any garbage,
waste, peelings of vegetables or fruits, rubbish, ashes, cans, bottles, wire,
paper, cartons, boxes, parts of automobiles, wagons, furniture, glass, oil or
anything else of an unsightly or unsanitary nature along, near or on any public
road, street, parkway, park drive, highway or ditch, or land adjoining any
public road or highway or ditch, and/or on private property not owned by said
person or upon which consent has not been given by the owner thereof, except on
land provided for such purpose by city ordinance or other governmental
authority, unless directed to do so by a public official on special clean-up
days.
      (2)   The Director of Public Service shall place or cause to be placed
suitable signs along the highways and streets which indicate “No Littering” and
the penalty therefore.
(Ord. 30-90, passed 4-16-1990)
§ 660.04  NOXIOUS ODORS; FILTHY ACCUMULATIONS; POLLUTING AND DIVERTING
WATERCOURSES.
   (A)   No person shall erect, continue to use, or maintain a building,
structure, or place for the exercise of a trade, employment, or business or for
keeping or feeding an animal which, by occasioning noxious exhalations or
noisome or offensive smells, becomes injurious to the health, comfort, or
property of individuals or of the public.
   (B)   No person shall cause or allow offal, filth, or noisome substances to
be collected or remain in any place to the damage or prejudice of others or of
the public.
   (C)   No person shall unlawfully obstruct or impede the passage of a
navigable river, harbor, or collection of water, or corrupt or render
unwholesome or impure a watercourse, stream of water, or unlawfully divert such
watercourse from its natural course or state to the injury or prejudice of
others.
   (D)   Persons who are engaged in agriculture-related activities, as
“agriculture” is defined in Ohio R.C. 519.01, and who are conducting those
activities outside the municipality, in accordance with generally accepted
agricultural practices, and in such a manner so as not to have a substantial,
adverse effect on the public health, safety, or welfare, are exempt from
divisions (A) and (B) above and from any ordinances, resolutions, rules, or
other enactments of the municipality that prohibit excessive noise.
(ORC 3767.13)
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.  The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
(ORC 3767.99(C))
§ 660.05  DUTY TO KEEP SIDEWALKS IN REPAIR AND CLEAN.
   (A)   In Business Districts.  No owner or occupant of land abutting streets
in a C-1, C-2, C-3 or C-4 Zoning District, as established in the Zoning Code,
shall fail to keep the sidewalks in repair and free from snow, ice or any
nuisance.
   (B)   Failure to Clear Sidewalks.  In the event that an owner or occupant,
as provided for herein, is notified by the city to clear and remove snow and
ice from any sidewalk and fails to do so within 24 hours of receipt of said
notice, the Public Service Department of the city is hereby authorized to enter
upon the lands of said owner and remove said snow and ice and charge such owner
a reasonable amount, to be determined by the Public Service Department, for
such snow and ice removal.  For purposes of this section, adequate notice will
be deemed to have been given by the actual delivery of said notice to said
owner and occupant or by posting said notice on the premises of said owner or
occupant and noting the date and time of posting thereof.
   (C)   Generally.  No owner or occupant of land in the city shall obstruct
any street, city right of way or sidewalk with snow or ice removed from his or
her premises.
(Ord. 14-95, passed 2-6-1995)
§ 660.06  ABANDONED REFRIGERATORS AND AIRTIGHT CONTAINERS.
   (A)   No person shall abandon, discard, or knowingly permit to remain on
premises under the person’s control, in a place accessible to children, any
abandoned or discarded icebox, refrigerator, or other airtight or semi-airtight
container which has a capacity of one and one-half cubic feet or more and an
opening of 50 square inches or more and which has a door or lid equipped with a
hinge, latch, or other fastening device capable of securing such door or lid,
without rendering the equipment harmless to human life by removing such hinges,
latches or other hardware which may cause a person to be confined therein. 
This section shall not apply to an icebox, refrigerator or other airtight or
semi-airtight container located in that part of a building occupied by a
dealer, warehouse or repairer.
(ORC 3767.29)
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
(ORC 3767.99(B))
§ 660.07  STORAGE OF JUNK VEHICLES AND HEAVY EQUIPMENT OR MACHINERY.
   (A)   Junk Vehicles.
      (1)   No person shall store or permit to be stored on any lot a motor
vehicle which is dismantled, extensively damaged, inoperative or unlicensed,
for a period of more than ten days, unless it is kept in a completely enclosed,
authorized building or garage.
      (2)   When a vehicle is stored contrary to this section, the Chief of
Police or his or her designee is authorized to serve notice upon the property
owner to remove such vehicle within fourteen days from the time of service of
such notice, and no person who has been notified to remove a vehicle shall fail
to do so before the expiration of the fourteen-day period. 
      (3)   The Police Department is hereby authorized to impound a motor
vehicle which is being stored contrary to this section upon written request of
the property owner to do so. The procedures for impounding set forth in §
404.05 of the Traffic Code shall be followed.
   (B)   Heavy Equipment or Machinery.
      (1)   No person shall store or accumulate, or permit, contribute to or
suffer another person to store or accumulate any derrick, pile driving or road
building equipment, sewer or ditch digging equipment or machinery, equipment
for house-moving or dredging, or any other heavy machinery, equipment or
material of a similar nature, on any property within the city, except in that
portion of the city which has been classified by the Zoning Code of the city
for light industrial uses and purposes. However, nothing herein contained shall
prohibit a person engaged in the buying and selling of such equipment,
machinery, materials or other articles or products as aforesaid from storing on
the premises where the business is regularly conducted such articles or
products as they regularly deal in if the same are properly housed and hidden
from view from neighbors or people upon the public ways.
      (2)   Nothing herein contained shall prohibit the storing of any
equipment or material being used in any construction work on the premises where
such construction work is being done, for the period in which the particular
project is under construction, provided, however, that nothing contained herein
shall be deemed to enlarge upon or permit any use for any property within the
city other than those already provided by the Zoning Code and Map of the city.
(Ord. 27-79, passed 3-19-1979; Ord. 24-86, passed 2-18-1986)
§ 660.08  OPEN BURNING.
   (A)   (1)   Definitions.  As used in this section:
         “Agricultural waste.” Any waste material generated by crop,
horticultural, or livestock production practices, and includes such items as
woody debris and plant matter from stream flooding, bags, cartons, structural
materials, and landscape wastes that are generated in agricultural activities,
but does not include land clearing waste; buildings (including dismantled/
fallen barns); garbage; dead animals; animal waste; motor vehicles and parts
thereof; nor economic poisons and containers thereof, unless the manufacturer
has identified open burning as a safe disposal procedure.
         “Air curtain burner.” An engineered apparatus consisting of a
motorized high-velocity fan and an air distribution system designed to aid in
the efficient combustion of materials placed in a manufactured steel structure
and for which a permit-to-install has been obtained as required in O.A.C.
Chapter 3745-31 and a permit-to-operate has been obtained as required in O.A.C.
Chapter 3745-77.
         “Air curtain destructor.” An engineered apparatus consisting of a
motorized high-velocity fan and an air distribution system designed to aid in
the efficient combustion of materials placed in an adjacent pit. An air curtain
burner may be used in place of an air curtain destructor, but an air curtain
destructor may not be used in place of an air curtain burner.
         “Economic poisons.” Include but are not restricted to pesticides such
as insecticides, fungicides, rodenticides, miticides, nematocides and
fumigants; herbicides; seed disinfectants; and defoliants.
         “Emergency burning.” The burning of clean wood waste or deceased
animals caused by a natural disaster or an uncontrolled event such as the
following:
            1.   A tornado.
            2.   High winds.
            3.   An earthquake.
            4.   An explosion.
            5.   A flood.
            6.   A hail storm, a rain storm, or an ice storm.
         “Garbage.” Any waste material resulting from the handling, processing,
preparation, cooking and consumption of food or food products.
         “Inhabited building.” Any inhabited private dwelling house and any
public structure which may be used as a place of resort, assembly, education,
entertainment, lodging, trade, manufacture, repair, storage, traffic, or
occupancy by the public. Examples would include, but are not limited to,
highway rest stops, restaurants, motels, hotels and gas stations.
         “Land clearing waste.” Plant waste material which is removed from
land, including plant waste material removed from stream banks during projects
involving more than one property owner, for the purpose of rendering the land
useful for residential, commercial, or industrial development. Land clearing
waste also includes the plant waste material generated during the clearing of
land for new agricultural development.
         “Landscape waste.” Any plant waste material, except garbage, including
trees, tree trimmings, branches, stumps, brush, weeds, leaves, grass,
shrubbery, yard trimmings, and crop residues.
         “Ohio EPA.” The Ohio Environmental Protection Agency Director or
agencies delegated authority by the Director of the Ohio Environmental
Protection Agency pursuant to R.C. § 3704.03 or the Chief of any Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency District Office.
         “Open burning.” The burning of any materials wherein air contaminants
resulting from combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without
passing through a stack or chimney. Open burning includes the burning of any
refuse or salvageable material in any device not subject to or designed
specifically to comply with the requirements of O.A.C. 3745-17-09 or O.A.C.
3745-17-10.
         “Residential waste.” Any waste material, including landscape waste,
generated on the property of a one-, two- or three-family residence as a result
of residential activities, but not including garbage, rubber, grease, asphalt,
liquid petroleum products, or plastics.
         “Restricted area.” The area within the boundary of the municipality,
plus a zone extending 1,000 feet beyond the boundaries of a municipality having
a population of 1,000 to 10,000 persons and a zone extending one mile beyond
any municipality having a population of 10,000 persons or more according to the
latest federal census.
         “Unrestricted area.” All areas outside the boundaries of a restricted
area as defined in this section.
      (2)   Referenced materials. This section includes references to certain
matter or materials. The text of the referenced materials is not included in
the legislation contained in this section. Information on the availability of
the referenced materials as well as the date of, and/or the particular edition
or version of the material is included in this legislation. For materials
subject to change, only the specific versions specified in this legislation are
referenced. Material is referenced as it exists on the effective date of this
legislation. Except for subsequent annual publication of existing (unmodified)
Code of Federal Regulation compilations, any amendment or revision to a
referenced document is not applicable unless and until this section has been
amended to specify the new dates.
         (a)   Availability. The referenced materials are available as follows:
            1.   Clean Air Act. Information and copies may be obtained by
writing to: Superintendent of Documents, Attn: New Orders, PO Box 371954,
Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954. The full text of the act as amended in 1990 is also
available in electronic format at www.epa.gov/oar/caa/. A copy of the act is
also available for inspection and use at most public libraries and the State
Library of Ohio.
            2.   Code of Federal Regulations (C.F.R.). Information and copies
may be obtained by writing to: Superintendent of Documents, Attn: New Orders,
PO Box 371954, Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954. The full text of the C.F.R. is also
available in electronic format at http://www.ecfr.gov. The C.F.R. compilations
are also available for inspection and use at most public libraries and the
State Library of Ohio.
            3.   National Fire Protection Association. Information on the
National Fire Protection Association codes may be obtained by contacting the
Association at 1 Batterymarch Park, Quincy, Massachusetts 02169-7471, 617-770-
3000. Codes may be ordered at www.nfpa.org/catalog/home/index.asp. Copies of
the code exist or are available at most public libraries and the State Library
of Ohio.
         (b)   Referenced materials.
            1.   40 C.F.R. § 60.2974: “Am I required to apply for and obtain a
title V operating permit for my air curtain incinerator that burns only wood
waste, clean lumber, and yard waste?” as published in the July 1, 2012 Code of
Federal Regulations.
            2.   40 C.F.R. § 60.3069: “Am I required to apply for and obtain a
title V operating permit for my air curtain incinerator that burns only wood
waste, clean lumber, and yard waste?” as published in the July 1, 2012 Code of
Federal Regulations.
            3.   NFPA publication 1403: “Standard on Live Fire Training
Evolutions, Chapter 4, Acquired Structures” published April 30, 2007.
            4.   Section 129 of the Clean Air Act, contained in 42 U.S.C. §
7429: “Solid waste combustion” published January 2, 2006 in Supplement V of the
2000 Edition of the United States Code.
(O.A.C. 3745-19-01)
   (B)   Relation to Other Laws.
      (1)   Notwithstanding any provision in O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19, no open
burning shall be conducted in an area where an air alert, warning or emergency
under O.A.C. Chapter 3745-25 is in effect.
      (2)   No provisions of O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19 permitting open burning,
and no permission to open burn granted by the Ohio EPA, shall exempt any person
from compliance with any section of the Ohio Revised Code, or any regulation of
any state department, or any local ordinance or regulation dealing with open
burning.
(O.A.C. 3745-19-02)
   (C)   Open Burning in Restricted Areas.
      (1)   No person or property owner shall cause or allow open burning in a
restricted area except as provided in divisions (C)(2) to (C)(4) of this
section or in Ohio R.C. 3704.11.
      (2)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes without
notification to or permission from the Ohio EPA:
         (a)   Heating tar, welding, acetylene torches, highway safety flares,
heating for warmth of outdoor workers and strikers, smudge pots and similar
occupational needs.
         (b)   Bonfires, campfires and outdoor fireplace equipment, whether for
cooking food for human consumption, pleasure, religious, ceremonial, warmth,
recreational, or similar purposes, if the following conditions are met:
            1.   They are fueled with clean seasoned firewood, natural gas or
equivalent, or any clean burning fuel with emissions that are equivalent to or
lower than those created from the burning of seasoned firewood;
            2.   They are not used for waste disposal purposes; and
            3.   They shall have a total fuel area of three feet or less in
diameter and two feet or less in height.
         (c)   Disposal of hazardous explosive materials, military munitions or
explosive devices that require immediate action to prevent endangerment of
human health, public safety, property or the environment and that are excluded
from the requirement to obtain a hazardous waste permit pursuant to O.A.C.
3745-50-45(D)(1)(d).
         (d)   Recognized training in the use of fire extinguishers for
commercial or industrial fire prevention.
         (e)   Fires set at the direction of federal, state, and local law
enforcement officials for the purpose of destruction of cannabis sativa
(marijuana) plant vegetation, processed marijuana material and/or other drugs
seized by federal, state, or local law enforcement officials.
         (f)   Fires allowed by divisions (C)(2)(a), (C)(2)(b), and (C)(2)(d)
of this section shall not be used for waste disposal purposes and shall be of
minimum size sufficient for their intended purpose; the fuel shall be chosen to
minimize the generation and emission of air contaminants.
      (3)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes with prior
notification to the Ohio EPA in accordance with division (D)(2) of this
section:
         (a)   Prevention or control of disease or pests, with written or
verbal verification to the Ohio EPA from the Ohio Department of Health or local
health department, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, cooperative
extension service, Ohio Department of Agriculture or U.S. Department of
Agriculture, that open burning is the only appropriate disposal method.
         (b)   Bonfires or campfires used for ceremonial purposes that do not
meet the requirements of division (C)(2)(b) of this section, provided the
following conditions are met:
            1.   They have a total fuel area no greater than five feet in
diameter by five feet in height and burn no longer than three hours;
            2.   They are not used for waste disposal purposes; and
            3.   They are fueled with clean seasoned firewood, natural gas or
equivalent, or any clean burning fuel with emissions that are equivalent to or
lower than those created from the burning of seasoned firewood.
         (c)   Disposal of agricultural waste generated on the premises if the
following conditions are observed:
            1.   The fire is set only when atmospheric conditions will readily
dissipate contaminants;
            2.   The fire does not create a visibility hazard on the roadways,
railroad tracks, or air fields;
            3.   The fire is located at a point on the premises no less than
1,000 feet from any inhabited building not located on said premises;
            4.   The wastes are stacked and dried to provide the best
practicable condition for efficient burning; and
            5.   No materials are burned which contain rubber, grease, asphalt,
liquid petroleum products, plastics or building materials.
      (4)   Open burning shall be allowed for the following purposes upon
receipt of written permission from the Ohio EPA, in accordance with division
(D)(1) of this section, provided that any conditions specified in the
permission are followed:
         (a)   Disposal of ignitable or explosive materials where the Ohio EPA
determines that there is no practical alternate method of disposal, excluding
those materials identified in division (C)(2)(c) of this section;
         (b)   Instruction in methods of fire fighting or for research in the
control of fires as recognized by the State Fire Marshal Division of the Ohio
Department of Commerce and the guidelines set forth in the National Fire
Protection Association’s (NFPA) publication 1403, Standard on Live Fire
Training Evolutions, Chapter 4, Acquired Structures, provided that the
application required in division (D)(1)(a) of this section is submitted by the
commercial or public entity responsible for the instruction;
         (c)   In emergency or other extraordinary circumstances for any
purpose determined to be necessary by the Director and performed as identified
in the appendix to O.A.C. 3745-19-03. If deemed necessary, the open burning may
be authorized with prior oral approval by the Director followed by the issuance
of a written permission to open burn within seven working days of the oral
approval;
         (d)   Recognized horticultural, silvicultural (forestry), range or
wildlife management practices; and
         (e)   Fires and/or pyrotechnic effects, for purposes other than waste
disposal, set as part of commercial film-making or video production activities
for motion pictures and television.
(O.A.C. 3745-19-03)
   (D)   Permission to Individuals and Notification to the Ohio EPA.
      (1)   Permission.
         (a)   An application for permission to open burn shall be submitted in
writing to Ohio EPA. The applicant shall allow Ohio EPA at least ten working
days to review the permit. Applicant may proceed with burn upon receipt of
written permission from Ohio EPA. Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays shall
not be considered working days. The application shall be in such form and
contain such information as required by the Ohio EPA.
         (b)   Except as provided in divisions (D)(1)(f) and (D)(1)(g) of this
section, such applications shall contain, as a minimum, information regarding:
            1.   The purpose of the proposed burning;
            2.   The quantity or acreage and the nature of the materials to be
burned;
            3.   The date or dates when such burning will take place;
            4.   The location of the burning site, including a map showing
distances to residences, populated areas, roadways, air fields, and other
pertinent landmarks; and
            5.   The methods or actions which will be taken to reduce the
emissions of air contaminants.
         (c)   Permission to open burn shall not be granted unless the
applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Ohio EPA that open burning is
necessary to the public interest; will be conducted in a time, place, and
manner as to minimize the emission of air contaminants, when atmospheric
conditions are appropriate; and will have no serious detrimental effect upon
adjacent properties or the occupants thereof. The Ohio EPA may impose such
conditions as may be necessary to accomplish the purpose of O.A.C. Chapter
3745-19.
         (d)   Except as provided in division (D)(1)(f) of this section,
permission to open burn must be obtained for each specific project. In
emergencies where public health or environmental quality will be seriously
threatened by delay while written permission is sought, the fire may be set
with oral permission of the Ohio EPA.
         (e)   Violations of any of the conditions set forth by the Ohio EPA in
granting permission to open burn shall be grounds for revocation of such
permission and refusal to grant future permission, as well as for the
imposition of other sanctions provided by law.
         (f)   The Ohio Department of Commerce, Division of State Fire Marshal,
may request permission to open burn on an annual basis for the purpose of
training firefighters on pre-flashover conditions using the Ohio Fire Academy’s
mobile training laboratory at either the academy or at other training sites in
Ohio. The annual application required pursuant to division (D)(1)(a) of this
section shall contain information as required in division (D)(1)(b) of this
section, except the information required in divisions (D)(1)(b)3. and (D)(1)
(b)4. of this section need not be provided unless it is available at the time
of submittal of the application. The Academy shall contact the appropriate Ohio
EPA District Office or local air agency at least five working days before each
training session of the date or dates when the training session will take place
and its location. Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays shall not be considered
a working day.
         (g)   For open burning defined under division  (C)(4)(b) of this
section and O.A.C. 3745-19-04(C)(2), permission to open burn shall not be
granted unless the applicant provides proof of written notice of intent to
demolish received by the appropriate Ohio EPA field office in accordance with
O.A.C. 3745-20-03.
      (2)   Notification.
         (a)   Notification shall be submitted in writing at least ten working
days before the fire is to be set. Saturday, Sunday, and legal holidays shall
not be considered a working day. It shall be in such form and contain such
information as shall be required by the Ohio EPA.
         (b)   Such notification shall inform the Ohio EPA regarding:
            1.   The purpose of the proposed burning;
            2.   The nature and quantities of materials to be burned;
            3.   The date or dates when such burning will take place; and
            4.   The location of the burning site.
         (c)   The Ohio EPA, after receiving notification, may determine that
the open burning is not allowed under O.A.C. Chapter 3745-19 and the Ohio EPA
shall notify the applicant to this effect.
(O.A.C. 3745-19-05)
   (E)   Penalty.  Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree.  A separate offense shall be
deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues.
In addition to the penalty provided in §
202.99, the offender shall be required to pay the cost of proper disposal of
the materials burned. The cost of proper disposal of the materials burned shall
be the amount it would have cost to dispose of the materials in a manner that
is consistent with the air, water and solid waste laws, ordinances and
regulations of the municipality and the state.
§ 660.085  BURNING OF HAZARDOUS WASTE.
   No person shall burn hazardous waste, as defined in Ohio R.C. 3734.01, in
the city.
(Ord. 89-55, passed 8-15-1989)
§ 660.09  BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS.
   (A)   No person shall abandon or knowingly permit to remain on public or
private property, any excavation, well, cesspool or structure which is in the
process of construction, reconstruction, repair or alteration unless the same
is adequately protected by suitable barricades and guarded by warning devices
or lights at night so that the condition will not reasonably prove dangerous to
life or limb.
   (B)   No person shall destroy, remove, damage or extinguish any barricade or
warning light that is placed for the protection of the public so as to prevent
injury to life or limb.
   (C)   Any owner or agent in control of a premises upon which a basement,
cellar, well or cistern has been abandoned due to demolition, failure to build
or any other reason shall cause the same to be filled to the ground surface
with rock, gravel, earth or other suitable material.
   (D)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  A separate offense shall be deemed committed
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. The penalty shall
be as provided in §
202.99.
§ 660.10  SIDEWALK OBSTRUCTIONS; DAMAGE OR INJURY.
   (A)   No person shall place or knowingly drop upon any part of a sidewalk or
playground any tacks, bottles, wire, glass, nails or other articles which may
damage property of another or injure any person or animal traveling along or
upon such sidewalk or playground.
   (B)   No person shall walk on, or allow any animal upon, or injure or deface
in any way, any soft or newly laid sidewalk pavement.
   (C)   No person shall place, deposit or maintain any merchandise, goods,
material or equipment upon any sidewalk so as to obstruct pedestrian traffic
thereon except for such reasonable time as may be actually necessary for the
delivery or pickup of such articles. In no case shall the obstruction remain on
such sidewalk for more than one hour.
   (D)   No person shall unload upon, or transport any heavy merchandise,
goods, material or equipment over or across any sidewalk or curb without first
placing some sufficient protection over the pavement to protect against damage
or injury.
   (E)   No person shall allow any cellar or trap door, coal chute or elevator
or lift opening in any sidewalk to remain open without providing suitable
safeguards to protect and warn pedestrian traffic of the dangerous conditions.
   (F)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the fist degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
each day during or on which a violation occurs or continues. The penalty shall
be as provided in §
202.99.
§ 660.11  NOTICE TO FILL LOTS, REMOVE PUTRID SUBSTANCES.
   (A)   No person shall fail to comply with the following requirements within
the lawful time after service or publication of the notice or resolution is
made as required by law:  to fill or drain any lot or land or remove all putrid
substances therefrom, or remove all obstructions from culverts, covered drains
or natural watercourses as provided in Ohio R.C. 715.47.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree. A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
§ 660.12  DEPOSITING POISON.
   No person shall leave or deposit poison or a substance containing poison in
a common street, alley, lane or thoroughfare or in a yard or enclosure occupied
by another.
§ 660.13  POLYCHLORINATED BIPHENYLS (PCBs).
   (A)   As used in this section, “person” includes all persons, natural and
artificial, and includes but is not limited to private corporations, public
utilities, partners, principals, agents and employees.
   (B)   No person shall introduce or install within the city an electrical
transformer or capacitor containing or utilizing polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCBs) in a concentration of one part per million or greater.
   (C)   Within 45 days of the enactment of this section, all persons who own,
lease, operate or maintain within the city one or more electrical transformers
or capacitors containing or utilizing polychlorinated biphenyls in a
concentration of one part per million or greater shall conduct a survey thereof
and shall submit to the Director of Public Safety a written itemized report
containing the following information: the exact location of each such
transformer or capacitor; the date of original installation of each; the
projected useful life of each at the time of installation; and the history of
all repairs made to each.
   (D)   All electrical transformers or capacitors containing or utilizing
polychlorinated biphenyls in a concentration of one part per million or greater
and already located within the city shall be removed as soon as reasonably
possible and, in any event, on or before December 31, 1985.
   (E)   Within thirty days of the date of filing a report pursuant to division
(C) of this section, all persons who own, lease, operate or maintain within the
city one or more electrical transformers or capacitors containing or utilizing
polychlorinated biphenyls in a concentration of one part per million or greater
shall submit a second written report to the Director of Public Safety detailing
the measures which such person will take to comply with division (D) of this
section.
   (F)   All persons who own, lease, operate or maintain within the city one or
more electrical transformers or capacitors containing or utilizing
polychlorinated biphenyls in a concentration of one part per million or greater
shall, in the daily operation thereof, proceed as follows:
      (1)   Whenever a leak or discharge of any polychlorinated biphenyls is
suspected or reported at any location within the city, the Director of Public
Safety and the Fire Chief shall immediately be notified in person or by
telephone.
      (2)   Any such leaking or discharging electrical transformer or capacitor
shall immediately and forever be removed from the city.
      (3)   All such leaking and discharging of polychlorinated biphenyls shall
immediately be properly disposed of, under supervision of the Fire Chief, so
that upon completion no trace of polychlorinated biphenyls at a level of one
part per million or greater can be detected in the surrounding environment.
   (G)   The Director of Law, upon the request of the Director of Public
Safety, is hereby authorized to bring a civil action to enforce this section.
   (H)   Whoever violates division (B) or (D) of this section shall be fined
not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 for each offense.  Each transformer and
capacitor in violation shall be deemed a separate and distinct offense, and a
separate and distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day that a
violation continues.
   (I)   Whoever violates division (C) or (E) of this section shall be fined
not less than $100 nor more than $1,000 for each offense.  A separate and
distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day that a violation continues.
   (J)   Whoever violates division (F) of this section shall be subject to the
penalty provided in §
202.99.
(Ord. 73-84, passed 10-15-1984)
§ 660.14  SMOKING IN PLACES OF PUBLIC ASSEMBLY.
   (A)   As used in this section, “place of public assembly” means:
      (1)   Enclosed theaters, except the lobby; opera houses; auditoriums;
classrooms; elevators; rooms in which persons are confined as a matter of
health care, including but not limited to a hospital room and a room in a
residential care facility serving as the residence of a person living in such
residential care facility.
      (2)   All buildings and other enclosed structures owned by the state, its
agencies, or political subdivisions, including but not limited to hospitals and
state institutions for the mentally ill and persons with intellectual
disabilities; university and college buildings, except rooms within those
buildings used primarily as the residences of students or other persons
affiliated with the university or college; office buildings; libraries;
museums; and vehicles used in public transportation.  That portion of a
building or other enclosed structure that is owned by the state, a state
agency, or a political subdivision, and that is used primarily as a food
service establishment, is not a place of public assembly.
      (3)   Each portion of a building or enclosed structure that is not
included in division (A)(1) or (A)(2) of this section is a place of public
assembly if it has a seating capacity of 50 or more persons and is available to
the public.  Restaurants, food service establishments, dining rooms, cafes,
cafeterias, or other rooms used primarily for the service of food, as well as
bowling alleys and places licensed by the Ohio Division of Liquor Control to
sell intoxicating beverages for consumption on the premises, are not places of
public assembly.
   (B)   For the purpose of separating persons who smoke from persons who do
not smoke for the comfort and health of persons not smoking, in every place of
public assembly there shall be an area where smoking is not permitted, which
shall be designated a no smoking area, provided that not more than one-half of
the rooms in any health care facility in which persons are confined as a matter
of health care may be designated as smoking areas in their entirety.  The
designation shall be made before the place of public assembly is made available
to the public. In places included in division (A)(1) of this section, the local
fire authority having jurisdiction shall designate the no smoking area.  In
places included in division (A)(2) of this section that are owned by the state
or its agencies, the Ohio Director of Administrative Services shall designate
the area, and if the place is owned by a political subdivision, its legislative
authority shall designate an officer who shall designate the area.  In places
included in division (A)(3) of this section, the person having control of the
operations of the place of public assembly shall designate the no smoking
area.  In places included in division (A)(2) of this section which are also
included in division (A)(1) of this section, the officer who has authority to
designate the area in places in division (A)(2) of this section shall designate
the no smoking area.  A no smoking area may include the entire place of public
assembly.  Designations shall be made by the placement of signs that are
clearly visible and that state “no smoking.”  No person shall remove signs from
areas designated as no smoking areas.
   (C)   This section does not affect or modify the prohibition contained in
Ohio R.C. 3313.751(B).
   (D)   No person shall smoke in any area designated as a no smoking area in
accordance with division (B) of this section.
(ORC 3791.031)
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first
degree.  The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
§ 660.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 666:  SEX RELATED OFFENSES
Section
666.01   Definitions
666.02   Unlawful sexual conduct with a minor
666.03   Sexual imposition
666.04   Public indecency
666.05   Voyeurism
666.06   Polygraph examinations for victims: restrictions on use
666.07   Procuring
666.08   Soliciting
666.085   Loitering to engage in solicitation
666.09   Prostitution
666.10   Rules of evidence
666.11   Disseminating matter harmful to juveniles
666.115   Displaying matter harmful to juveniles
666.13   Deception to obtain matter harmful to juveniles
666.14   Presumptions; notice
666.15   Declaratory judgment
666.16   Injunction; abatement of nuisance
666.17   Unlawful operation of viewing booths depicting sexual conduct
666.18   Juveniles on the premises of adult entertainment establishments
prohibited
666.19   Sexually oriented businesses; illegal operation and activity
666.20   Unlawful advertising of massage
666.21   Nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images
666.98   Sentencing for sexually oriented offenses; sexual predators;
registration
666.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Criminal child enticement, see §
636.08
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Indecent exposure of waiters, waitresses, employees, etc., in beverage and
food establishments, see §
810.01
   Spreading contagion, see §
660.02
Statutory reference:
   Assistance to victims of sexual assault, see Ohio R.C. 2907.28, 2907.30
   Child victim, disposition of, see Ohio R.C. 2945.481
   Cost incurred in medical examination or test, see Ohio R.C. 2907.28
   Examination and treatment for venereal disease; HIV tests, see Ohio R.C.
2907.27
   Power to restrain houses of ill fame, see Ohio R.C. 715.52
   Registration of sex offenders in cities and counties, see Ohio R.C. 2950.01
et seq.
§ 666.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   “Harmful to juveniles.”  That quality of any material or performance
describing or representing nudity, sexual conduct, sexual excitement, or sado-
masochistic abuse in any form to which all of the following apply:
      (1)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole, appeals to
the prurient interest of juveniles in sex.
      (2)   The material or performance is patently offensive to prevailing
standards in the adult community as a whole with respect to what is suitable
for juveniles.
      (3)   The material or performance, when considered as a whole, lacks
serious literary, artistic, political, and scientific value for juveniles.
   “Juvenile.”  Any unmarried person under 18 years of age.
   “Material.”  Any book, magazine, newspaper, pamphlet, poster, print,
picture, figure, image, description, motion picture film, video cassette, laser
disc, phonograph record, cassette tape, compact disc, or other tangible thing
capable of arousing interest through sight, sound, or touch and includes an
image or text appearing on a computer monitor, television screen, liquid
crystal display, or similar display device or an image or text recorded on a
computer hard disk, computer floppy disk, compact disk, magnetic tape, or
similar data storage device.
   “Mental health client or patient.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
2305.51.
   “Mental health professional.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2305.115.
   “Minor.”  A person under the age of 18.
   “Nudity.”  The showing, representation, or depiction of human male or female
genitals, pubic area, or buttocks with less than a full, opaque covering, or of
a female breast with less than a full, opaque covering of any portion thereof
below the top of the nipple, or of covered male genitals in a discernibly
turgid state.
   “Obscene.”  When considered as a whole, and judged with reference to
ordinary adults or, if it is designed for sexual deviates or other specially
susceptible group, judged with reference to that group, any material or
performance is “obscene” if any of the following apply:
      (1)   Its dominant appeal is to prurient interest.
      (2)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting
sexual activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, or nudity in a way that tends
to represent human beings as mere objects of sexual appetite.
      (3)   Its dominant tendency is to arouse lust by displaying or depicting
bestiality or extreme or bizarre violence, cruelty, or brutality.
      (4)   Its dominant tendency is to appeal to scatological interest by
displaying or depicting human bodily functions of elimination in a way that
inspires disgust or revulsion in persons with ordinary sensibilities, without
serving any genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral, or artistic
purpose.
      (5)   It contains a series of displays or descriptions of sexual
activity, masturbation, sexual excitement, nudity, bestiality, extreme or
bizarre violence, cruelty, or brutality, or human bodily functions of
elimination, the cumulative effect of which is a dominant tendency to appeal to
prurient or scatological interest, when the appeal to such an interest is
primarily for its own sake or for commercial exploitation, rather than
primarily for a genuine scientific, educational, sociological, moral, or
artistic purpose.
   “Performance.”  Any motion picture, preview, trailer, play, show, skit,
dance, or other exhibition performed before an audience.
   “Prostitute.”  A male or female who promiscuously engages in sexual activity
for hire, regardless of whether the hire is paid to the prostitute or to
another.
   “Sado-masochistic abuse.” Flagellation or torture by or upon a person or the
condition of being fettered, bound, or otherwise physically restrained.
   “Sexual activity.”  Sexual conduct or sexual contact, or both.
   “Sexual conduct.”  Vaginal intercourse between a male and female; anal
intercourse, fellatio, and cunnilingus between persons regardless of sex; and,
without privilege to do so, the insertion, however slight, of any part of the
body or any instrument, apparatus, or other object into the vaginal or anal
opening of another.  Penetration, however slight, is sufficient to complete
vaginal or anal intercourse.
   “Sexual contact.”  Any touching of an erogenous zone of another, including
without limitation the thigh, genitals, buttock, pubic region, or, if the
person is a female, a breast, for the purpose of sexually arousing or
gratifying either person.
   “Sexual excitement.”  The condition of human male or female genitals when in
a state of sexual stimulation or arousal.
   “Spouse.”  A person married to an offender at the time of an alleged
offense, except that such person shall not be considered the spouse when any of
the following apply:
      (1)   When the parties have entered into a written separation agreement
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3103.06.
      (2)   When an action is pending between the parties for annulment,
divorce, dissolution of marriage, or legal separation.
      (3)   In the case of an action for legal separation, after the effective
date of the judgment for legal separation.
(ORC 2907.01)
§ 666.02  UNLAWFUL SEXUAL CONDUCT WITH A MINOR.
   (A)   No person who is 18 years of age or older shall engage in sexual
conduct with another who is not the spouse of the offender, when the offender
knows the other person is 13 years of age or older but less than 16 years of
age, or the offender is reckless in that regard.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful sexual conduct
with a minor.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(2), unlawful sexual
conduct with a minor is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in division (B)(3) of this section, if
the offender is less than four years older than the other person, unlawful
sexual conduct with a minor is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
      (3)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of Ohio R.C. 2907.02, 2907.03 or 2907.04, or any substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, or a violation of former Ohio R.C. 2907.12, or
any substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, unlawful sexual conduct with
a minor is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2907.04)
§ 666.03  SEXUAL IMPOSITION.
   (A)   No person shall have sexual contact with another, not the spouse of
the offender; cause another, not the spouse of the offender, to have sexual
contact with the offender; or cause two or more other persons to have sexual
contact when any of the following applies:
      (1)   The offender knows that the sexual contact is offensive to the
other person, or one of the other persons, or is reckless in that regard.
      (2)   The offender knows that the other person’s, or one of the other
person’s ability to appraise the nature of or control the offender’s or
touching person’s conduct is substantially impaired.
      (3)   The offender knows that the other person, or one of the other
persons, submits because of being unaware of the sexual contact.
      (4)   The other person, or one of the other persons, is 13 years of age
or older but less than 16 years of age, whether or not the offender knows the
age of the person, and the offender is at least 18 years of age and four or
more years older than the other person.
      (5)   The offender is a mental health professional, the other person or
one of the other persons is a mental health client or patient of the offender,
and the offender induces the other person who is the client or patient to
submit by falsely representing to the other person who is the client or patient
that the sexual contact is necessary for mental health treatment purposes.
   (B)   No person shall be convicted of a violation of this section solely
upon the victim’s testimony unsupported by other evidence.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of sexual imposition, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
(ORC 2907.06)
Statutory reference:
   Gross sexual imposition, felony, see Ohio R.C. 2907.05
   Notice to licensing board or agency upon indictment, conviction or guilty
plea of mental health professional, see Ohio R.C. 2907.17 and 2907.18
§ 666.04  PUBLIC INDECENCY.
   (A)   No person shall recklessly do any of the following, under
circumstances in which the person’s conduct is likely to be viewed by and
affront others who are in the person’s physical proximity and who are not
members of the person’s household:
      (1)   Expose the person’s private parts.
      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct or masturbation.
      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be
sexual conduct or masturbation.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly do any of the following, under circumstances
in which the person’s conduct is likely to be viewed by and affront another
person who is in the person’s physical proximity, who is a minor, and who is
not the spouse of the offender:
      (1)   Engage in masturbation.
      (2)   Engage in sexual conduct.
      (3)   Engage in conduct that to an ordinary observer would appear to be
sexual conduct or masturbation.
      (4)   Expose the person’s private parts with the purpose of personal
sexual arousal or gratification or to lure the minor into sexual activity.
   (C)   (1)   If either of the following applies, the court may determine at
the time of sentencing whether to classify the offender as a tier I sex
offender/child-victim offender for a violation of division (B)(4) of this
section:
         (a)   The offender is less than ten years older than the other person.
         (b)   The offender is ten or more years older than the other person
and the offender has not previously been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any
violation of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or
municipal ordinance.
      (2)   If the offender is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (B)(4) of this section, is ten or more years older than the other
person, and previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to any violation
of this section or any substantially equivalent state law or municipal
ordinance, the court shall issue an order at the time of sentencing that
classifies the offender as a tier I sex offender/child-victim offender subject
to registration under R.C. §§ 2950.04, 2950.041, 2950.05, and 2950.06.
(R.C. § 2907.09)
   (D)   A mother is entitled to breast-feed her baby in any location of a
place of public accommodation, as defined in Ohio R.C. 4112.01, wherein the
mother otherwise is permitted.
(ORC 3781.55)
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of public indecency, a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
§ 666.05  VOYEURISM.
   (A)   No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying himself
or herself, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade the
privacy of another, to spy or eavesdrop upon another.
   (B)   No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying himself
or herself, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade the
privacy of another to videotape, film, photograph, or otherwise record the
other person in a state of nudity.
   (C)   No person, for the purpose of sexually arousing or gratifying himself
or herself, shall commit trespass or otherwise surreptitiously invade the
privacy of another to videotape, film, photograph, or otherwise record the
other person in a state of nudity if the other person is a minor.
   (D)   No person shall secretly or surreptitiously videotape, film,
photograph, or otherwise record another person under or through the clothing
being worn by that person for the purpose of viewing the body of, or the
undergarments worn by, that other person.
   (E)   As used in this section:
      “Babysitting care” means care provided for a child while the parents,
guardians, or legal custodians of the child are temporarily away.
      “Child day-care center,” “type A family day-care home” and “type B family
day-care home” have the same meanings as in Ohio R.C. 5104.01.
      “Institution of higher education” means a state institution of higher
education as defined in Ohio R.C. 3345.031, a private nonprofit college or
university located in this state that possesses a certificate of authorization
issued by the Ohio Board of Regents pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 1713, or a
school certified under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3332.
(ORC 2907.08)
   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of voyeurism.
      (1)   A violation of division (A), (B), (C) or (D) of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
§ 666.06  POLYGRAPH EXAMINATIONS FOR VICTIMS: RESTRICTIONS ON USE.
   (A)   (1)   A peace officer, prosecutor, or other public official shall not
ask or require a victim of an alleged sex offense to submit to a polygraph
examination as a condition for proceeding with the investigation of the alleged
sex offense.
      (2)   The refusal of the victim of an alleged sex offense to submit to a
polygraph examination shall not prevent the investigation of the alleged sex
offense, the filing of criminal charges with respect to the alleged sex
offense, or the prosecution of the alleged perpetrator of the alleged sex
offense.
   (B)   As used in this section:
      “Peace officer” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2921.51.
      “Polygraph examination” means any mechanical or electrical instrument or
device of any type used or allegedly used to examine, test, or question an
individual for the purpose of determining the individual’s truthfulness.
      “Prosecution” means the prosecution of criminal charges in a criminal
prosecution or the prosecution of a delinquent child complaint in a delinquency
proceeding.
      “Prosecutor” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2935.01.
      “Public official” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 117.01.
      “Sex offense” means a violation of any provision of §§
666.02 to
666.05 or Ohio R.C. 2907.02 to 2907.09.
(ORC 2907.10)
§ 666.07  PROCURING.
   (A)   No person, knowingly and for gain, shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Entice or solicit another to patronize a prostitute or brothel;
      (2)   Procure a prostitute for another to patronize, or take or direct
another at the other’s request to any place for the purpose of patronizing a
prostitute.
   (B)   No person, having authority or responsibility over the use of
premises, shall knowingly permit the premises to be used for the purpose of
engaging in sexual activity for hire.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of procuring. Except as
otherwise provided in this division, procuring is a misdemeanor of the first
degree. If the prostitute who is procured, patronized, or otherwise involved in
a violation of division (A)(2) of this section is under 18 years of age at the
time of the violation, regardless of whether the offender who violates division
(A)(2) of this section knows the prostitute’s age, or if a prostitute who
engages in sexual activity for hire in premises used in violation of division
(B) of this section is under 18 years of age at the time of the violation,
regardless of whether the offender who violates division (B) of this section
knows the prostitute’s age, procuring is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
(ORC 2907.23)
§ 666.08  SOLICITING.
   (A)   (1)   No person shall solicit another who is 18 years of age or older
to engage with the other person in sexual activity for hire.
      (2)   No person shall solicit another to engage with such other person in
sexual activity for hire if the other person is 16 or 17 years of age and the
offender knows that the other person is 16 or 17 years of age or is reckless in
that regard.
      (3)   No person shall solicit another to engage with such other person in
sexual activity for hire if either of the following applies:
         (a)   The other person is less than 16 years of age, whether or not
the offender knows the age of the other person.
         (b)   The other person is a person with a developmental disability and
the offender knows or has reasonable cause to believe the other person is a
person with a developmental disability.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of
soliciting, a misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as provided
in §
202.99.
      (2)   If a person is convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of
division (A) of this section or an attempt to commit a violation of division
(A) of this section and if the person, in committing or attempting to commit
the violation, was in, was on, or used a motor vehicle, the court, in addition
to or independent of all other penalties imposed for the violation, may impose
upon the offender a class six suspension of the person’s driver’s license,
commercial driver’s license, temporary instruction permit, probationary
license, or nonresident operating privilege from the range specified in Ohio
R.C. 4510.02(A)(6). In lieu of imposing upon the offender the class six
suspension, the court instead may require the offender to perform community
service for a number of hours determined by the court.
   (C)   As used in division (A) of this section:
      “Person with a developmental disability” has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 2905.32.
      “Sexual activity for hire” means an implicit or explicit agreement to
provide sexual activity in exchange for anything of value paid to the person
engaging in such sexual activity, to any person trafficking that person, or to
any person associated with either such person.
(ORC 2907.24(A), (D), (E))
Statutory reference:
   Offenders with knowledge that they test HIV positive, felony, see Ohio R.C.
2907.24(B)
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see Ohio R.C. 2907.27
§ 666.085  LOITERING TO ENGAGE IN SOLICITATION.
   (A)   No person, with purpose to solicit another to engage in sexual
activity for hire and while in or near a public place, shall do any of the
following:
      (1)   Beckon to, stop or attempt to stop another;
      (2)   Engage or attempt to engage another in conversation;
      (3)   Stop or attempt to stop the operator of a vehicle or approach a
stationary vehicle;
      (4)   If the offender is the operator of or a passenger in a vehicle,
stop, attempt to stop, beckon to, attempt to beckon to, or entice another to
approach or enter the vehicle of which the offender is the operator or in which
the offender is the passenger;
      (5)   Interfere with the free passage of another.
   (B)   As used in division (A) of this section:
      “Public place” means any of the following:
         (a)   A street, road, highway, thoroughfare, bikeway, walkway,
sidewalk, bridge, alley, alleyway, plaza, park, driveway, parking lot or
transportation facility.
         (b)   A doorway or entrance way to a building that fronts on a place
described in division (1)(a) of this definition.
         (c)   A place not described in division (1)(a) or (1)(b) of this
definition that is open to the public.
      “Vehicle” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4501.01.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of loitering to engage in
solicitation, a misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as
provided in §
202.99.
(ORC 2907.241)
Statutory reference:
   Offenders with knowledge that they test HIV positive, felony, see Ohio R.C.
2907.241(B)
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see Ohio R.C. 2907.27
§ 666.09  PROSTITUTION.
   (A)   No person shall engage in sexual activity for hire.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of prostitution, a misdemeanor
of the first degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
(ORC 2907.25)
Statutory reference:
   Offenders with knowledge that they test HIV positive, felony, see Ohio R.C.
2907.25(B)
   Testing offenders for venereal disease and AIDS, see Ohio R.C. 2907.27
§ 666.10  RULES OF EVIDENCE.
   (A)   In any case in which it is necessary to prove that a place is a
brothel, evidence as to the reputation of such place and as to the reputation
of the persons who inhabit or frequent it is admissible on the question of
whether such place is or is not a brothel.
   (B)   In any case in which it is necessary to prove that a person is a
prostitute, evidence as to the reputation of such person is admissible on the
question of whether such person is or is not a prostitute.
   (C)   In any prosecution for a violation of §§
666.07 to
666.09, proof of a prior conviction of the accused of any such offense or
substantially equivalent offense is admissible in support of the charge.
   (D)   The prohibition contained in Ohio R.C. 2317.02(D) against testimony by
a husband or wife concerning communications between them does not apply, and
the accused’s spouse may testify concerning any such communication in any of
the following cases:
      (1)   When the husband or wife is charged with a violation of §
666.07 and the spouse testifying was the prostitute involved in the offense or
the person who used the offender’s premises to engage in sexual activity for
hire;
      (2)   When the husband or wife is charged with a violation of §§
666.08 or
666.09.
(ORC 2907.26)
§ 666.11  DISSEMINATING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (A)   No person, with knowledge of its character or content, shall
recklessly do any of following:
      (1)   Directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit,
rent, or present to a juvenile any material or performance that is obscene or
harmful to juveniles;
      (2)   Offer or agree to sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide,
exhibit, rent, or present to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law
enforcement officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement
officers posing as juveniles any material or performance that is obscene or
harmful to juveniles;
      (3)   While in the physical proximity of the juvenile or law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile, allow any juvenile or law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile to review or peruse any material or view any live
performance that is harmful to juveniles.
   (B)   The following are affirmative defenses to a charge under this section
that involves material or a performance that is harmful to juveniles but not
obscene:
      (1)   The defendant is the parent, guardian, or spouse of the juvenile
involved.
      (2)   The juvenile involved, at the time of the conduct in question, was
accompanied by his or her parent or guardian who, with knowledge of its
character, consented to the material or performance being furnished or
presented to the juvenile.
      (3)   The juvenile exhibited to the defendant or his or her agent or
employee a draft card, driver’s license, birth record, marriage license, or
other official or apparently official document purporting to show that the
juvenile was 18 years of age or over or married, and the person to whom the
document was exhibited did not otherwise have reasonable cause to believe that
the juvenile was under the age of 18 and unmarried.
   (C)   (1)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section,
involving material or a performance that is obscene or harmful to juveniles,
that the material or performance was furnished or presented for a bona fide
medical, scientific, educational, governmental, judicial, or other proper
purpose, by a physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher,
librarian, clergy, prosecutor, judge, or other proper person.
      (2)   Except as provided in division (B)(3) of this section, mistake of
age is not a defense to a charge under this section.
   (D)   (1)   A person directly sells, delivers, furnishes, disseminates,
provides, exhibits, rents, or presents or directly offers or agrees to sell,
deliver, furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present material or a
performance to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement officer
posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles in violation of this section by means of an electronic method of
remotely transmitting information if the person knows or has reason to believe
that the person receiving the information is a juvenile or the group of persons
receiving the information are juveniles.
      (2)   A person remotely transmitting information by means of a method of
mass distribution does not directly sell, deliver, furnish, disseminate,
provide, exhibit, rent, or present or directly offer or agree to sell, deliver,
furnish, disseminate, provide, exhibit, rent, or present the material or
performance in question to a juvenile, a group of juveniles, a law enforcement
officer posing as a juvenile, or a group of law enforcement officers posing as
juveniles in violation of this section if either of the following applies:
         (a)   The person has inadequate information to know or have reason to
believe that a particular recipient of the information or offer is a juvenile.
         (b)   The method of mass distribution does not provide the person the
ability to prevent a particular recipient from receiving the information.
   (E)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of disseminating matter
harmful to juveniles.  If the material or performance involved is harmful to
juveniles except as otherwise provided in this division, a violation of this
section is a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the material or performance
involved is obscene, violation of this section is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
(ORC 2907.31)
§ 666.115  DISPLAYING MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (A)   No person who has custody, control, or supervision of a commercial
establishment, with knowledge of the character or content of the material
involved, shall display at the establishment any material that is harmful to
juveniles and that is open to view by juveniles as part of the invited general
public.
   (B)   It is not a violation of division (A) of this section if the material
in question is displayed by placing it behind “blinder racks” or similar
devices that cover at least the lower two-thirds of the material, if the
material in question is wrapped or placed behind the counter, or if the
material in question otherwise is covered or located so that the portion that
is harmful to juveniles is not open to the view of juveniles.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of displaying matter harmful
to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  Each day during which the
offender is in violation of this section constitutes a separate offense. The
penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
(ORC 2907.311)
§ 666.13  DECEPTION TO OBTAIN MATTER HARMFUL TO JUVENILES.
   (A)   No person, for the purpose of enabling a juvenile to obtain any
material or gain admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles,
shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Falsely represent that he or she is the parent, guardian, or spouse
of the juvenile.
      (2)   Furnish the juvenile with any identification or document purporting
to show that the juvenile is 18 years of age or over or married.
   (B)   No juvenile, for the purpose of obtaining any material or gaining
admission to any performance which is harmful to juveniles, shall do either of
the following:
      (1)   Falsely represent that he or she is 18 years of age or over or
married.
      (2)   Exhibit any identification or document purporting to show that he
or she is 18 years of age or over or married.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of deception to obtain matter
harmful to juveniles, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  A juvenile who
violates division (B) of this section shall be adjudged an unruly child, with
the disposition of the case as may be appropriate under Ohio R.C. Chapter 2151.
The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
(ORC 2907.33)
§ 666.14  PRESUMPTIONS; NOTICE.
   (A)   An owner or manager, or agent or employee of an owner or manager, of a
bookstore, newsstand, theater, or other commercial establishment engaged in
selling material or exhibiting performances, who, in the course of business
does any of the acts prohibited by §
666.11 is presumed to have knowledge of the character of the material or
performance involved if the owner, manager, or agent or employee of the owner
or manager has actual notice of the nature of such material or performance,
whether or not the owner, manager, or agent or employee of the owner or manager
has precise knowledge of its contents.
   (B)   Without limitation on the manner in which such notice may be given,
actual notice of the character of material or a performance may be given in
writing by the chief legal officer of the municipality.  Such notice,
regardless of the manner in which it is given, shall identify the sender,
identify the material or performance involved, state whether it is obscene or
harmful to juveniles, and bear the date of such notice.
   (C)   Section 666.11 does not apply to a motion picture operator or
projectionist acting within the scope of employment as an employee of the owner
or manager of the theater or other place for the showing of motion pictures to
the general public, and having no managerial responsibility or financial
interest in the operator’s or projectionist’s place of employment, other than
wages.
   (D)   (1)   The provisions of §§
666.11,
666.115 and
666.13(A) do not apply to a person solely because the person provided access or
connection to or from an electronic method of remotely transferring information
not under that person’s control, including having provided capabilities that
are incidental to providing access or connection to or from the electronic
method of remotely transferring the information, and that do not include the
creation of the content of the material that is the subject of the access or
connection.
      (2)   Division (D)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
conspires with an entity actively involved in the creation or knowing
distribution of material in violation of §§
666.11,
666.115 or
666.13 or who knowingly advertises the availability of material of that nature.
      (3)   Division (D)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
provides access or connection to an electronic method of remotely transferring
information that is engaged in the violation of §§
666.11,
666.115 or
666.13 and that contain content that person has selected and introduced into
the electronic method of remotely transferring information or content over
which that person exercises editorial control.
   (E)   An employer is not guilty of a violation of §§
666.11,
666.115 or
666.15 based on the actions of an employee or agent of the employer unless the
employee’s or agent’s conduct is within the scope of the employee’s or agent’s
employment or agency, and the employer does either of the following:
      (1)   With knowledge of the employee’s or agent’s conduct, the employer
authorizes or ratifies the conduct.
      (2)   The employer recklessly disregards the employee’s or agent’s
conduct.
   (F)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under §§
666.11 or
666.115 as the section applies to an image transmitted through the internet or
other electronic method of remotely transmitting information that the person
charged with violating the section has taken, in good faith, reasonable,
effective, and appropriate actions under the circumstances to restrict or
prevent access by juveniles to material that is harmful to juveniles, including
any method that is feasible under available technology.
(ORC 2907.35)
§ 666.15  DECLARATORY JUDGMENT.
   (A)   Without limitation on the persons otherwise entitled to bring an
action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 2721, involving
the same issue, the following persons have standing to bring a declaratory
judgment action to determine whether particular materials or performances are
obscene or harmful to juveniles:
      (1)   The chief legal officer of the municipality if and when there is
reasonable cause to believe that Ohio R.C. 2907.31 or Ohio R.C. 2907.32, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, is being or is about to be
violated;
      (2)   Any person who, pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2907.35(B) or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, has received notice in writing from the chief
legal officer stating that particular materials or performances are obscene or
harmful to juveniles.
   (B)   Any party to an action for a declaratory judgment pursuant to division
(A) of this section is entitled, upon the party’s request, to trial on the
merits within five days after joinder of the issues, and the court shall render
judgment within five days after trial is concluded.
   (C)   An action for a declaratory judgement pursuant to division (A) of this
section shall not be brought during the pendency of any civil action or
criminal prosecution when the character of the particular materials or
performances involved is at issue in the pending case, and either of the
following applies:
      (1)   Either of the parties to the action for a declaratory judgment is a
party to the pending case;
      (2)   A judgment in the pending case will necessarily constitute res
judicata as to the character of the materials or performances involved.
   (D)   A civil action or criminal prosecution in which the character of
particular materials or performances is at issue, brought during the pendency
of an action for a declaratory judgment involving the same issue, shall be
stayed during the pendency of the action for a declaratory judgment.
   (E)   The fact that a violation of Ohio R.C. 2907.31 or Ohio R.C. 2907.32,
or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, occurs prior to a judicial
determination of the character of the material or performance involved in the
violation does not relieve the offender of criminal liability for the
violation, even though prosecution may be stayed pending the judicial
determination.
(ORC 2907.36)
§ 666.16  INJUNCTION; ABATEMENT OF NUISANCE.
   (A)   Where it appears that Ohio R.C. 2907.31 or Ohio R.C. 2907.32, or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, is being or is about to be
violated, the chief legal officer of the municipality may bring an action to
enjoin the violation.  The defendant, upon his or her request, is entitled to
trial on the merits within five days after the joinder of the issues, and the
court shall render judgment within five days after the trial is concluded.
   (B)   Premises used or occupied for repeated violations of Ohio R.C. 2907.31
or Ohio R.C. 2907.32, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance,
constitute a nuisance subject to abatement pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 3767.
(ORC 2907.37)
§ 666.17  UNLAWFUL OPERATION OF VIEWING BOOTHS DEPICTING SEXUAL CONDUCT.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      “Commercial establishment” means an entity that is open to the public and
to which either of the following applies:
         (a)   It has a substantial or significant portion of its stock in
trade of the sale, rental, or viewing of visual materials or performances
depicting sexual conduct.
         (b)   It has as a principal business purpose the sale, rental, or
viewing of visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct.
      “Visual materials or performances” means films, videos, CD-ROM discs,
streaming video, or other motion pictures.
   (B)   No person who has custody, control, or supervision of a commercial
establishment, with knowledge of the character of the visual material or
performance involved, shall knowingly permit the use of, or offer the use of,
viewing booths, stalls, or partitioned portions of a room located in the
commercial establishment for the purpose of viewing visual materials or
performances depicting sexual conduct unless both of the following apply:
      (1)   The inside of each booth, stall, or partitioned room is visible
from, and at least one side of each booth, stall, or partitioned room is open
to, a continuous and contiguous main aisle or hallway that is open to the
public areas of the commercial establishment and is not obscured by any
curtain, door, or other covering or enclosure.
      (2)   No booth, stall, or partitioned room is designed, constructed,
pandered, or allowed to be used for the purpose of encouraging or facilitating
nudity or sexual activity on the part of or between patrons or members of the
public, and no booth, stall, or partitioned room has any aperture, hole, or
opening for the purpose of encouraging or facilitating nudity or sexual
activity.
   (C)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under this section that
either of the following applies to the involved visual materials or
performances:
      (1)   The visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct are
disseminated or presented for a bona fide medical, scientific, educational,
religious, governmental, judicial, or other proper purpose and by or to a
physician, psychologist, sociologist, scientist, teacher, person pursuing bona
fide studies or research, librarian, member of the clergy, prosecutor, judge,
or other person having a proper interest in the visual materials or
performances.
      (2)   The visual materials or performances depicting sexual conduct,
taken as a whole, would be found by a reasonable person to have serious
literary, artistic, political, or scientific value or are presented or
disseminated in good faith for a serious literary, artistic, political, or
scientific purpose and are not pandered for their prurient appeal.
   (D)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of permitting unlawful
operation of viewing booths depicting sexual conduct, a misdemeanor of the
first degree.
(ORC 2907.38)
§ 666.18  JUVENILES ON THE PREMISES OF ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS
PROHIBITED.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      “Adult arcade” means any place to which the public is permitted or
invited in which coin-operated, slug-operated, or electronically, electrically,
or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, or
other image-producing devices are regularly maintained to show images to five
or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and in which the images so
displayed are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon matter
exhibiting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
      “Adult bookstore”, “adult novelty store”, or “adult video store”.
         (a)   Means a commercial establishment that, for any form of
consideration, has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock-in-
trade in, derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues from,
devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or
advertising to, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display
space for the sale or rental of any of the following:
            1.   Books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or
photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides, or
other visual representations, that are characterized by their emphasis upon the
exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas;
            2.   Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are designed for
use or marketed primarily for stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse of self or others.
         (b)   Includes a commercial establishment as defined in Ohio R.C.
2907.38. An establishment may have other principal business purposes that do
not involve the offering for sale, rental, or viewing of materials exhibiting
or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas and
still be categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty store, or adult video
store. The existence of other principal business purposes does not exempt an
establishment from being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty
store, or adult video store so long as one of its principal business purposes
is offering for sale or rental, for some form of consideration, such materials
that exhibit or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas.
      “Adult cabaret” means a nightclub, bar, juice bar, restaurant, bottle
club, or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages
are served, that regularly features any of the following:
         (a)   Persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity;
         (b)   Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities;
         (c)   Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or other
photographic reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by their
emphasis upon the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or
specified anatomical areas.
      “Adult entertainment” means the sale, rental, or exhibition, for any form
of consideration, of books, films, video cassettes, magazines, periodicals, or
live performances that are characterized by an emphasis on the exposure or
display of specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activity.
      “Adult entertainment establishment” means an adult arcade, adult
bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motion
picture theater, adult theater, nude or seminude model studio, or sexual
encounter establishment. An establishment in which a medical practitioner,
psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the
state engages in medically approved and recognized therapy, including, but not
limited to, massage therapy, as regulated pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4731.15, is not
an “adult entertainment establishment”.
      “Adult motion picture theater” means a commercial establishment where
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic
reproductions that are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon
the exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas are regularly shown for any form of consideration.
      “Adult theater” means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar
commercial establishment that, for any form of consideration, regularly
features persons who appear in a state of nudity or seminudity or live
performances that are characterized by their emphasis upon the exposure of
specified anatomical areas or specified sexual activities.
      “Distinguished or characterized by their emphasis upon” means the
dominant or principal character and theme of the object described by this
phrase. For instance, when the phrase refers to films “that are distinguished
or characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas”, the films so
described are those whose dominant or principal character and theme are the
exhibition or description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas.
      “Nude or seminude model studio” means any place where a person, who
regularly appears in a state of nudity or seminudity, is provided for money or
any other form of consideration to be observed, sketched, drawn, painted,
sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted by other persons. A modeling
class or studio is not a nude or seminude model studio and is not subject to
this chapter if it is operated in any of the following ways:
         (a)   By a college or university supported entirely or partly by
taxation;
         (b)   By a private college or university that maintains and operates
educational programs, the credits for which are transferable to a college or
university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
         (c)   In a structure that has no sign visible from the exterior of the
structure and no other advertising indicating that a person appearing in a
state of nudity or seminudity is available for viewing, if in order to
participate in a class in the structure, a student must enroll at least three
days in advance of the class and if not more than one nude or seminude model is
on the premises at any one time.
      “Nudity”, “nude”, or “state of nudity” means the showing of the human
male or female genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft, or cleavage with
less than a fully opaque covering; or the showing of the female breasts with
less than a fully opaque covering of any part of the nipple.
      “Regularly features” or “regularly shown” means a consistent or
substantial course of conduct, such that the films or performances exhibited
constitute a substantial portion of the films or performances offered as a part
of the ongoing business of the adult entertainment establishment.
      “Seminude” or “state of seminudity” means a state of dress in which
opaque clothing covers not more than the genitals, pubic region, and nipple of
the female breast, as well as portions of the body covered by supporting straps
or devices.
      “Sexual encounter establishment”.
         (a)   Means a business or commercial establishment that, as one of its
principal business purposes, offers for any form of consideration a place where
either of the following occur:
            1.   Two or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort for
the purpose of engaging in specified sexual activities.
            2.   Two or more persons appear nude or seminude for the purpose of
displaying their nude or seminude bodies for their receipt of consideration or
compensation in any type or form.
         (b)   An establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist,
psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in
medically approved and recognized therapy, including, but not limited to,
massage therapy, as regulated pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4731.15, is not a “sexual
encounter establishment”.
      “Specified anatomical areas” means the cleft of the buttocks, anus, male
or female genitals, or the female breast.
      “Specified sexual activity” means any of the following:
         (a)   Sex acts, normal or perverted, or actual or simulated, including
intercourse, oral copulation, masturbation, or sodomy;
         (b)   Excretory functions as a part of or in connection with any of
the activities described in division (a) of this definition.
   (B)   No person knowingly shall allow an individual, including, but not
limited to, a patron, customer, or employee, who is under 18 years of age on
the premises of an adult entertainment establishment.
   (C)   No individual who is under 18 years of age knowingly shall show or
give false information concerning the individual’s name or age, or other false
identification, for the purpose of gaining entrance to an adult entertainment
establishment.
   (D)   A person shall not be found guilty of a violation of division (B) of
this section if the person raises as an affirmative defense and if the jury or,
in a nonjury trial, the court finds the person has established by a
preponderance of the evidence, all of the following:
      (1)   The individual gaining entrance to the adult entertainment
establishment exhibited to an operator, employee, agent, or independent
contractor of the adult entertainment establishment a driver’s or commercial
driver’s license or an identification card issued under Ohio R.C. 4507.50 and
4507.52 showing that the individual was then at least 18 years of age.
      (2)   The operator, employee, agent, or independent contractor made a
bona fide effort to ascertain the true age of the individual gaining entrance
to the adult entertainment establishment by checking the identification
presented, at the time of entrance, to ascertain that the description on the
identification compared with the appearance of the individual and that the
identification had not been altered in any way.
      (3)   The operator, employee, agent, or independent contractor had reason
to believe that the individual gaining entrance to the adult entertainment
establishment was at least 18 years of age.
   (E)   In any criminal action in which the affirmative defense described in
division (D) of this section is raised, the Registrar of Motor Vehicles or the
Deputy Registrar who issued a driver’s or commercial driver’s license or an
identification card under Ohio R.C. 4507.50 and 4507.52 shall be permitted to
submit certified copies of the records, in the Registrar’s or Deputy
Registrar’s possession, of the issuance of the license or identification card
in question, in lieu of the testimony of the personnel of the Bureau of Motor
Vehicles in the action.
   (F)   (1)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of
permitting a juvenile on the premises of an adult entertainment establishment,
a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day a person violates this division
constitutes a separate offense.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of use by a
juvenile of false information to enter an adult entertainment establishment, a
delinquent act that would be a misdemeanor of the fourth degree if committed by
an adult.
(ORC 2907.39)
§ 666.19  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES; ILLEGAL OPERATION AND ACTIVITY.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      “Adult bookstore” or “adult video store” means a commercial establishment
that has as a significant or substantial portion of its stock in trade or
inventory in, derives a significant or substantial portion of its revenues
from, devotes a significant or substantial portion of its interior business or
advertising to, or maintains a substantial section of its sales or display
space for the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of books,
magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion
pictures, video cassettes, compact discs, slides, or other visual
representations, that are characterized by their emphasis upon the exhibition
or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
      “Adult cabaret” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2907.39.
      “Adult motion picture theater” means a commercial establishment where
films, motion pictures, videocassettes, slides, or similar photographic
reproductions that are characterized by their emphasis upon the display of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas are regularly shown
to more than five individuals for any form of consideration.
      “Characterized by” means describing the essential character or quality of
an item.
      “Employee” means any individual who performs any service on the premises
of a sexually oriented business on a full-time, part-time, or contract basis,
regardless of whether the individual is denominated an employee, independent
contractor, agent, or otherwise, but does not include an individual exclusively
on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or for the delivery
of goods to the premises.
      “Nudity”, “nude”, or “state of nudity” has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 2907.39.
      “Operator” means any individual on the premises of a sexually oriented
business who causes the business to function or who puts or keeps in operation
the business or who is authorized to manage the business or exercise overall
operational control of the business premises.
      “Patron” means any individual on the premises of a sexually oriented
business except for any of the following:
         (a)   An operator or an employee of the sexually oriented business;
         (b)   An individual who is on the premises exclusively for repair or
maintenance of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the premises;
         (c)   A public employee or a volunteer firefighter emergency medical
services worker acting within the scope of the public employee’s or volunteer’s
duties as a public employee or volunteer.
      “Premises” means the real property on which the sexually oriented
business is located and all appurtenances to the real property, including, but
not limited, to the sexually oriented business, the grounds, private walkways,
and parking lots or parking garages adjacent to the real property under the
ownership, control, or supervision of the owner or operator of the sexually
oriented business.
      “Regularly” means consistently or repeatedly.
      “Seminude” or “state of seminudity” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
2907.39.
      “Sexual device” means any three-dimensional object designed and marketed
for stimulation of the male or female human genitals or anus or female breasts
or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of oneself or others, including, but not
limited to, dildos, vibrators, penis pumps, and physical representations of the
human genital organs, but not including devices primarily intended for
protection against sexually transmitted diseases or for preventing pregnancy.
      “Sexual device shop” means a commercial establishment that regularly
features sexual devices, but not including any pharmacy, drug store, medical
clinic, or establishment primarily dedicated to providing medical or healthcare
products or services, and not including any commercial establishment that does
not restrict access to its premises by reason of age.
      “Sexual encounter center” means a business or commercial enterprise that,
as one of its principal business purposes, purports to offer for any form of
consideration physical contact in the form of wrestling or tumbling between
individuals of the opposite sex when one or more of the individuals is nude or
seminude.
      “Sexually oriented business” means an adult bookstore, adult video store,
adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, sexual device shop, or sexual
encounter center, but does not include a business solely by reason of its
showing, selling, or renting materials that may depict sex.
      “Specified anatomical areas” includes human genitals, pubic region, and
buttocks and the human female breast below a point immediately above the top of
the areola.
      “Specified sexual activity” means sexual intercourse, oral copulation,
masturbation, or sodomy, or excretory functions as a part of or in connection
with any of these activities.
   (B)   No sexually oriented business shall be or remain open for business
between 12:00 midnight and 6:00 a.m. on any day, except that a sexually
oriented business that holds a liquor permit pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 4303
may remain open until the hour specified in that permit if it does not conduct,
offer, or allow sexually oriented entertainment activity in which the
performers appear nude.
   (C)   (1)   No patron who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family
shall knowingly touch any employee while that employee is nude or seminude or
touch the clothing of any employee while that employee is nude or seminude.
      (2)   No employee who regularly appears nude or seminude on the premises
of a sexually oriented business, while on the premises of that sexually
oriented business and while nude or seminude, shall knowingly touch a patron
who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who
is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or the clothing of a patron
who is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who
is not a member of the employee’s immediate family or allow a patron who is not
a member of the employee’s immediate family or another employee who is not a
member of the employee’s immediate family to touch the employee or the clothing
of the employee.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of illegally
operating a sexually oriented business, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
(ORC 2907.40)
Statutory reference:
   State indemnification for certain municipal liability stemming from local
adult business regulations, see Ohio R.C. 715.55
§ 666.20  UNLAWFUL ADVERTISING OF MASSAGE.
   (A)   No person, by means of a statement, solicitation, or offer in a print
or electronic publication, sign, placard, storefront display, or other medium,
shall advertise massage, relaxation massage, any other massage technique or
method, or any related service, with the suggestion or promise of sexual
activity.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of unlawful advertising of
massage, a misdemeanor of the first degree.
   (C)   Nothing in this section prevents the municipality from enacting any
regulation of the advertising of massage further than and in addition to the
provisions of divisions (A) and (B) of this section.
   (D)   As used in this section, “sexual activity” has the same meaning as in
R.C. § 2907.01.
(ORC 2927.17) 
§ 666.21  NONCONSENSUAL DISSEMINATION OF PRIVATE SEXUAL IMAGES.
   (A)   As used in this section:
      "Cable service provider." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.01.
      "Direct-to-home satellite service." Has the meaning defined in 47 U.S.C.
§ 303, as amended.
      "Disseminate." Means to post, distribute, or publish on a computer
device, computer network, web site, or other electronic device or medium of
communication.
      "Image." Means a photograph, film, videotape, digital recording, or other
depiction or portrayal of a person.
      "Interactive computer service." Has the meaning defined in the
“Telecommunications Act of 1996”, 47 U.S.C. § 230, as amended.
      "Internet provider." Means a provider of internet service, including all
of the following:
         (a)   Broadband service, however defined or classified by the Federal
Communications Commission;
         (b)   Information service or telecommunications service, both as
defined in the “Telecommunications Act of 1996”, 47 U.S.C. § 153, as amended;
         (c)   Internet protocol-enabled services, as defined in R.C. §
4927.01.
      "Mobile service." Has the meaning defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153, as amended.
      "Sexual act." Means any of the following:
         (a)   Sexual activity;
         (b)   Masturbation;
         (c)   An act involving a bodily substance that is performed for the
purpose of sexual arousal or gratification;
         (d)   Sado-masochistic abuse.
      "Telecommunications carrier." Has the meaning defined in 47 U.S.C. § 153,
as amended.
      "Video service provider." Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 1332.21.
2020 S-1
292A   Sex Related Offenses   § 666.21
   (B)   No person shall knowingly disseminate an image of another person if
all of the following apply:
      (1)   The person in the image is 18 years of age or older.
      (2)   The person in the image can be identified from the image itself or
from information displayed in connection with the image and the offender
supplied the identifying information.
      (3)   The person in the image is in a state of nudity or is engaged in a
sexual act.
      (4)   The image is disseminated without consent from the person in the
image.
      (5)   The image is disseminated with intent to harm the person in the
image.
   (C)   This section does not prohibit the dissemination of an image if any of
the following apply:
      (1)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of a criminal
investigation that is otherwise lawful.
      (2)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of, or in connection
with, the reporting of unlawful conduct.
      (3)   The image is part of a news report or commentary or an artistic or
expressive work, such as a performance, work of art, literary work, theatrical
work, musical work, motion picture, film, or audiovisual work.
      (4)   The image is disseminated by a law enforcement officer, or a
corrections officer or guard in a detention facility, acting within the scope
of the person’s official duties.
      (5)   The image is disseminated for another lawful public purpose.
      (6)   The person in the image is knowingly and willingly in a state of
nudity or engaged in a sexual act and is knowingly and willingly in a location
in which the person does not have a reasonable expectation of privacy.
      (7)   The image is disseminated for the purpose of medical treatment or
examination.
   (D)   The following entities are not liable for a violation of this section
solely as a result of an image or other information provided by another person:
      (1)   A provider of interactive computer service;
      (2)   A mobile service;
      (3)   A telecommunications carrier;
2020 S-1
§ 666.21   Broadview Heights - General Offenses   292B
      (4)   An internet provider;
      (5)   A cable service provider;
      (6)   A direct-to-home satellite service;
      (7)   A video service provider.
   (E)   Any conduct that is a violation of this section and any other section
of this Code or the Ohio Revised Code may be prosecuted under this section, the
other section, or both sections.
   (F)   (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in division (F)(1)(b), (F)(1)
(c), or (F)(1)(d) of this section, whoever violates this section is guilty of
nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images, a misdemeanor of the
third degree.
         (b)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of this section or any substantially equivalent state law
or municipal ordinance, nonconsensual dissemination of private sexual images is
a misdemeanor of the second degree.
         (c)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to two or more violations of this section or any substantially
equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, nonconsensual dissemination of
private sexual images is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
         (d)   If the offender is under 18 years of age and the person in the
image is not more than five years older than the offender, the offender shall
not be prosecuted under this section.
      (2)   In addition to any other penalty or disposition authorized or
required by law, the court may order any person who is convicted of a violation
of this section or who is adjudicated delinquent by reason of a violation of
this section to criminally forfeit all of the following property to the state
under R.C. Chapter 2981:
         (a)   Any profits or proceeds and any property the person has acquired
or maintained in violation of this section that the sentencing court determines
to have been acquired or maintained as a result of the violation;
         (b)   Any interest in, securities of, claim against, or property or
contractual right of any kind affording a source of influence over any
enterprise that the person has established, operated, controlled, or conducted
in violation of this section that the sentencing court determines to have been
acquired or maintained as a result of the violation.
   (G)   A victim of a violation of this section may commence a civil cause of
action against the offender, as described in R.C. § 2307.66.
(R.C. § 2917.211)
§ 666.98  SENTENCING FOR SEXUALLY ORIENTED OFFENSES; SEXUAL PREDATORS;
REGISTRATION.
   (A)   If an offender is being sentenced for a sexually oriented offense or
child-victim oriented offense that is a misdemeanor committed on or after
January 1, 1997, and the offender is a tier III sex offender/child- victim
offender relative to the offense or the offense is any offense listed in Ohio
R.C. 2901.07(D)(1) to (D)(3), the judge shall include in the offender’s
sentence a statement that the offender is a tier III sex offender/child-victim
offender, shall comply with the requirements of Ohio R.C. 2950.03, and shall
require the offender to submit to a DNA specimen collection procedure pursuant
to Ohio R.C. 2901.07.
   (B)   If an offender is being sentenced for a sexually oriented offense or a
child-victim oriented offense that is a misdemeanor committed on or after
January 1, 1997, the judge shall include in the sentence a summary of the
offender’s duties imposed under Ohio R.C. 2950.04, 2950.041, 2950.05, and
2950.06, and the duration of the duties. The judge shall inform the offender,
at the time of sentencing, of those duties and of their duration. If required
under Ohio R.C. 2950.03(A)(2), the judge shall perform the duties specified in
that section or, if required under Ohio R.C. 2950.03(A)(6), the judge shall
perform the duties specified in that division.
(ORC 2929.23)
§ 666.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 672:  WEAPONS AND EXPLOSIVES
Section
672.01   Definitions
672.02   Carrying concealed weapons
672.025   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention
672.03   Using weapons while intoxicated
672.04   Improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle
672.05   License or permit to possess dangerous ordnance
672.06   Failure to secure dangerous ordnance
672.07   Unlawful transactions in weapons
672.085   Underage purchase of a firearm or handgun
672.10   Fireworks
672.105   Limiting the use of fireworks
672.12   Pointing and discharging firearms and other weapons
672.125   Discharge of a firearm on or near prohibited premises
672.13   Endangering aircraft and airport operations
672.14   Possessing criminal tools
672.15   Possession of an object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school
safety zone
672.16   Concealed handgun licenses: possession of a revoked or suspended
license; additional restrictions; posting of signs prohibiting possession
672.17   Defaced firearms
672.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Arson, see §
642.09
   Definitions generally, see §
606.01
   Hunting prohibited, see §
618.12
   Posting firearm warning signs, see §
612.06
   Reporting gunshot wounds, see §
606.12
   Vehicles transporting explosives, see §
440.04
Statutory reference:
   Prohibiting sales of firearms and explosives in riot areas, see Ohio R.C.
3761.16
   Return of surrendered firearms by law enforcement, see Ohio R.C. 2923.163
§ 672.01  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   “Alien registration number.”  The number issued by the United States
Citizenship and Immigration Services Agency that is located on the alien’s
permanent resident card and may also be commonly referred to as the “USCIS
number” or the “alien number”.
   “Automatic firearm.”  Any firearm designed or specially adapted to fire a
succession of cartridges with a single function of the trigger.
   “Ballistic knife.”  A knife with a detachable blade that is propelled by a
spring-operated mechanism.
   “Concealed handgun license” or “license to carry a concealed handgun.”
      (1)   Means, subject to division (2) of this definition, a license or
temporary emergency license to carry a concealed handgun issued under Ohio R.C.
2923.125 or Ohio R.C. 2923.1213 or a license to carry a concealed handgun
issued by another state with which the Attorney General has entered into a
reciprocity agreement under Ohio R.C. 109.69.
      (2)   A reference in any provision of this Code to a concealed handgun
license issued under Ohio R.C. 2923.125 or a license to carry a concealed
handgun issued under Ohio R.C. 2923.125 means only a license of the type that
is specified in that section. A reference in any provision of this Code to a
concealed handgun license issued under Ohio R.C. 2923.1213, a license to carry
a concealed handgun issued under Ohio R.C. 2923.1213, or a license to carry a
concealed handgun on a temporary emergency basis means only a license of the
type that is specified in Ohio R.C. 2923.1213. A reference in any provision of
this Code to a concealed handgun license issued by another state or a license
to carry a concealed handgun issued by another state means only a license
issued by another state with which the Attorney General has entered into a
reciprocity agreement under Ohio R.C. 109.69.
   “Dangerous ordnance.”
      (1)   Any of the following, except as provided in division (2) of this
definition:
         (a)   Any automatic or sawed-off firearm, zip-gun, or ballistic knife.
         (b)   Any explosive device or incendiary device.
         (c)   Nitroglycerin, nitrocellulose, nitrostarch, PETN, cyclonite,
TNT, picric acid, and other high explosives; amatol, tritonal, tetrytol,
pentolite, pecretol, cyclotol, and other high explosive compositions; plastic
explosives; dynamite, blasting gelatin, gelatin dynamite, sensitized ammonium
nitrate, liquid-oxygen blasting explosives, blasting powder, and other blasting
agents; and any other explosive substance having sufficient brisance or power
to be particularly suitable for use as a military explosive, or for use in
mining, quarrying, excavating, or demolitions.
         (d)   Any firearm, rocket launcher, mortar, artillery piece, grenade,
mine, bomb, torpedo, or similar weapon, designed and manufactured for military
purposes, and the ammunition for that weapon.
         (e)   Any firearm muffler or suppressor.
         (f)   Any combination of parts that is intended by the owner for use
in converting any firearm or other device into a dangerous ordnance.
      (2)   “Dangerous ordnance” does not include any of the following:
         (a)   Any firearm, including a military weapon and the ammunition for
that weapon, and regardless of its actual age, that employs a percussion cap or
other obsolete ignition system, or that is designed and safe for use only with
black powder.
         (b)   Any pistol, rifle, or shotgun, designed or suitable for sporting
purposes, including a military weapon as issued or as modified, and the
ammunition for that weapon, unless the firearm is an automatic or sawed-off
firearm.
         (c)   Any cannon or other artillery piece that, regardless of its
actual age, is of a type in accepted use prior to 1887, has no mechanical,
hydraulic, pneumatic, or other system for absorbing recoil and returning the
tube into battery without displacing the carriage, and is designed and safe for
use only with black powder.
         (d)   Black powder, priming quills, and percussion caps possessed and
lawfully used to fire a cannon of a type defined in division (2)(c) of this
definition during displays, celebrations, organized matches or shoots, and
target practice, and smokeless and black powder, primers, and percussion caps
possessed and lawfully used as a propellant or ignition device in small-arms or
small-arms ammunition.
         (e)   Dangerous ordnance that is inoperable or inert and cannot
readily be rendered operable or activated, and that is kept as a trophy,
souvenir, curio, or museum piece.
         (f)   Any device that is expressly excepted from the definition of a
destructive device pursuant to the Gun Control Act of 1968, 18 U.S.C. 921(a)
(4), as amended, and regulations issued under that Act.
         (g)   Any firearm with an overall length of at least 26 inches that is
approved for sale by the Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and
Explosives under the “Gun Control Act of 1968”, 82 Stat. 1213, 18 U.S.C. § 921
(a)(3), but that is found by the Bureau not to be regulated under the “National
Firearms Act”, 68A Stat. 725 (1934), 26 U.S.C. § 5845(a).
   “Deadly weapon.”  Any instrument, device, or thing capable of inflicting
death, and designed or specially adapted for use as a weapon, or possessed,
carried, or used as a weapon.
   “Explosive.”  Any chemical compound, mixture, or device, the primary or
common purpose of which is to function by explosion.  “Explosive” includes all
materials that have been classified as division 1.1, division 1.2, division
1.3, or division 1.4 explosives by the United States Department of
Transportation in its regulations and includes, but is not limited to,
dynamite, black powder, pellet powders, initiating explosives, blasting caps,
electric blasting caps, safety fuses, fuse igniters, squibs, cordeau detonant
fuses, instantaneous fuses, and igniter cords and igniters.  “Explosives” does
not include “fireworks,” as defined in Ohio R.C. 3743.01, or any substance or
material otherwise meeting the definition of explosive set forth in this
section that is manufactured, sold, possessed, transported, stored, or used in
any activity described in Ohio R.C. 3743.80, provided the activity is conducted
in accordance with all applicable laws, rules, and regulations, including, but
not limited to, the provisions of Ohio R.C. 3743.80 and the rules of the Fire
Marshal adopted pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3737.82.
   “Explosive device.”  Any device designed or specially adapted to cause
physical harm to persons or property by means of an explosion, and consisting
of an explosive substance or agency and a means to detonate it.  “Explosive
device” includes without limitation any bomb, any explosive demolition device,
any blasting cap or detonator containing an explosive charge, and any pressure
vessel that has been knowingly tampered with or arranged so as to explode.
   “Firearm.”
      (1)   Any deadly weapon capable of expelling or propelling one or more
projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible propellant.  “Firearm”
includes an unloaded firearm, and any firearm that is inoperable but that can
readily be rendered operable.
      (2)   When determining whether a firearm is capable of expelling or
propelling one or more projectiles by the action of an explosive or combustible
propellant, the trier of fact may rely upon circumstantial evidence, including,
but not limited to, the representations and actions of the individual
exercising control over the firearm.
   “Handgun.”  Means any of the following:
      (1)   Any firearm that has a short stock and is designed to be held and
fired by the use of a single hand;
      (2)   Any combination of parts from which a firearm of a type described
in division (1) of this definition can be assembled.
   “Incendiary device.”  Any firebomb, and any device designed or specially
adapted to cause physical harm to persons or property by means of fire, and
consisting of an incendiary substance or agent and a means to ignite it.
   “Sawed-off firearm.”  A shotgun with a barrel less than 18 inches long, or a
rifle with a barrel less than 16 inches long, or a shotgun or rifle less than
26 inches long overall.  “Sawed-off firearm” does not include any firearm with
an overall length of at least 26 inches that is approved for sale by the
Federal Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, and Explosives under the “Gun
Control Act of 1968”, 82 Stat. 1213, 18 U.S.C. § 921(a)(3), but that is found
by the Bureau not to be regulated under the “National Firearms Act”, 68A Stat.
725 (1934), 26 U.S.C. § 5845(a).
   “Semi-automatic firearm.”  Any firearm designed or specially adapted to fire
a single cartridge and automatically chamber a succeeding cartridge ready to
fire, with a single function of the trigger.
   “Valid concealed handgun license” or “valid license to carry a concealed
handgun.” A concealed handgun license that is currently valid, that is not
under a suspension under Ohio R.C. 2923.128(A)(1), under Ohio R.C. 2923.1213,
or under a suspension provision of the state other than this state in which the
license was issued, and that has not been revoked under Ohio R.C. 2923.128(B)
(1), under Ohio R.C. 2923.1213, or under a revocation provision of the state
other than this state in which the license was issued.
   “Zip-gun.”  Any of the following:
      (1)   Any firearm of crude and extemporized manufacture.
      (2)   Any device, including without limitation a starter’s pistol, not
designed as a firearm, but that is specially adapted for use as a firearm.
      (3)   Any industrial tool, signaling device, or safety device, not
designed as a firearm, but that as designed is capable of use as such, when
possessed, carried, or used as a firearm.
(ORC 2923.11)
§ 672.02  CARRYING CONCEALED WEAPONS.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly carry or have, concealed on the person’s
person or concealed ready at hand, any of the following:
      (1)   A deadly weapon other than a handgun;
      (2)   A handgun other than a dangerous ordnance;
      (3)   A dangerous ordnance.
   (B)   No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license shall do any
of the following:
      (1)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose, and is
carrying a concealed handgun, fail to promptly inform any law enforcement
officer who approaches the person after the person has been stopped that the
person has been issued a concealed handgun license and that the person then is
carrying a concealed handgun;
      (2)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly fail to keep the person’s hands in
plain sight at any time after any law enforcement officer begins approaching
the person while stopped and before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless
the failure is pursuant to and in accordance with directions given by a law
enforcement officer;
      (3)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose, if the
person is carrying a concealed handgun, and if the person is approached by any
law enforcement officer while stopped, knowingly remove or attempt to remove
the loaded handgun from the holster, pocket, or other place in which the person
is carrying it, knowingly grasp or hold the loaded handgun, or knowingly have
contact with the loaded handgun by touching it with the person’s hands or
fingers at any time after the law enforcement officer begins approaching and
before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the person removes, attempts
to remove, grasps, holds, or has contact with the loaded handgun pursuant to
and in accordance with directions given by the law enforcement officer;
      (4)   If the person is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and is
carrying a concealed handgun, knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any
lawful order of any law enforcement officer given while the person is stopped,
including but not limited to a specific order to the person to keep the
person’s hands in plain sight.
   (C)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or the
United States, or to a law enforcement officer, who is authorized to carry
concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized to carry handguns and
is acting within the scope of the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s duties;
         (b)   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry concealed weapons or dangerous ordnance or is authorized to carry
handguns, and who is subject to and in compliance with the requirements of Ohio
R.C. 109.801, unless the appointing authority of the person has expressly
specified that the exemption provided in this division (C)(1)(b) does not apply
to the person;
         (c)   A person’s transportation or storage of a firearm, other than a
firearm described in Ohio R.C. 2923.11(G) to (M), in a motor vehicle for any
lawful purpose if the firearm is not on the actor’s person;
         (d)   A person’s storage or possession of a firearm, other than a
firearm described in Ohio R.C. 2923.11(G) to (M), in the actor’s own home for
any lawful purpose.
      (2)   Division (a)(2) of this section does not apply to any person who,
at the time of the alleged carrying or possession of a handgun, either is
carrying a valid concealed handgun license or is an active duty member of the
armed forces of the United States and is carrying a valid military
identification card and documentation of successful completion of firearms
training that meets or exceeds the training requirements described in R.C. §
2923.125(G)(1), unless the person knowingly is in a place described in R.C. §
2923.126(B).
   (D)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (A)(1) of this
section of carrying or having control of a weapon other than a handgun and
other than a dangerous ordnance, that the actor was not otherwise prohibited by
law from having the weapon, and that any of the following applies:
      (1)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for
defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in or was going to or from the
actor’s lawful business or occupation, which business or occupation was of a
character or was necessarily carried on in a manner or at a time or place as to
render the actor particularly susceptible to criminal attack, such as would
justify a prudent person in going armed.
      (2)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for
defensive purposes, while the actor was engaged in a lawful activity and had
reasonable cause to fear a criminal attack upon the actor, a member of the
actor’s family, or the actor’s home, such as would justify a prudent person in
going armed.
      (3)   The weapon was carried or kept ready at hand by the actor for any
lawful purpose and while in the actor’s own home.
   (E)   No person who is charged with a violation of this section shall be
required to obtain a concealed handgun license as a condition for the dismissal
of the charge.
(ORC 2923.12(A) - (E))
   (F)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of carrying concealed weapons.
The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
   (G)   If a law enforcement officer stops a person to question the person
regarding a possible violation of this section, for a traffic stop, or for any
other law enforcement purpose, if the person surrenders a firearm to the
officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the officer,
and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of this section
or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not otherwise prohibited by
law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is not contraband, the officer
shall return the firearm to the person at the termination of the stop.  If a
court orders a law enforcement officer to return a firearm to a person pursuant
to the requirement set forth in this division, Ohio R.C. 2923.163(B) applies.
(ORC 2923.12(H))
Statutory reference:
   Carrying concealed handguns, licensing through county sheriff, see Ohio R.C.
2923.124 et seq.
   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance on school
premises, felony  offense, see Ohio R.C. 2923.122
   Conveyance, possession, or control of deadly weapon or dangerous ordinance
in a courthouse, felony offense, see Ohio R.C. 2923.123
   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offense, see Ohio
R.C. 2923.131
   Possession of firearm in liquor permit premises, felony offense, see Ohio
R.C. 2923.121
§ 672.025  POSSESSION OF DEADLY WEAPON WHILE UNDER DETENTION.
   (A)   “Detention” and “detention facility” have the same meanings as in Ohio
R.C. 2921.01.
   (B)   No person under detention at a detention facility shall possess a
deadly weapon.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possession of a deadly
weapon while under detention.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (C)(2) of this section,
possession of a deadly weapon while under detention is a felony to be
prosecuted under state law. 
      (2)   If the offender, at the time of the commission of the offense, was
under detention as an alleged or adjudicated delinquent child or unruly child
and if at the time the offender commits the act for which the offender was
under detention it would not be a felony if committed by an adult, possession
of a deadly weapon while under detention is a misdemeanor of the first degree.
The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
(ORC 2923.131)
Statutory reference:
   Possession of deadly weapon while under detention, felony offenses, see Ohio
R.C. 2923.131
§ 672.03  USING WEAPONS WHILE INTOXICATED.
   (A)   No person, while under the influence of alcohol or any drug of abuse,
shall carry or use any firearm or dangerous ordnance.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of using weapons while
intoxicated, a misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as
provided in §
202.99.
(ORC 2923.15)
§ 672.04  IMPROPERLY HANDLING FIREARMS IN A MOTOR VEHICLE.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly discharge a firearm while in or on a motor
vehicle.
   (B)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded firearm in a
motor vehicle in such a manner that the firearm is accessible to the operator
or any passenger without leaving the vehicle.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a firearm in a motor
vehicle, unless the person may lawfully possess that firearm under applicable
law of this state or the United States, the firearm is unloaded, and the
firearm is carried in one of the following ways:
      (1)   In a closed package, box, or case.
      (2)   In a compartment that can be reached only by leaving the vehicle.
      (3)   In plain sight and secured in a rack or holder made for the
purpose.
      (4)   If the firearm is at least 24 inches in overall length as measured
from the muzzle to the part of the stock furthest from the muzzle and if the
barrel is at least 18 inches in length, either in plain sight with the action
open or the weapon stripped, or, if the firearm is of a type on which the
action will not stay open or which cannot easily be stripped, in plain sight.
   (D)   No person shall knowingly transport or have a loaded handgun in a
motor vehicle if, at the time of that transportation or possession, any of the
following applies:
      (1)   The person is under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or a
combination of them.
      (2)   The person’s whole blood, blood serum or plasma, breath, or urine
contains a concentration of alcohol, a listed controlled substance, or a listed
metabolite of a controlled substance prohibited for persons operating a
vehicle, as specified in Ohio R.C. 4511.19(A), regardless of whether the person
at the time of the transportation or possession as described in this division
is the operator of or a passenger in the motor vehicle.
   (E)   No person who has been issued a concealed handgun license or who is an
active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is carrying a
valid military identification card and documentation of successful completion
of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements described
in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1), who is the driver or an occupant of a motor vehicle
that is stopped as a result of a traffic stop or a stop for another law
enforcement purpose or is the driver or an occupant of a commercial motor
vehicle that is stopped by an employee of the motor carrier enforcement unit
for the purposes defined in R.C. § 5503.34, and who is transporting or has a
loaded handgun in the motor vehicle or commercial motor vehicle in any manner,
shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Fail to promptly inform any law enforcement officer who approaches
the vehicle while stopped that the person has been issued a concealed handgun
license or is authorized to carry a concealed handgun as an active duty member
of the armed forces of the United States and that the person then possesses or
has a loaded handgun in the motor vehicle;
      (2)   Fail to promptly inform the employee of the unit who approaches the
vehicle while stopped that the person has been issued a concealed handgun
license or is authorized to carry a concealed handgun as an active duty member
of the armed forces of the United States and that the person then possesses or
has a loaded handgun in the commercial motor vehicle;
      (3)   Knowingly fail to remain in the motor vehicle while stopped, or
knowingly fail to keep the person’s hands in plain sight at any time after any
law enforcement officer begins approaching the person
while stopped and before the law enforcement officer leaves, unless the failure
is pursuant to and in accordance with directions given by a law enforcement
officer;
      (4)   Knowingly have contact with the loaded handgun by touching it with
the person’s hands or fingers in the motor vehicle at any time after the law
enforcement officer begins approaching and before the law enforcement officer
leaves, unless the person has contact with the loaded handgun pursuant to and
in accordance with directions given by the law enforcement officer;
      (5)   Knowingly disregard or fail to comply with any lawful order of any
law enforcement officer given while the motor vehicle is stopped, including but
not limited to a specific order to the person to keep the person’s hands in
plain sight.
   (F)   (1)   Divisions (A), (B), (C), and (E) of this section do not apply to
any of the following:
         (a)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or the
United States, or a law enforcement officer, when authorized to carry or have
loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles and acting within the scope of
the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s duties;
         (b)   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry or have loaded or accessible firearms in motor vehicles, and who is
subject to and in compliance with the requirements of Ohio R.C. 109.801, unless
the appointing authority of the person has expressly specified that the
exemption provided in this division (F)(1)(b) does not apply to the person.
      (2)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to a person if all of
the following circumstances apply:
         (a)   The person discharges a firearm from a motor vehicle at a coyote
or groundhog, the discharge is not during the deer gun hunting season as set by
the Chief of the Division of Wildlife of the Department of Natural Resources,
and the discharge at the coyote or groundhog, but for the operation of this
section, is lawful.
         (b)   The motor vehicle from which the person discharges the firearm
is on real property that is located in an unincorporated area of a township and
that is either zoned for agriculture or is used for agriculture.
         (c)   The person owns the real property described in division (F)(2)
(b) of this section, is the spouse or a child of another person who owns that
real property, is a tenant of another person who owns that real property, or is
the spouse or a child of a tenant of another person who owns that real
property.
         (d)   The person does not discharge the firearm in any of the
following manners:
            1.   While under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
alcohol and a drug of abuse;
            2.   In the direction of a street, highway or other public or
private property used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking;
            3.   At or into an occupied structure that is a permanent or
temporary habitation;
            4.   In the commission of any violation of law, including but not
limited to a felony that includes, as an essential element, purposely or
knowingly causing or attempting to cause the death of or physical harm to
another and that was committed by discharging a firearm from a motor vehicle.
      (3)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to a person if all of
the following apply:
         (a)   The person possesses a valid all-purpose vehicle permit issued
under R.C. § 1533.103 by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife.
         (b)   The person discharges a firearm at a wild quadruped or game bird
as defined in R.C. § 1531.01 during the open hunting season for the applicable
wild quadruped or game bird.
         (c)   The person discharges a firearm from a stationary all-purpose
vehicle as defined in R.C. § 1531.01 from private or publicly owned lands or
from a motor vehicle that is parked on a road that is owned or administered by
the Division of Wildlife.
         (d)   The person does not discharge the firearm in any of the
following manners:
            1.   While under the influence of alcohol, a drug of abuse, or
alcohol and a drug of abuse;
            2.   In the direction of a street, a highway, or other public or
private property that is used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking;
            3.   At or into an occupied structure that is a permanent or
temporary habitation;
            4.   In the commission of any violation of law, including, but not
limited to, a felony that includes, as an essential element, purposely or
knowingly causing or attempting to cause the death of or physical harm to
another and that was committed by discharging a firearm from a motor vehicle.
      (4)   Divisions (B) and (C) of this section do not apply to a person if
all of the following circumstances apply:
         (a)   At the time of the alleged violation of either of those
divisions, the person is the operator of or a passenger in a motor vehicle.
         (b)   The motor vehicle is on real property that is located in an
unincorporated area of a township and that is either zoned for agriculture or
is used for agriculture.
         (c)   The person owns the real property described in division (F)(4)
(b) of this section, is the spouse or a child of another person who owns that
real property, is a tenant of another person who owns that real property, or is
the spouse or a child of a tenant of another person who owns that real
property.
         (d)   The person, prior to arriving at the real property described in
division (F)(4)(b) of this section, did not transport or possess a firearm in
the motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by division (B) or (C) of this section
while the motor vehicle was being operated on a street, highway or other public
or private property used by the public for vehicular traffic or parking.
      (5)   Divisions (B) and (C) of this section do not apply to a person who
transports or possesses a handgun in a motor vehicle if, at the time of that
transportation or possession, both of the following apply:
         (a)   The person transporting or possessing the handgun is either
carrying a valid concealed handgun license or is an active duty member of the
armed forces of the United States and is carrying a valid military
identification card and documentation of successful completion of firearms
training that meets or exceeds the training requirements described in R.C. §
2923.125(G)(1).
         (b)   The person transporting or possessing the handgun is not
knowingly in a place described in Ohio R.C. 2923.126(B).
      (6)   Divisions (B) and (C) of this section do not apply to a person if
all of the following apply:
         (a)   The person possesses a valid all-purpose vehicle permit issued
under R.C. § 1533.103 by the Chief of the Division of Wildlife.
         (b)   The person is on or in an all-purpose vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 1531.01 or a motor vehicle during the open hunting season for a wild
quadruped or game bird.
         (c)   The person is on or in an all-purpose vehicle as defined in R.C.
§ 1531.01 on private or publicly owned lands or on or in a motor vehicle that
is parked on a road that is owned or administered by the Division of Wildlife.
   (G)   (1)   The affirmative defenses authorized in Ohio R.C. 2923.12(D)(1)
and (D)(2) are affirmative defenses to a charge under division (B) or (C) of
this section that involves a firearm other than a handgun.
      (2)   It is an affirmative defense to a charge under division (B) or (C)
of this section of improperly handling firearms in a motor vehicle that the
actor transported or had the firearm in the motor vehicle for any lawful
purpose and while the motor vehicle was on the actor’s own property, provided
that this affirmative defense is not available unless the person, immediately
prior to arriving at the actor’s own property, did not transport or possess the
firearm in a motor vehicle in a manner prohibited by division (B) or (C) of
this section while the motor vehicle was being operated on a street, highway,
or other public or private property used by the public for vehicular traffic.
   (H)   (1)   No person who is charged with a violation of division (B), (C)
or (D) of this section shall be required to obtain a  concealed handgun license
as a condition for the dismissal of the charge.
      (2)   (a)   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty
to, or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (E) of this section as it
existed prior to September 30, 2011 and if the conduct that was the basis of
the violation no longer would be a violation of division (E) of this section on
or after September 30, 2011, the person may file an application under Ohio R.C.
2953.37 requesting the expungement of the record of conviction.
         (b)   If a person is convicted of, was convicted of, pleads guilty to,
or has pleaded guilty to a violation of division (B) or (C) of this section as
the division existed prior to September 30, 2011 and if the conduct that was
the basis of the violation no longer would be a violation of division (B) or
(C) of this section on or after September 30, 2011 due to the application of
division (F)(5) of this section as it exists on and after September 30, 2011,
the person may file an application under Ohio R.C. 2953.37 requesting the
expungement of the record of conviction.
   (I)   If a law enforcement officer stops a motor vehicle for a traffic stop
or any other purpose, if any person in the motor vehicle surrenders a firearm
to the officer, either voluntarily or pursuant to a request or demand of the
officer, and if the officer does not charge the person with a violation of this
section or arrest the person for any offense, the person is not otherwise
prohibited by law from possessing the firearm, and the firearm is not
contraband, the officer shall return the firearm to the person at the
termination of the stop.  If a court orders a law enforcement officer to return
a firearm to a person pursuant to the requirement set forth in this division,
Ohio R.C. 2923.163(B) applies.
   (J)   As used in this section:
      “Agriculture” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 519.01.
      “Commercial motor vehicle” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 4506.25
(A).
      “Motor carrier enforcement unit” means the Motor Carrier Enforcement Unit
in the Department of Public Safety, Division of State Highway Patrol, that is
created by Ohio R.C. 5503.34.
      “Motor vehicle,” “street” and “highway” have the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 4511.01.
      “Occupied structure” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2909.01.
      “Tenant” has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 1531.01.
      “Unloaded.”
         (a)   With respect to a firearm other than a firearm described in
division (d) of this definition, means that no ammunition is in the firearm in
question, no magazine or speed loader containing ammunition is inserted into
the firearm, and one of the following applies:
            1.   There is no ammunition in a magazine or speed loader that is
in the vehicle in question and that may be used with the firearm in question.
            2.   Any magazine or speed loader that contains ammunition and that
may be used with the firearm in question is stored in a compartment within the
vehicle in question that cannot be accessed without leaving the vehicle or is
stored in a container that provides complete and separate enclosure.
         (b)   For the purposes of division (a)2. of this definition, a
“container that provides complete and separate enclosure” includes, but is not
limited to, any of the following:
            1.   A package, box, or case with multiple compartments, as long as
the loaded magazine or speed loader and the firearm in question either are in
separate compartments within the package, box, or case, or, if they are in the
same compartment, the magazine or speed loader is contained within a separate
enclosure in that compartment that does not contain the firearm and that closes
using a snap, button, buckle, zipper, hook and loop closing mechanism, or other
fastener that must be opened to access the contents or the firearm is contained
within a separate enclosure of that nature in that compartment that does not
contain the magazine or speed loader;
            2.   A pocket or other enclosure on the person of the person in
question that closes using a snap, button, buckle, zipper, hook and loop
closing mechanism, or other fastener that must be opened to access the
contents.
         (c)   For the purposes of divisions (a) and (b) of this definition,
ammunition held in stripper- clips or in en-bloc clips is not considered
ammunition that is loaded into a magazine or speed loader.
         (d)   “Unloaded” means, with respect to a firearm employing a
percussion cap, flintlock, or other obsolete ignition system, when the weapon
is uncapped or when the priming charge is removed from the pan.
   (K)   Divisions (a) and (b) of the definition of “unloaded” in division (K)
of this section do not affect the authority of a person who is carrying a valid
concealed handgun license to have one or more magazines or speed loaders
containing ammunition anywhere in a vehicle, without being transported as
described in those divisions, as long as no ammunition is in a firearm, other
than a handgun, in the vehicle other than as permitted under any other
provision of this chapter. A person who is carrying a valid concealed handgun
license may have one or more magazines or speed loaders containing ammunition
anywhere in a vehicle without further restriction, as long as no ammunition is
in a firearm, other than a handgun, in the vehicle other than as permitted
under any provision of this chapter.
(ORC 2923.16(A) - (H), (J) - (L))
   (L)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of improperly handling
firearms in a motor vehicle.  Violation of this section is a misdemeanor of the
first degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
Statutory reference:
   Return of surrendered firearms by law enforcement, see Ohio R.C. 2923.163
§ 672.05  LICENSE OR PERMIT TO POSSESS DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
   (A)   Upon application to the Sheriff of the County or Safety Director or
Police Chief of the municipality where the applicant resides or has the
applicant’s principal place of business, and upon payment of the fee specified
in division (B) of this section, a license or temporary permit shall be issued
to qualified applicants to acquire, possess, carry or use a dangerous ordnance
for the following purposes:
      (1)   Contractors, wreckers, quarriers, mine operators and other persons
regularly employing explosives in the course of a legitimate business, with
respect to explosives and explosive devices acquired, possessed, carried or
used in the course of such business.
      (2)   Farmers, with respect to explosives and explosive devices acquired,
possessed, carried or used for agricultural purposes on lands farmed by them.
      (3)   Scientists, engineers, and instructors, with respect to a dangerous
ordnance acquired, possessed, carried or used in the course of bona fide
research or instruction.
      (4)   Financial institutions and armored car company guards, with respect
to automatic firearms lawfully acquired, possessed, carried or used by any such
person while acting within the scope of the person’s duties.
      (5)   In the discretion of the issuing authority, any responsible person,
with respect to a dangerous ordnance lawfully acquired, possessed, carried or
used for a legitimate research, scientific, educational, industrial or other
proper purpose.
   (B)   Application for a license or temporary permit under this section shall
be in writing under oath to the Sheriff of the County or Safety Director or
Police Chief of the municipality where the applicant resides or has the
applicant’s principal place of business. The application shall be accompanied
by an application fee of $50 when the application is for a license, and an
application fee of $5 when the application is for a temporary permit.  The fees
shall be paid into the general revenue fund of the County or municipality.  The
application shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name, age, address, occupation and business address of the
applicant, if the applicant is a natural person, or the name, address, and
principal place of business of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation.
      (2)   A description of the dangerous ordnance for which a permit is
requested.
      (3)   A description of the  places where and the manner in which the
dangerous ordnance is to be kept, carried, and used.
      (4)   A statement of the purposes for which the dangerous ordnance is to
be acquired, possessed, carried or used.
      (5)   Such other information as the issuing authority may require in
giving effect to this section.
   (C)   Upon investigation, the issuing authority shall issue a license or
temporary permit only if all of the following apply:
      (1)   The applicant is not otherwise prohibited by law from acquiring,
having, carrying or using a dangerous ordnance.
      (2)   The applicant is 21 years of age or over, if the applicant is a
natural person.
      (3)   It appears that the applicant has sufficient competence to safely
acquire, possess, carry or use the dangerous ordnance, and that proper
precautions will be taken to protect the security of the dangerous ordnance and
ensure the safety of persons and property.
      (4)   It appears that the dangerous ordnance will be lawfully acquired,
possessed, carried and used by the applicant for a legitimate purpose.
   (D)   The license or temporary permit shall identify the person to whom it
is issued, identify the dangerous ordnance involved and state the purposes for
which the license or temporary permit is issued, state the expiration date, if
any, and list such restrictions on the acquisition, possession, carriage, or
use of the dangerous ordnance as the issuing authority considers advisable to
protect the security of the dangerous ordnance and ensure the safety of persons
and property.
   (E)   A temporary permit shall be issued for the casual use of explosives
and explosive devices, and other consumable dangerous ordnance, and shall
expire within 30 days of its issuance. A license shall be issued for the
regular use of consumable dangerous ordnance, or for any non-consumable
dangerous ordnance, which license need not specify an expiration date, but the
issuing authority may specify such expiration date, not earlier than one year
from the date of issuance, as it considers advisable in view of the nature of
the dangerous ordnance and the purposes for which the license is issued.
   (F)   The dangerous ordnance specified in a license or temporary permit may
be obtained by the holder anywhere in the state.  Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2923.18
(F), the holder of a license may use such dangerous ordnance anywhere in the
state.  The holder of a temporary permit may use such dangerous ordnance only
within the territorial jurisdiction of the issuing authority.
   (G)   The issuing authority shall forward to the State Fire Marshal a copy
of each license or temporary permit issued pursuant to this section, and a copy
of each record of a transaction in a dangerous ordnance and of each report of a
lost or stolen dangerous ordnance, given to the local law enforcement authority
as required by R.C. § 2923.20(A)(7) and (A)(8) or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.  The State Fire Marshal will keep a permanent file of all
licenses and temporary permits issued pursuant to this section, and of all
records of transactions in, and losses or thefts of a dangerous ordnance
forwarded by local law enforcement authorities pursuant to this section.
(ORC 2923.18)
§ 672.06  FAILURE TO SECURE DANGEROUS ORDNANCE.
   (A)   No person, in acquiring, possessing, carrying, or using any dangerous
ordnance, shall negligently fail to take proper precautions:
      (1)   To secure the dangerous ordnance against theft, or against its
acquisition or use by any unauthorized or incompetent person.
      (2)   To insure the safety of persons and property.
   (B)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of failure to a secure
dangerous ordnance, a misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as
provided in §
202.99.
(ORC 2923.19)
§ 672.07  UNLAWFUL TRANSACTIONS IN WEAPONS.
   (A)   No person shall:
      (1)   Manufacture, carry about his or her person, possess for sale, sell
or furnish to any person, other than a law enforcement agency for authorized
use in police work, any brass knuckles, cestus, billy, blackjack, sandbag,
switchblade knife, springblade knife, gravity knife and/or spring loaded weapon
capable of propelling a knife or knifelike projectile, including but not
limited to a ballistic knife (sometimes referred to as a KGB knife) or other
similar weapon and/or an advanced martial arts weapon, including, but not
limited to, a shurikan (throwing star), nunchuck, sword, knife, staff, tonfa,
kama, sai and/or other similar weapon. This division does not apply to the
possession and/or use of advanced martial arts weapons on the premises of a
recognized martial arts school or during the time such weapons are being
transported directly to or from such premises.
      (2)   When transferring any dangerous ordnance to another, negligently
fail to require the transferee to exhibit such identification, license or
permit showing him to be authorized to acquire dangerous ordnance pursuant to
Ohio R.C. 2923.17, or negligently fail to take a complete record of the
transaction and forthwith forward a copy of such record to the County Sheriff
or Safety Director or Police Chief of the municipality;
      (3)   Knowingly fail to report to the Police Department forthwith the
loss or theft of any firearm or dangerous ordnance in such person’s possession
or under his control.
   (B)   As used in division (A)(1) of this section:
      “Nunchuck” means two pieces of hardwood sticks, generally equal in size
and weight, held together by a piece of string, leather or chain.
      “Sword” means a weapon with a long blade for cutting or thrusting and
designed, manufactured or marketed as a martial arts weapon.
      “Knife” means a weapon consisting of a single or double-edged short blade
for cutting or throwing and designed, manufactured or marketed as a martial
arts weapon.
      “Staff” means a hardwood stick, the size of which can vary from two to
six feet in length, which can be used to strike, block, jab, hold and throw an
opponent.
      “Tonfa” means a hardwood shaft which measures about seventeen inches in
length with a handle approximately four and one-half inches in length affixed
to the shaft.
      “Kama” means an instrument consisting of a handle with a long, curved
single-edged blade affixed at the end of the handle.
      “Sai” means a piece of steel or heavy metal that is approximately twelve
inches in length with a pointed or blunted end and two prongs that extend down
from the blade to form a handle and a protection for strikes.
(Ord. 24-87, passed 3-16-1987)
§ 672.085  UNDERAGE PURCHASE OF A FIREARM OR HANDGUN.
   (A)   No person under 18 years of age shall purchase or attempt to purchase
a firearm.
   (B)   No person under 21 years of age shall purchase or attempt to purchase
a handgun; provided, that this division does not apply to the purchase or
attempted purchase of a handgun by a person 18 years of age or older and under
21 years of age, if either of the following applies:
      (1)   The person is a law enforcement officer and has received firearms
training approved by the Ohio Peace Officer Training Council or equivalent
firearms training.
      (2)   The person is an active or reserve member of the armed services of
the United States or the Ohio National Guard, or was honorably discharged from
military service in the active or reserve armed services of the United States
or the Ohio National Guard, and the person has received firearms training from
the armed services or the national guard or equivalent firearms training.
(ORC 2923.211)
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of underage
purchase of a firearm, a delinquent act that would be a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law if it could be committed by an adult.  Whoever
violates division (B) of this section is guilty of underage purchase of a
handgun, a misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as provided in
§
202.99.
§ 672.10  FIREWORKS.
   (A)   Definitions.  As used in this section, unless otherwise provided:
      “1.3G fireworks.”  Display fireworks consistent with regulations of the
United States Department of Transportation as expressed using the designation
“Division 1.3" in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
      “1.4G fireworks.”  Consumer fireworks consistent with regulations of the
United States Department of Transportation as expressed using the designation
“Division 1.4" in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
      “Beer” and “intoxicating liquor.”  Have the same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
4301.01.
      “Booby trap.”  A small tube that has a string protruding from both ends
that has a friction-sensitive composition and that is ignited by pulling the
ends of the string.
      “Cigarette load.”  A small wooden peg that is coated with a small
quantity of explosive composition and that is ignited in a cigarette.
      “Controlled substance.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 3719.01.
      “Discharge site.” An area immediately surrounding the mortars used to
fire aerial shells.
      “Fireworks.”  Any composition or device prepared for the purpose of
producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, deflagration, or
detonation, except ordinary matches and except as provided in Ohio R.C.
3743.80.
      “Fireworks incident.”  Any action or omission that occurs at a fireworks
exhibition that results in injury or death, or a substantial risk of injury or
death, to any person, and that involves either of the following:
         (a)   The handling or other use, or the results of the handling or
other use, of fireworks or associated equipment or other materials;
         (b)   The failure of any person to comply with any applicable
requirement imposed by this section or Ohio R.C. Chapter 3743, or any
applicable rule adopted under this section or Ohio R.C. Chapter 3743.
      “Fireworks incident site.”  A discharge site or other location at a
fireworks exhibition where a fireworks incident occurs, a location where an
injury or death associated with a fireworks incident occurs, or a location
where evidence of a fireworks incident or an injury or death associated with a
fireworks incident is found.
      “Fireworks plant.”  All buildings and other structures in which the
manufacturing of fireworks, or the storage or sale of manufactured fireworks by
a manufacturer, takes place.
      “Highway.”  Any public street, road, alley, way, lane or other public
thoroughfare.
      “Licensed building.”  A building on the licensed premises of a licensed
manufacturer or wholesaler of fireworks that is approved for occupancy by the
building official having jurisdiction.
      “Licensed exhibitor of fireworks” or “licensed exhibitor.”  A person
licensed pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.50 through 3743.55.
      “Licensed manufacturer of fireworks” or “licensed manufacturer.”  A
person licensed pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.02 through 3743.08.
      “Licensed premises.”  The real estate upon which a licensed manufacturer
or wholesaler of fireworks conducts business.
      “Licensed wholesaler of fireworks” or “licensed wholesaler.”  A person
licensed pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.15 through 3743.21.
      “List of licensed exhibitors.” The list required by R.C. § 3743.51(C).
      “List of licensed manufacturers.” The list required by R.C. § 3743.03(C).
      “List of licensed wholesalers.” The list required by R.C. § 3743.16(C).
      “Manufacturing of fireworks.”  The making of fireworks from raw
materials, none of which in and of themselves constitute fireworks, or the
processing of fireworks.
      “Navigable waters.” Any body of water susceptible of being used in its
ordinary condition as a highway of commerce over which trade and travel is or
may be conducted in the customary modes, but does not include a body of water
that is not capable of navigation by barges, tugboats, and other large vessels.
      “Novelties” and “trick noisemakers.”
         (a)   Devices that produce a small report intended to surprise the
user, including but not limited to booby traps, cigarette loads, party poppers,
and snappers;
         (b)   Snakes or glow worms;
         (c)   Smoke devices;
         (d)   Trick matches.
      “Party popper.”  A small plastic or paper item that contains not more
than 16 milligrams of friction- sensitive explosive composition that is ignited
by pulling a string protruding from the item, and from which paper streamers
are expelled when the item is ignited.
      “Processing of fireworks.”  The making of fireworks from materials all or
part of which in and of themselves constitute fireworks, but does not include
the mere packaging or repackaging of fireworks.
      “Railroad.”  Any railway or railroad that carries freight or passengers
for hire, but does not include auxiliary tracks, spurs, and sidings installed
and primarily used in serving a mine, quarry or plant.
      “Retail sale” or “sell at retail.”  A sale of fireworks to a purchaser
who intends to use the fireworks and not to resell them.
      “Smoke device.”  A tube or sphere that contains pyrotechnic composition
that, upon ignition, produces white or colored smoke as the primary effect.
      “Snake” or “glow worm.”  A device that consists of a pressed pellet of
pyrotechnic composition that produces a large snake-like ash upon burning,
which ash expands in length as the pellet burns.
      “Snapper.”  A small paper-wrapped item that contains a minute quantity of
explosive composition coated on small bits of sand and that, when dropped,
implodes.
      “Storage location.” A single parcel or contiguous parcels of real estate
approved by the Fire Marshal pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.04(I) or Ohio R.C.
3743.17(G) that are separate from a licensed premises containing a retail
showroom, and which parcel or parcels a licensed manufacturer or wholesaler of
fireworks may use only for the distribution, possession, and storage of
fireworks in accordance with this chapter.
      “Trick match.”  A kitchen or book match that is coated with a small
quantity of explosive composition and that, upon ignition, produces a small
report or a shower of sparks.
      “Wholesale sale” or “sell at wholesale.”  A sale of fireworks to a
purchaser who intends to resell the fireworks so purchased.
      “Wire sparkler.”  A sparkler consisting of a wire or stick coated with a
nonexplosive pyrotechnic mixture that produces a shower of sparks upon ignition
and that contains no more than 100 grams of this mixture.
(ORC 3743.01)
   (B)   Manufacturing.
      (1)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall knowingly fail to
comply with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to Ohio R.C.
3743.05 or the requirements of Ohio R.C. 3743.06.
      (2)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall fail to maintain
complete inventory, wholesale sale and retail records as required by Ohio R.C.
3743.07, or to permit an inspection of these records or the premises of a
fireworks plant or the wholesaler pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.08.
      (3)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.08(B)(1)
within the specified period of time.
      (4)   No licensed manufacturer of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.08(B)(2)
until the nonconformities are eliminated, corrected or otherwise remedied or
the 72 hour period specified in those divisions has expired, whichever occurs
first.
      (5)   No person shall smoke or shall carry a pipe, cigarette, or cigar,
or a match, lighter, other flame-producing item, or open flame on, or shall
carry a concealed source of ignition into, the premises of a fireworks plant,
except as smoking is authorized in specified lunchrooms or restrooms by a
manufacturer pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.06(C).
      (6)   No person shall have possession or control of, or be under the
influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer, or controlled substance while on
the premises of a fireworks plant.
(ORC 3743.60(E) - (J))
   (C)   Wholesaling.
      (1)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall knowingly fail to comply
with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.18
or the requirements of Ohio R.C. 3743.19.
      (2)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall fail to maintain complete
inventory, wholesale sale and retail records as required by Ohio R.C. 3743.20,
or to permit an inspection of these records or the premises of a fireworks
plant or the wholesaler pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.21.
      (3)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.21(B)(1)
within the specified period of time.
      (4)   No licensed wholesaler of fireworks shall fail to comply with an
order of the State Fire Marshal issued pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.21(B)(2)
until the nonconformities are eliminated, corrected or otherwise remedied or
the 72 hour period specified in those divisions has expired, whichever occurs
first.
      (5)   No person shall smoke or shall carry a pipe, cigarette, or cigar,
or a match, lighter, other flame-producing item, or open flame on, or shall
carry a concealed source of ignition into, the premises of a wholesaler of
fireworks, except as smoking is authorized in specified lunchrooms or restrooms
by a wholesaler pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.19(D).
      (6)   No person shall have possession or control of, or be under the
influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer, or controlled substance while on
the premises of a wholesaler of fireworks.
(ORC 3743.61(E) - (J))
   (D)   Purchasing and Transporting.
      (1)   No person who resides in another state and purchases fireworks in
this state shall obtain possession of the fireworks in this state unless the
person complies with Ohio R.C. 3743.44.
      (2)   No person who resides in another state and who purchases fireworks
in this state shall obtain possession of fireworks in this state other than
from a licensed manufacturer or wholesaler, or fail, when transporting 1.3G
fireworks, to transport them directly out of this state within 72 hours after
the time of their purchase.  No such person shall give or sell to any other
person in this state fireworks that the person has acquired in this state.
      (3)   No person who resides in this state and purchases fireworks in this
state shall obtain possession of the fireworks in this state unless the person
complies with Ohio R.C. 3743.45.
      (4)   No person who resides in this state and who purchases fireworks in
this state under Ohio R.C. 3743.45 shall obtain possession of the fireworks in
this state other than from a licensed manufacturer or licensed wholesaler, or
fail, when transporting the fireworks, to transport them directly out of this
state within 48 hours after the time of their purchase.  No such person shall
give or sell to any other person in this state fireworks that the person has
acquired in this state.
(ORC 3743.63)
   (E)   Prohibited Activities by Exhibitors.
      (1)   An exhibitor of fireworks licensed under Ohio R.C. 3743.50 through
3743.55 who wishes to conduct a public fireworks exhibition shall apply for
approval to conduct the exhibition to the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer
and to the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the
designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
having jurisdiction over the premises.
      (2)   The approval required by division (E)(1) of this section shall be
evidenced by the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief
or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police
Chief or similar chief law enforcement officer, signing a permit for the
exhibition.  Any exhibitor of fireworks who wishes to conduct a public
fireworks exhibition may obtain a copy of the form from the State Fire Marshal
or, if available, from the Fire Chief, a fire prevention officer, the Police
Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or a designee of the
Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer.
      (3)   Before a permit is signed and issued to a licensed exhibitor of
fireworks, the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in consultation with the
Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of
the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, shall inspect
the premises on which the exhibition will take place and shall determine that,
in fact, the applicant for the permit is a licensed exhibitor of fireworks. 
Each applicant shall show his or her license as an exhibitor of fireworks to
the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer.
      (4)   The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and the Police Chief or
other similar chief law enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police
Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, shall give approval to
conduct a public fireworks exhibition only if satisfied, based on the
inspection, that the premises on which the exhibition will be conducted allow
the exhibitor to comply with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.53(B) and (E) and that the applicant is, in fact, a
licensed exhibitor of fireworks.  The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in
consultation with  the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement
officer or with the designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, may inspect the premises immediately prior to the
exhibition to determine if the exhibitor has complied with the rules, and may
revoke a permit for noncompliance with the rules.
      (5)   If the Council has prescribed a fee for the issuance of a permit
for a public fireworks exhibition, the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer
and Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or their
designee, shall not issue a permit until the exhibitor pays the requisite fee.
      (6)   Each exhibitor shall provide an indemnity bond in the amount of at
least $1,000,000 with surety satisfactory to the Fire Chief or fire prevention
officer and to the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
or the designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement
officer, conditioned for the payment of all final judgments that may be
rendered against the exhibitor on account of injury, death, or loss to person
or property emanating from the fireworks exhibitor, or proof of insurance
coverage of at least $1,000,000 for liability arising from injury, death, or
loss of persons or property emanating from the fireworks exhibition.  The
Council may require the exhibitor to provide an indemnity bond or proof of
insurance coverage in amounts greater than those required by this division. 
The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and Police Chief or other similar
chief law enforcement officer, or their designee, shall not issue a permit
until the exhibitor provides the bond or proof of the insurance coverage
required by this division or by the Council.
      (7)   Each permit for a fireworks exhibition issued by the Fire Chief or
fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, or the designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief
law enforcement officer, shall contain a distinct number, designate the
municipality, and identify the certified fire safety inspector, Fire Chief, or
fire prevention officer who will be present before, during and after the
exhibition, where appropriate.  A copy of each permit issued shall be forwarded
by the Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and by the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, or designee of the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, issuing it to the State Fire Marshal.  A
permit is not transferable or assignable.
      (8)   The Fire Chief or fire prevention officer and Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, or designee of the Police Chief or other
similar chief law enforcement officer, shall keep a record of issued permits
for fireworks exhibitions.  In this list, the Fire Chief, fire prevention
officer, Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer, or
designee of the Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement officer,
shall list the name of the exhibitor, his or her license number, the premises
on which the exhibition will be conducted, the date and time of the exhibition,
and the number and political subdivision designation of the permit issued to
the exhibitor for the exhibition.
      (9)   The Council shall require that a certified fire safety inspector,
Fire Chief or fire prevention officer be present before, during and after the
exhibition, and shall require the certified fire safety inspector, Fire Chief
or fire prevention officer to inspect the premises where the exhibition is to
take place and determine whether the exhibition is in compliance with this
section and Ohio R.C. Chapter 3743.
(ORC 3743.54)
      (10)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall fail to comply with the
applicable requirements of the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant
to Ohio R.C. 3743.53(B) and (E) or to comply with Ohio R.C. 3743.53(C) and (D).
      (11)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall conduct a fireworks
exhibition unless a permit has been secured for the exhibition pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 3743.54 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, or if a permit
so secured is revoked by a Fire Chief or fire prevention officer, in
consultation with a Police Chief or other similar chief law enforcement
officer, or with a designee of a Police Chief or other similar chief law
enforcement officer, pursuant to those sections.
      (12)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall acquire fireworks for use
at a fireworks exhibition other than in accordance with Ohio R.C. 3743.54 and
3743.55, or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance.
      (13)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks or other person associated with
the conduct of a fireworks exhibition shall have possession or control of, or
be under the influence of, any intoxicating liquor, beer, or controlled
substance while on the premises on which the exhibition is being conducted.
      (14)   No licensed exhibitor of fireworks shall permit an employee to
assist the licensed exhibitor in conducting fireworks exhibitions unless the
employee is registered with the State Fire Marshal under Ohio R.C. 3743.56.
(ORC 3743.64)
   (F)   Possession, Sale, Discharge and Advertising; Falsification.
      (1)   No person shall possess fireworks in this municipality or shall
possess for sale or sell fireworks in this municipality, except a licensed
manufacturer of fireworks as authorized by Ohio R.C. 3743.02 through 3743.08, a
licensed wholesaler of fireworks as authorized by Ohio R.C. 3743.15 through
3743.21, a shipping permit holder as authorized by Ohio R.C. 3743.40, an out-
of-state resident as authorized by Ohio R.C. 3743.44, a resident of this state
as authorized by Ohio R.C. 3743.45, or a licensed exhibitor of fireworks as
authorized by Ohio R.C. 3743.50 through 3743.55, or as authorized by any
municipal ordinance that is substantially equivalent to any of these statutes,
and except as provided in Ohio R.C. 3743.80 or a substantially equivalent
municipal ordinance.
      (2)   Except as provided in Ohio R.C. 3743.80 or a substantially
equivalent municipal ordinance, and except for licensed exhibitors of fireworks
authorized to conduct a fireworks exhibition pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3743.50
through 3743.55 or a substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, no person
shall discharge, ignite, or explode any fireworks in this municipality.
      (3)   No person shall use in a theater or public hall what is technically
known as fireworks showers, or a mixture containing potassium chlorate and
sulphur.
      (4)   No person shall sell fireworks of any kind to a person under 18
years of age.  No person under 18 years of age shall enter a fireworks sales
showroom unless that person is accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or
other responsible adult. No person under 18 years of age shall touch or possess
fireworks on a licensed premises without the consent of the licensee. A
licensee may eject any person from a licensed premises that is in any way
disruptive to the safe operation of the premises.
      (5)   Except as otherwise provided in Ohio R.C. 3743.44, no person, other
than a licensed manufacturer, licensed wholesaler, licensed exhibitor, or
shipping permit holder shall possess 1.3G fireworks in this municipality.
(ORC 3743.65(A) - (E))
   (G)   Transporting and Shipping.
      (1)   No person shall transport fireworks in this municipality except in
accordance with the rules adopted by the State Fire Marshal pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 3743.58.
      (2)   As used in this division, “fireworks” includes only 1.3G and 1.4G
fireworks.  No person shall ship fireworks into this municipality by mail,
parcel post, or common carrier unless the person possesses a valid shipping
permit issued under Ohio R.C. 3743.40, and the fireworks are shipped directly
to the holder of a license issued under Ohio R.C. 3743.03, 3743.16 or 3743.51.
      (3)   No person shall ship fireworks within this municipality by mail,
parcel post, or common carrier unless the fireworks are shipped directly to the
holder of a license issued under Ohio R.C. 3743.01, 3743.16 or 3743.51.
(ORC 3743.66)
   (H)   Exceptions.  This section does not prohibit or apply to the following:
      (1)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage, or use
in emergency situations of pyrotechnic signaling devices and distress signals
for marine, aviation, or highway use;
      (2)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of fusees, torpedoes, or other signals necessary for the safe operation of
railroads;
      (3)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of blank cartridges in connection with theaters or shows, or in connection with
athletics as signals for ceremonial purposes;
      (4)   The manufacture for, the transportation, storage, possession or use
by, or the sale to the armed forces of the United States and the militia of
this state of pyrotechnic devices;
      (5)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of toy pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or other devices in which paper or plastic
caps containing 0.25 grains or less of explosive material are used, provided
that they are constructed so that a hand cannot come into contact with a cap
when it is in place for explosion, or apply to the manufacture, sale,
possession, transportation, storage or use of those caps;
      (6)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of novelties and trick noisemakers, auto burglar alarms, or model rockets and
model rocket motors designed, sold, and used for the purpose of propelling
recoverable aero models;
      (7)   The manufacture, sale, possession, transportation, storage or use
of wire sparklers.
      (8)   The conduct of radio-controlled special effect exhibitions that use
an explosive black powder charge of not more than one-quarter pound per charge,
and that are not connected in any manner to propellant charges; provided, that
the exhibition complies with all of the following:
         (a)   No explosive aerial display is conducted in the exhibition;
         (b)   The exhibition is separated from spectators by not less than 200
feet;
         (c)   The person conducting the exhibition complies with regulations
of the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms of the United States Department
of the Treasury and the United States Department of Transportation with respect
to the storage and transport of the explosive black powder used in the
exhibition.
(ORC 3743.80)
   (I)   Forfeiture and Disposal.  Fireworks manufactured, sold, possessed,
transported, or used in violation of this section shall be forfeited by the
offender.  The Fire Marshal’s office or certified fire safety inspector’s
office shall dispose of seized fireworks pursuant to the procedures specified
in Ohio R.C. 2981.11 to 2981.13 for the disposal of forfeited property by law
enforcement agencies, and the Fire Marshal or that office is not liable for
claims for the loss of or damages to the seized fireworks.
(ORC 3743.68(B))
   (J)   Penalty.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (J)(2) or (J)(3) of this
section, whoever violates any provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
      (2)   If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty
to a violation of Ohio R.C. 3743.60(I) or Ohio R.C. 3743.61(I), or a
substantially equivalent municipal ordinance, a violation of division (B)(5) of
this section or division (C)(5) of this section is a felony to be prosecuted
under appropriate state law.
      (3)   Whoever violates division (E)(10) of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  In addition to any other penalties that may
be imposed on a licensed exhibitor of fireworks under this division and unless
the third sentence of this division applies, the person’s license as an
exhibitor of fireworks or as an assistant exhibitor of fireworks shall be
suspended, and the person is ineligible to apply for either type of license,
for a period of five years.  If the violation of division (E)(10) of this
section results in serious physical harm to persons or serious physical harm to
property, the person’s license as an exhibitor of fireworks or as an assistant
exhibitor of fireworks shall be revoked, and that person is ineligible to apply
for a license as or to be licensed as an exhibitor of fireworks or as an
assistant exhibitor of fireworks in this state.
(ORC 3743.99(C), (D))
§ 672.105  LIMITING THE USE OF FIREWORKS.
   No otherwise authorized and legal public display of fireworks shall utilize
shells greater than six inches in diameter in the City of Broadview Heights.
(Ord. 43-03, passed 4-7-2003)
§ 672.12  POINTING AND DISCHARGING FIREARMS AND OTHER WEAPONS.
   (A)   Except as provided in divisions (C) and (D) of this section, no person
shall discharge any air gun, rifle, shotgun, revolver, pistol or other firearm,
or make use of any sling or arrow, within the corporate limits of the
municipality.
   (B)   No person shall, intentionally and without malice, point or aim a
firearm at or toward another or discharge a firearm so pointed or aimed.
   (C)   This section does not extend to cases in which firearms, slings or
arrows are used in self-defense, in the discharge of official duty or in
justifiable homicide.
   (D)   This section does not extend to cases in which BB guns and other air
guns, or slings or arrows, are used in the confines of dwellings, provided such
use is under adult supervision and is approved by the Chief of Police.
   (E)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of this section is guilty of a
misdemeanor of the first degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
§ 672.125  DISCHARGE OF A FIREARM ON OR NEAR PROHIBITED PREMISES.
   (A)   No person shall do any of the following:
      (1)   Without permission from the proper officials and subject to
division (B)(1) of this section, discharge a firearm upon or over a cemetery or
within 100 yards of a cemetery;
      (2)   Subject to division (B)(2) of this section, discharge of a firearm
on a lawn, park, pleasure ground, orchard, or other ground appurtenant to a
schoolhouse, church, or inhabited dwelling, the property of another, or a
charitable institution;
      (3)   Discharge a firearm upon or over a public road or highway.
   (B)   (1)   Division (A)(1) of this section does not apply to a person who
while on the person’s own land, discharges a firearm.
      (2)   Division (A)(2) of this section does not apply to a person who owns
any type of property described in that division and who, while on the person’s
own enclosure, discharges a firearm.
   (C)   Whoever violates division (A) of this section is guilty of discharge
of a firearm on or near prohibited premises. A violation of this section is a
misdemeanor of the first  degree. The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99.
(ORC 2923.162)
§ 672.13  ENDANGERING AIRCRAFT AND AIRPORT OPERATIONS.
   (A)   For the purpose of this section, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
      “Air gun.” A hand pistol or rifle that propels its projectile by means of
releasing compressed air, carbon dioxide, or other gas.
      “Airport operational surface.”  Any surface of land or water that is
developed, posted, or marked so as to give an observer reasonable notice that
the surface is designed and developed for the purpose of storing, parking,
taxiing, or operating aircraft, or any surface of land or water that is
actually being used for any of those purposes.
      “Firearm.”  Has the same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2923.11.
      “Spring-operated gun.”  A hand pistol or rifle that propels a projectile
not less than four or more than five millimeters in diameter by means of a
spring.
   (B)   No person shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Knowingly throw an object at, or drop an object upon, any moving
aircraft.
      (2)   Knowingly shoot with a bow and arrow, or knowingly discharge a
firearm, air gun, or spring- operated gun, at or toward any aircraft.
   (C)   No person shall knowingly or recklessly shoot with a bow and arrow, or
shall knowingly or recklessly discharge a firearm, air gun, or spring-operated
gun, upon or over any airport operational surface.  This division does not
apply to the following:
      (1)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or of the
United States, or a law enforcement officer, authorized to discharge firearms
and acting within the scope of his or her duties.
      (2)   A person who, with the consent of the owner or operator of the
airport operational surface or the authorized agent of either, is lawfully
engaged in any hunting or sporting activity or is otherwise lawfully
discharging a firearm.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (B) of this section is guilty of endangering
aircraft, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  If the violation creates any risk
of physical harm to any person, or if the aircraft that is the subject of the
violation is occupied, endangering aircraft is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
   (E)   Whoever violates division (C) of this section is guilty of endangering
airport operations, a misdemeanor of the first degree.  The penalty shall be as
provided in §
202.99. If the violation creates a risk of physical harm to any person or
substantial risk of serious harm to any person, endangering airport operations
is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate state law.  In addition to any
other penalty or sanction imposed for the violation, the hunting license or
permit of a person who violates division (C) of this section while hunting
shall be suspended or revoked pursuant to Ohio R.C. 1533.68.
(ORC 2909.08(A) - (E))
§ 672.14  POSSESSING CRIMINAL TOOLS.
   (A)   No person shall possess or have under his or her control any
substance, device, instrument, or article, with purpose to use it criminally.
   (B)   Each of the following constitutes prima facie evidence of criminal
purpose:
      (1)   Possession or control of any dangerous ordnance, or the materials
or parts for making a dangerous ordnance, in the absence of circumstances
indicating the dangerous ordnance, materials or parts are intended for a
legitimate use.
      (2)   Possession or control of any substance, device, instrument, or
article designed or specially adapted for criminal use.
      (3)   Possession or control of any substance, device, instrument, or
article commonly used for criminal purposes, under circumstances indicating the
item is intended for criminal use.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of possessing criminal tools. 
Except as otherwise provided in this division, possessing criminal tools is a
misdemeanor of the first degree.  The penalty shall be as provided in §
202.99. If the circumstances indicate that the substance, device, instrument,
or article involved in the offense was intended for use in the commission of a
felony, possessing criminal tools is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
(ORC 2923.24)
§ 672.15  POSSESSION OF AN OBJECT INDISTINGUISHABLE FROM A FIREARM IN A SCHOOL
SAFETY ZONE.
   (A)   No person shall knowingly possess an object in a school safety zone if
both of the following apply:
      (1)   The object is indistinguishable from a firearm, whether or not the
object is capable of being fired.
      (2)   The person indicates that the person possesses the object and that
it is a firearm, or the person knowingly displays or brandishes the object and
indicates that it is a firearm.
   (B)   (1)   This section does not apply to any of the following:
         (a)   An officer, agent, or employee of this or any other state or the
United States who is authorized to carry deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance
and is acting within the scope of the officer’s, agent’s, or employee’s duties,
a law enforcement officer who is authorized to carry deadly weapons or
dangerous ordnance, a security officer employed by a board of education or
governing body of a school during the time that the security officer is on duty
pursuant to that contract of employment, or any other person who has written
authorization from the board of education or governing body of a school to
convey deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance into a school safety zone or to
possess a deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance in a school safety zone and who
conveys or possesses the deadly weapon or dangerous ordnance in accordance with
that authorization;
         (b)   Any person who is employed in this state, who is authorized to
carry deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance, and who is subject to and in
compliance with the requirements of Ohio R.C. 109.801, unless the appointing
authority of the person has expressly specified that the exemption provided in
this division (B)(1)(b) does not apply to the person.
      (2)   This section does not apply to premises upon which home schooling
is conducted. This section also does not apply to a school administrator,
teacher or employee who possesses an object that is indistinguishable from a
firearm for legitimate school purposes during the course of employment, a
student who uses an object that is indistinguishable from a firearm under the
direction of a school administrator, teacher or employee, or any other person
who, with the express prior approval of a school administrator, possesses an
object that is indistinguishable from a firearm for a legitimate purpose,
including the use of the object in a ceremonial activity, a play, re-enactment
or other dramatic presentation, school safety training, or a ROTC activity or
another similar use of the object.
      (3)   This section does not apply to a person who conveys or attempts to
convey a handgun into, or possesses a handgun in, a school safety zone if, at
the time of that conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession of the
handgun, all of the following apply:
         (a)   The person does not enter into a school building or onto school
premises and is not at a school activity.
         (b)   The person is carrying a valid concealed handgun license or the
person is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).
         (c)   The person is in the school safety zone in accordance with 18
U.S.C. § 922(q)(2)(B).
         (d)   The person is not knowingly in a place described in R.C. §
2923.126(B)(1) or (B)(3) to (B)(8).
      (4)   This section does not apply to a person who conveys or attempts to
convey a handgun into, or possesses a handgun in, a school safety zone if at
the time of that conveyance, attempted conveyance, or possession of the handgun
all of the following apply:
         (a)   The person is carrying a valid concealed handgun license or the
person is an active duty member of the armed forces of the United States and is
carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of successful
completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training requirements
described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1).
         (b)   The person leaves the handgun in a motor vehicle.
         (c)   The handgun does not leave the motor vehicle.
         (d)   If the person exits the motor vehicle, the person locks the
motor vehicle.
   (C)   Whoever violates this section is guilty of illegal possession of an
object indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone.  Except as
otherwise provided in this division, illegal possession of an object
indistinguishable from a firearm in a school safety zone is a misdemeanor of
the first degree.  If the offender previously has been convicted of a violation
of this section, illegal possession of an object indistinguishable from a
firearm in a school safety zone is a felony to be prosecuted under appropriate
state law.
   (D)   (1)   In addition to any other penalty imposed upon a person who is
convicted of or pleads guilty to a violation of this section, and subject to
division (D)(2) of this section, if the offender has not attained 19 years of
age, regardless of whether the offender is attending or is enrolled in a school
operated by a board of education or for which the State Board of Education
prescribes minimum standards under Ohio R.C. 3301.07, the court shall impose
upon the offender a class four suspension of the offender’s probationary
driver’s license, restricted license, driver’s license, commercial driver’s
license, temporary instruction permit, or probationary commercial driver’s
license that then is in effect from the range specified in Ohio R.C. 4510.02(A)
(4) and  shall deny the offender the issuance of any permit or license of that
type during the period of the suspension. If the offender is not a resident of
this state, the court shall impose a class four suspension of the nonresident
operating privilege of the offender from the range specified in Ohio R.C.
4510.02(A)(4).
      (2)   If the offender shows good cause why the court should not suspend
one of the types of licenses, permits or privileges specified in division (D)
(1) of this section or deny the issuance of one of the temporary instruction
permits specified in division (D)(1) of this section, the court in its
discretion may choose not to impose the suspension, revocation or denial
required in division (D)(1) of this section, but the court, in its discretion,
instead may require the offender to perform community service for a number of
hours determined by the court.
   (E)   As used in this section, “object that is indistinguishable from a
firearm” means an object made, constructed or altered so that, to a reasonable
person without specialized training in firearms, the object appears to be a
firearm.
(ORC 2923.122(C) - (G))
Statutory reference:
   Conveyance or possession of deadly weapons or dangerous ordnance in a school
safety zone, felony offense, see Ohio R.C. 2923.122(A), (B)
§ 672.16  CONCEALED HANDGUN LICENSES: POSSESSION OF A REVOKED OR SUSPENDED
LICENSE; ADDITIONAL RESTRICTIONS; POSTING OF SIGNS PROHIBITING POSSESSION.
   (A)   Possession of a Revoked or Suspended Concealed Handgun License.
      (1)   No person, except in the performance of official duties, shall
possess a  concealed handgun license that was issued and that has been revoked
or suspended.
(ORC 2923.1211(B))
      (2)   Whoever violates this division (A) is guilty of possessing a
revoked or suspended concealed handgun license. The penalty shall be as
provided in §
202.99.
   (B)   Additional Restrictions. Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 2923.126:
      (1)   (a)   A concealed handgun license that is issued under R.C. §
2923.125 shall expire five years after the date of issuance. A licensee who has
been issued a license under that section shall be granted a grace period of 30
days after the licensee’s license expires during which the licensee’s license
remains valid. Except as provided in divisions (B)(2) and (B)(3) of this
section, a licensee who has been issued a concealed handgun license under R.C.
§ 2923.125 or 2923.1213 may carry a concealed handgun anywhere in this state if
the licensee also carries a valid license when the licensee is in actual
possession of a concealed handgun. The licensee shall give notice of any change
in the licensee’s residence address to the sheriff who issued the license
within 45 days after that change.
         (b)   If a licensee is the driver or an occupant of a motor vehicle
that is stopped as the result of a traffic stop or a stop for another law
enforcement purpose and if the licensee is transporting or has a loaded handgun
in the motor vehicle at that time, the licensee shall promptly inform any law
enforcement officer who approaches the vehicle while stopped that the licensee
has been issued a concealed handgun license and that the licensee currently
possesses or has a loaded handgun; the licensee shall not knowingly disregard
or fail to comply with lawful orders of a law enforcement officer given while
the motor vehicle is stopped, knowingly fail to remain in the motor vehicle
while stopped, or knowingly fail to keep the licensee’s hands in plain sight
after any law enforcement officer begins approaching the licensee while stopped
and before the officer leaves, unless directed otherwise by a law enforcement
officer; and the licensee shall not knowingly have contact with the loaded
handgun by touching it with the licensee’s hands or fingers, in any manner in
violation of Ohio R.C. 2923.16(E), after any law enforcement officer begins
approaching the licensee while stopped and before the officer leaves.
Additionally, if a licensee is the driver or an occupant of a commercial motor
vehicle that is stopped by an employee of the motor carrier enforcement unit
for the purposes defined in Ohio R.C. 5503.34 and if the licensee is
transporting or has a loaded handgun in the commercial motor vehicle at that
time, the licensee shall promptly inform the employee of the unit who
approaches the vehicle while stopped that the licensee has been issued a
concealed handgun license and that the licensee currently possesses or has a
loaded handgun.
         (c)   If a licensee is stopped for a law enforcement purpose and if
the licensee is carrying a concealed handgun at the time the officer
approaches, the licensee shall promptly inform any law enforcement officer who
approaches the licensee while stopped that the licensee has been issued a
concealed handgun license and that the licensee currently is carrying a
concealed handgun; the licensee shall not knowingly disregard or fail to comply
with lawful orders of a law enforcement officer given while the licensee is
stopped or knowingly fail to keep the licensee’s hands in plain sight after any
law enforcement officer begins approaching the licensee while stopped and
before the officer leaves, unless directed otherwise by a law enforcement
officer; and the licensee shall not knowingly remove, attempt to remove, grasp
or hold the loaded handgun or knowingly have contact with the loaded handgun by
touching it with the licensee’s hands or fingers, in any manner in violation of
Ohio R.C. 2923.12(B), after any law enforcement officer begins approaching the
licensee while stopped and before the officer leaves.
      (2)   A valid concealed handgun license does not authorize the licensee
to carry a concealed handgun in any manner prohibited under Ohio R.C. 2923.12
(B) or in any manner prohibited under Ohio R.C. 2923.16. A valid license does
not authorize the licensee to carry a concealed handgun into any of the
following places:
         (a)   A police station, sheriff’s office, or state highway patrol
station, premises controlled by the bureau of criminal identification and
investigation; a state correctional institution, jail, workhouse, or other
detention facility; any area of an airport passenger terminal that is beyond a
passenger or property screening checkpoint or to which access is restricted
through security measures by the airport authority or a public agency; or an
institution that is maintained, operated, managed, and governed pursuant to
R.C. § 5119.14(A) or R.C. § 5123.03(A)(1);
         (b)   A school safety zone if the licensee’s carrying the concealed
handgun is in violation of Ohio R.C. 2923.122;
         (c)   A courthouse or another building or structure in which a
courtroom is located if the licensee’s carrying the concealed handgun is in
violation of R.C. § 2923.123;
         (d)   Any premises or open air arena for which a D permit has been
issued under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4303 if the licensee’s carrying the concealed
handgun is in violation of Ohio R.C. 2923.121;
         (e)   Any premises owned or leased by any public or private college,
university or other institution of higher education, unless the handgun is in a
locked motor vehicle or the licensee is in the immediate process of placing the
handgun in a locked motor vehicle or unless the licensee is carrying the
concealed handgun pursuant to a written policy, rule, or other authorization
that is adopted by the institution’s board of trustees or other governing body
and that authorizes specific individuals or classes of individuals to carry a
concealed handgun on the premises;
         (f)   Any church, synagogue, mosque, or other place of worship, unless
the church, synagogue, mosque, or other place of worship posts or permits
otherwise;
         (g)   Any building that is a government facility of this state or a
political subdivision of this state and that is not a building that is used
primarily as a shelter, restroom, parking facility for motor vehicles, or rest
facility and is not a courthouse or other building or structure in which a
courtroom is located that is subject to division (b)(2)C. of this section,
unless the governing body with authority over the building has enacted a
statute, ordinance, or policy that permits a licensee to carry a concealed
handgun into the building;
         (h)   A place in which federal law prohibits the carrying of handguns.
      (3)   (a)   Nothing in this division (B) shall negate or restrict a rule,
policy, or practice of a private employer that is not a private college,
university, or other institution of higher education concerning or prohibiting
the presence of firearms on the private employer’s premises or property,
including motor vehicles owned by the private employer. Nothing in this
division (B) shall require a private employer of that nature to adopt a rule,
policy, or practice concerning or prohibiting the presence of firearms on the
private employer’s premises or property, including motor vehicles owned by the
private employer.
         (b)   1.   A private employer shall be immune from liability in a
civil action for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that
allegedly was caused by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto the
premises or property of the private employer, including motor vehicles owned by
the private employer, unless the private employer acted with malicious purpose.
A private employer is immune from liability in a civil action for any injury,
death, or loss to person or property that allegedly was caused by or related to
the private employer’s decision to permit a licensee to bring, or prohibit a
licensee from bringing, a handgun onto the premises or property of the private
employer. As used in this division, “private employer” includes a private
college, university, or other institution of higher education.
            2.   A political subdivision shall be immune from liability in a
civil action, to the extent and in the manner provided in Ohio R.C. Chapter
2744, for any injury, death, or loss to person or property that allegedly was
caused by or related to a licensee bringing a handgun onto any premises or
property owned, leased, or otherwise under the control of the political
subdivision. As used in this division, “political subdivision” has the same
meaning as in Ohio R.C. 2744.01.
         (c)   1.   a.   Except as provided in division (b)(3)C.2. of this
section and R.C. § 2923.1214, the owner or person in control of private land or
premises, and a private person or entity leasing land or premises owned by the
state, the United States, or a political subdivision of the state or the United
States, may post a sign in a conspicuous location on that land or on those
premises prohibiting persons from carrying firearms or concealed firearms on or
onto that land or those premises. Except as otherwise provided in this
division, a person who knowingly violates a posted prohibition of that nature
is guilty of criminal trespass in violation of R.C. § 2911.21(A)(4) and is
guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree. If a person knowingly violates a
posted prohibition of that nature and the posted land or premises primarily was
a parking lot or other parking facility, the person is not guilty of criminal
trespass under R.C. § 2911.21 or under any other criminal law of this state or
criminal law, ordinance, or resolution of a political subdivision of this
state, and instead is subject only to a civil cause of action for trespass
based on the violation.
               b.   If a person knowingly violates a posted prohibition of the
nature described in this division and the posted land or premises is a child
day-care center, type A family day-care home, or type B family day-care home,
unless the person is a licensee who resides in a type A family day-care home or
type B family day-care home, the person is guilty of aggravated trespass in
violation of R.C. § 2911.211. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
the offender is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the person
previously has been convicted of a violation of this division or any
substantially equivalent state law or municipal ordinance, or of any offense of
violence, if the weapon involved is a firearm that is either loaded or for
which the offender has ammunition ready at hand, or if the weapon involved is
dangerous ordnance, the offender is guilty of a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
            2.   A landlord may not prohibit or restrict a tenant who is a
licensee and who on or after September 9, 2008 enters into a rental agreement
with the landlord for the use of residential premises, and the tenant’s guest
while the tenant is present, from lawfully carrying or possessing a handgun on
those residential premises.
            3.   As used in division (b)(3)C. of this section:
               a.   “Residential premises.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. §
5321.01, except “residential premises” does not include a dwelling unit that is
owned or operated by a college or university.
               b.   “Landlord,” “tenant,” and “rental agreement.” Have the same
meanings as in R.C. § 5321.01.
      (4)   A person who holds a valid concealed handgun license issued by
another state that is recognized by the Attorney General pursuant to a
reciprocity agreement entered into pursuant to R.C. § 109.69 or a person who
holds a valid concealed handgun license under the circumstances described in
R.C. § 109.69(B) has the same right to carry a concealed handgun in this state
as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license under R.C. § 2923.125
and is subject to the same restrictions that apply to a person who carries a
license issued under that section.
      (5)   (a)   A peace officer has the same right to carry a concealed
handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license
under R.C. § 2923.125, provided that the officer when carrying a concealed
handgun under authority of this division is carrying validating identification.
For purposes of reciprocity with other states, a peace officer shall be
considered to be a licensee in this state.
         (b)   An active duty member of the armed forces of the United States
who is carrying a valid military identification card and documentation of
successful completion of firearms training that meets or exceeds the training
requirements described in R.C. § 2923.125(G)(1) has the same right to carry a
concealed handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun
license under R.C. § 2923.125 and is subject to the same restrictions as
specified in this division (b).
         (c)   A tactical medical professional who is qualified to carry
firearms while on duty under R.C. § 109.771 has the same right to carry a
concealed handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun
license under R.C. § 2923.125.
      (6)   (a)   A qualified retired peace officer who possesses a retired
peace officer identification card issued pursuant to division (b)(6)B. of this
section and a valid firearms requalification certification issued pursuant to
division (b)(6)C. of this section has the same right to carry a concealed
handgun in this state as a person who was issued a concealed handgun license
under R.C. § 2923.125 and is subject to the same restrictions that apply to a
person who carries a license issued under that section. For purposes of
reciprocity with other states, a qualified retired peace officer who possesses
a retired peace officer identification card issued pursuant to division (b)
(6)B. of this section and a valid firearms requalification certification issued
pursuant to division (b)(6)C. of this section shall be considered to be a
licensee in this state.
         (b)   1.   Each public agency of this state or of a political
subdivision of this state that is served by one or more peace officers shall
issue a retired peace officer identification card to any person who retired
from service as a peace officer with that agency, if the issuance is in
accordance with the agency’s policies and procedures and if the person, with
respect to the person’s service with that agency, satisfies all of the
following:
               a.   The person retired in good standing from service as a peace
officer with the public agency, and the retirement was not for reasons of
mental instability.
               b.   Before retiring from service as a peace officer with that
agency, the person was authorized to engage in or supervise the prevention,
detection, investigation or prosecution of, or the incarceration of any person
for, any violation of law and the person had statutory powers of arrest.
               c.   At the time of the person’s retirement as a peace officer
with that agency, the person was trained and qualified to carry firearms in the
performance of the peace officer’s duties.
               d.   Before retiring from service as a peace officer with that
agency, the person was regularly employed as a peace officer for an aggregate
of 15 years or more, or, in the alternative, the person retired from service as
a peace officer with that agency, after completing any applicable probationary
period of that service, due to a service-connected disability, as determined by
the agency.
            2.   A retired peace officer identification card issued to a person
under division (b)(6)B.1. of this section shall identify the person by name,
contain a photograph of the person, identify the public agency of this state or
of the political subdivision of this state from which the person retired as a
peace officer and that is issuing the identification card, and specify that the
person retired in good standing from service as a peace officer with the
issuing public agency and satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (b)
(6)B.1.a. to (b)(6)B.1.d. of this section. In addition to the required content
specified in this division, a retired peace officer identification card issued
to a person under division (b)(6)B.1. of this section may include the firearms
requalification certification described in division (b)(6)C. of this section,
and if the identification card includes that certification, the identification
card shall serve as the firearms requalification certification for the retired
peace officer. If the issuing public agency issues credentials to active law
enforcement officers who serve the agency, the agency may comply with division
(b)(6)B.1. of this section by issuing the same credentials to persons who
retired from service as a peace officer with the agency and who satisfy the
criteria set forth in divisions (b)(6)B.1.a. to (b)(6)B.1.d. of this section,
provided that the credentials so issued to retired peace officers are stamped
with the word “RETIRED”.
            3.   A public agency of this state or of a political subdivision of
this state may charge persons who retired from service as a peace officer with
the agency a reasonable fee for issuing to the person a retired peace officer
identification card pursuant to division (b)(6)B.1. of this section.
         (c)   1.   If a person retired from service as a peace officer with a
public agency of this state or of a political subdivision of this state and the
person satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (b)(6)B.1.a. to (b)
(6)B.1.d. of this section, the public agency may provide the retired peace
officer with the opportunity to attend a firearms requalification program that
is approved for purposes of firearms requalification required under R.C. §
109.801. The retired peace officer may be required to pay the cost of the
course.
            2.   If a retired peace officer who satisfies the criteria set
forth in divisions (b)(6)B.1.a. to (b)(6)B.1.d. of this section attends a
firearms requalification program that is approved for purposes of firearms
requalification required under R.C. § 109.801, the retired peace officer’s
successful completion of the firearms requalification program requalifies the
retired peace officer for purposes of division (b)(6) of this section for five
years from the date on which the program was successfully completed, and the
requalification is valid during that five-year period. If a retired peace
officer who satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (b)(6)B.1.a. to (b)
(6)B.1.d. of this section satisfactorily completes such a firearms
requalification program, the retired peace officer shall be issued a firearms
requalification certification that identifies the retired peace officer by
name, identifies the entity that taught the program, specifies that the retired
peace officer successfully completed the program, specifies the date on which
the course was successfully completed, and specifies that the requalification
is valid for five years from that date of successful completion. The firearms
requalification certification for a retired peace officer may be included in
the retired peace officer identification card issued to the retired peace
officer under division (b)(6)B. of this section.
            3.   A retired peace officer who attends a firearms requalification
program that is approved for purposes of firearms requalification required
under R.C. § 109.801 may be required to pay the cost of the program.
      (7)   For the purpose of division (b) of this section, the following
definitions shall apply unless the context clearly indicates or requires a
different meaning.
         (a)   “Governing body.” Has the same meaning as in R.C. § 154.01.
         (b)   “Government facility of this state or a political subdivision of
this state.” Any of the following:
            1.   A building or part of a building that is owned or leased by
the government of this state or a political subdivision of this state and where
employees of the government of this state or the political subdivision
regularly are present for the purpose of performing their official duties as
employees of the state or political subdivision;
            2.   The office of a Deputy Registrar serving pursuant to R.C.
Chapter 4503 that is used to perform deputy registrar functions.
         (c)   “Qualified retired peace officer.” A person who satisfies all of
the following:
            1.   The person satisfies the criteria set forth in divisions (b)
(6)B.1.a. to (b)(6)B.1.d. of this section.
            2.   The person is not under the influence of alcohol or another
intoxicating or hallucinatory drug or substance.
            3.   The person is not prohibited by federal law from receiving
firearms.
         (d)   “Retired peace officer identification card.” An identification
card that is issued pursuant to division (b)(6)B. of this section to a person
who is a retired peace officer.
         (e)   “Tactical medical professional.” Has the same meaning as in R.C.
§ 109.71.
         (f)   "Validating identification." Means photographic identification
issued by the agency for which an individual serves as a peace officer that
identifies the individual as a peace officer of the agency.
(ORC 2923.126)
   (C)   Posting of signs prohibiting possession. Each person, board, or entity
that owns or controls any place or premises identified in R.C. § 2923.126(B) as
a place into which a valid license does not authorize the licensee to carry a
concealed handgun, or a designee of such a person, board, or entity, shall post
in the following one or more conspicuous locations in the premises a sign that
contains a statement in substantially the following form: “Unless otherwise
authorized by law, pursuant to the Ohio Revised Code, no person shall knowingly
possess, have under the person’s control, convey, or attempt to convey a deadly
weapon or dangerous ordnance onto these premises.”
(R.C. § 2923.1212)
§ 672.17  DEFACED FIREARMS.
   (A)   No person shall do either of the following:
      (1)   Change, alter, remove, or obliterate the name of the manufacturer,
model, manufacturer’s serial number, or other mark of identification on a
firearm.
      (2)   Possess a firearm knowing or having reasonable cause to believe
that the name of the manufacturer, model, manufacturer’s serial number, or
other mark of identification on the firearm has been changed, altered, removed,
or obliterated.
   (B)   (1)   Whoever violates division (A)(1) of this section is guilty of
defacing identification marks of a firearm. Except as otherwise provided in
this division, defacing identification marks of a firearm is a misdemeanor of
the first degree. If the offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded
guilty to a violation of division (A)(1) of this section, defacing
identification marks of a firearm is a felony to be prosecuted under
appropriate state law.
      (2)   Whoever violates division (A)(2) of this section is guilty of
possessing a defaced firearm. Except as otherwise provided in this division,
possessing a defaced firearm is a misdemeanor of the first degree. If the
offender previously has been convicted of or pleaded guilty to a violation of
division (A)(2) of this section, possessing a defaced firearm is a felony to be
prosecuted under appropriate state law.
   (C)   Division (A) of this section does not apply to any firearm on which no
manufacturer’s serial number was inscribed at the time of its manufacture.
(ORC 2923.201)
§ 672.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 678:  WEED CONTROL/NUISANCE ABATEMENT
Section
678.01   Defined; declaration of hazards and nuisances
678.02   Notice to owner to cut weeds, grass, and/or abate other exterior
property area nuisances; failure to do so; assessment of costs
678.03   Notice of violation
678.04   Noncompliance; remedy of city; costs
678.05   Responsibility of owner; inspections; right of entry
678.99   Penalty/costs for nuisance abatement
Cross-reference:
   Maintenance of exterior property areas, see
Chapter 1348
Editor’s note:
   Chapter 678, previously a codification of Ordinance 53-70, passed October
26, 1970, and Ordinance 69-87, passed June 15, 1987, was reenacted in its
entirety by Ordinance 66-92, passed June 15, 1992.
Statutory reference:
   Cutting of noxious weeds along partition fences, see Ohio R.C. 971.33 et
seq.
   Destruction of noxious weeds in cemeteries, see Ohio R.C. 517.06
   Destruction of weeds by railroads, see Ohio R.C. 4959.11
   Destruction of weeds on private property, see Ohio R.C. 731.51 et seq.
   Failure or neglect to cut weeds, see Ohio R.C. 5589.11
§ 678.01  DEFINED; DECLARATION OF HAZARDS AND NUISANCES.
   (A)   On any recorded lot, whether improved or unimproved and exterior
property areas of all premises shall be kept free of any object, material or
condition which may create a health, accident or fire hazard, public nuisances
or qualified nuisances which adversely affect the value of surrounding
properties. Some examples of qualified nuisances are outside storage of seldom
moved or immovable vehicles or vehicles without license plates, except for new
or used cars customarily stored by automobile dealers, in conspicuous positions
where such storage is not part of the business conducted on the premises,
trailers and recreational equipment, collections of junk, rubbish, garbage,
weeds at a height of six inches or higher, brush, debris, tools and other
objectionable materials outside of buildings in all zoning classes in the City,
permitting buildings to fall into serious disrepair, including paint
requirements when the uncovered wood shows evidence of drying out or similar
defects, and similar nuisances.
   (B)   Prior to taking any action to abate a nuisance, the Building
Commissioner or other official investigating or seeking compliance with the
provisions hereof shall issue a three-day notice to terminate the nuisance to
the owner, occupant, agent or operator of a dwelling or structure. Notices may
be served in person, by ordinary mail, or by leaving the notice in a prominent
place on the premises. Notices to the owner may be by personal or residence
service or by ordinary mail to the tax mailing address.
   (C)   Whenever the owner, occupant, agent or operator of a dwelling or
structure fails, neglects or refuses to comply with a notice to abate a
nuisance issued in accordance with the provisions of this Code, and when such
dwelling or structure is determined by the Building Commissioner to constitute
a public nuisance in that it is injurious to the public health, safety or
welfare, the Building Commissioner may request the director of law to prepare
legislation stating such determination and authorizing the Mayor or Building
Commissioner to enter into a contract for the work necessary to abate the
nuisance. The Building Commissioner shall further give notice informing the
owner, occupant, agent or operator of such determination and action.
   (D)   In addition to or in place of taking the action authorized in
divisions (B) or (C) of this section, the Building Commissioner may file an
affidavit in the Municipal Court for a violation of the prohibition against
qualified nuisances. Prior to filing such affidavit, the Building Commissioner
or other official investigating or seeking compliance with the provisions
hereof shall cause a three-day notice to terminate the nuisance to issue to the
owner or the occupant of the premises. Notices to the occupant may be served in
person, by ordinary mail, or by leaving the notice in a prominent place on the
premises. Notices to the owner may be by personal or residence service or by
ordinary mail to the tax mailing address.
   (E)   Notwithstanding the notice and notice period required in division (A)
of this section, if the offender has received a three-day notice for a prior
violation of this section, further violations may be enforced without notice
upon the complaint of the Building Commissioner or a police officer filed
directly with the Municipal Court.
(Ord. 22-2020, passed 7-6-2020)
§ 678.02  NOTICE TO OWNER TO CUT WEEDS, GRASS, AND/OR ABATE OTHER EXTERIOR
PROPERTY AREA NUISANCES; FAILURE TO DO SO; ASSESSMENT OF COSTS.
   Council hereby reaffirms that the existence of ground cover of any sort,
including grass and/or weeds, that exists upon any property in the city which
is allowed to grow six inches in height or more and/or the existence of unkempt
property in such a condition as to cause a nuisance or devalue surrounding
property values, such as broken, uneven or improperly maintained public
sidewalks, private walks or driveways, debris scattered about, rubbish outside
of containers, junk, unused building materials, overgrowth, or other similar
condition, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance and/or a qualified public
nuisance for the reasons stated herein, and in such case the city shall take
the following steps to abate such nuisance:
   (A)   The Building Commissioner, or his or her designee, shall cause a
written notice to be served, by regular mail or by posting in a conspicuous
place on the structure or premises to which it relates, once upon the owner,
occupant or person having the charge or management of any lot or parcel of land
situated within the city, whether the same be improved or unimproved, vacant or
occupied, to cut or cause to be cut, any such ground cover growing upon such
lot or parcel of land in the city, and prevent the same from blooming or going
to seed or exceeding the height of six inches throughout the growing season,
and/or abate an exterior nuisance condition as stated herein.
   (B)   If the owner, occupant or person having the charge or management of
any lot or parcel of land does not cut or destroy, or cause to be cut or
destroyed, any such ground cover or abate a nuisance condition as provided
herein, the Building Commissioner, is hereby authorized to cause to be cut such
ground cover to a height less than six inches and/or abate the nuisance
condition(s).
   (C)   When any such ground cover is cut by the city, or caused to be cut by
the city, or a nuisance condition is abated by the city or caused to be abated
by the city, as provided herein, then after such work is performed, the city
shall give notice by regular mail or by leaving an invoice in a conspicuous
place, to the owner, occupant, or person having the charge or management of
such lot or parcel of land, at his or her last known address or by posting an
invoice on the premises as stated herein, to pay the cost of such cutting of
such ground cover and/or abatement of a nuisance condition, which notice shall
be accompanied by a statement of the amount of costs incurred by the city to
accomplish same. If the same is not paid within 30 days after the mailing of
the notice, such amount may be certified to the County Auditor for collection
as other taxes and assessments are collected or the city may seek recovery of
such costs by civil action against the property owner involved.
   (D)   Should such cost not be paid as provided for in division (C) of this
section, the Building Commissioner shall report to Council the cost thereof
with respect to each lot or parcel of land, including any and all costs
directly incidental thereto. Upon receipt of said report and approval thereof
by Council, the Director of Finance shall make a return in writing to the
County Auditor of such charges, which shall be entered upon the tax duplicate
of the county, all in accordance with R.C. § 731.54.
   (E)   Work performed by the city or caused to be done by the city under the
provisions herein shall not exceed $2,000 per incident, including
administrative fees, without resolution of the City Council.
(Ord. 66-92, passed 6-15-1992; Ord. 22-2020, passed 7-6-2020)
§ 678.03  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   (A)   Whenever the Building Commissioner and other department heads and
their representatives finds any dwelling structure or premises, or any part
thereof, to be in violation of the provisions of this Code, the Building
Commissioner shall give or cause to be given or mailed to the owner or operator
of such structure or premises a written notice stating the violations therein.
Such notice shall order the owner or operator, within a stated reasonable time,
to repair, improve or demolish the structure or premises concerned. Such
delivery or mailing shall be deemed legal service of notice.
   (B)   If the person to whom a notice of violation is addressed cannot be
found within Cuyahoga County after reasonable and diligent search, then notice
may be sent by registered mail to the last known address of such person, and a
copy of such notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the structure or
premises to which it relates. Such mailing and posting shall be deemed legal
service of notice.
   (C)   Notwithstanding the requirements of notice provided herein, when, in
the opinion of the Building Commissioner, the condition of a structure or
premises or part thereof constitutes an immediate hazard to human life or
health, or when a prior violation notice has been sent to the owner or operator
for the same or a similar violation, then no such notice of violation need be
given to the owner or operator of such building.
(Ord. 22-2020, passed 7-6-2020)
§ 678.04  NONCOMPLIANCE; REMEDY OF CITY; COSTS.
   The penalty provided in § 678.99, after service of the notice, or the
attempt thereof, as provided in § 678.03, any duly authorized employee of the
city and/or any contractor hired by the city may enter upon the property of any
owner in violation of the provisions of this chapter and cut and destroy any
weeds or grass growing and abate any nuisance thereon in violation of this
chapter. The full expense thereof shall be charged to such owner and may be
collected by the city by means of appropriate civil court action and/or as an
additional penalty and fine in any criminal proceeding associated with a
violation of this chapter.
(Ord. 66-92, passed 6-15-1992; Ord. 22-2020, passed 7-6-2020)
§ 678.05  RESPONSIBILITY OF OWNER; INSPECTIONS; RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (A)   The owner shall be responsible for compliance with all of the
provisions of this Code except where the responsibility therefor is
specifically placed elsewhere.
   (B)   The Building Commissioner and other city department heads and their
representatives are hereby authorized to make or cause to be made inspections
of all structures or premises used for dwelling purposes, and secondary or
appurtenant structures, to determine whether such structures or premises
conform to the provisions of this Code.
   (C)   Right of entry per §
1440.17.
(Ord. 22-2020, passed 7-6-2020)
§ 678.99  PENALTY/COSTS FOR NUISANCE ABATEMENT.
   Any expenses or costs incurred for nuisance abatement contained in this Code
shall be paid by the owner of the dwelling, structure or premises. If such
expenses and costs of nuisance abatement are not paid by the owner of the
dwelling, structure or premises within 30 days after written notice from the
city to do so, such expenses and costs may be recovered by an action at law or
may be assessed against the lands of the owner and shall become a lien thereon,
and shall be collected in the manner provided by law for assessments.
(Ord. 22-2020, passed 7-6-2020)
Editor’s note:
   See §
202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
PART VIII: BUSINESS REGULATION AND TAXATION CODE
TITLE TWO - BUSINESS REGULATION
   
CHAP. 810.   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES
   
CHAP. 811.   CABLE TELEVISION
   
CHAP. 812.   DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS
   
CHAP. 813.   BINGO
   
CHAP. 814.   HOTELS, MOTELS, TOURIST COURTS AND ROOMING HOUSES
   
CHAP. 816.   JUKE BOXES AND MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES
   
CHAP. 818.   LANDFILLS
   
CHAP. 820.   MASS MUSICAL OR PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT
   
CHAP. 824.   OIL AND GAS WELLS
   
CHAP. 828.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
   
CHAP. 830.   PRIVATE SALES
   
CHAP. 832.   PUBLIC PICNIC AND RECREATION PLACES
   
CHAP. 840.   SNOW REMOVAL SERVICES
   
CHAP. 848.   TREE REMOVAL AND SALES
TITLE FOUR - TAXATION
   
CHAP. 880.   EARNED INCOME TAX, EFFECTIVE THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2015
   
CHAP. 881.  EARNED INCOME TAX, EFFECTIVE BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2016
   
CHAP. 884.  HOTEL TAX
   
CHAP. 886.  MOTOR VEHICLE EXCISE TAX
   
CHAP. 888.  COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT AREAS
TITLE TWO:  BUSINESS REGULATION
   
CHAP. 810.   ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES
   
CHAP. 811.   CABLE TELEVISION
   
CHAP. 812.   DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS
   
CHAP. 813.   BINGO
   
CHAP. 814.   HOTELS, MOTELS, TOURIST COURTS AND ROOMING HOUSES
   
CHAP. 816.   JUKE BOXES AND MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES
   
CHAP. 818.   LANDFILLS
   
CHAP. 820.   MASS MUSICAL OR PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT
   
CHAP. 824.   OIL AND GAS WELLS
   
CHAP. 828.   PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
   
CHAP. 830.   PRIVATE SALES
   
CHAP. 832.   PUBLIC PICNIC AND RECREATION PLACES
   
CHAP. 840.   SNOW REMOVAL SERVICES
   
CHAP. 848.   TREE REMOVAL AND SALES
CHAPTER 810: ADULT ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESSES
Section
810.01   Indecent exposure of waiters, waitresses or entertainers in beverage
or food establishments
810.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Adult entertainment businesses in zoning districts, see §§
1276.10,
1277.10,
1280.02
   Safety of crowds at performances, see §
636.20
   Sex related offenses, see
Chapter 666
Statutory reference:
   Authority of municipalities re houses of ill fame, see Ohio R.C. 715.52
§ 810.01  INDECENT EXPOSURE OF WAITERS, WAITRESSES OR ENTERTAINERS IN BEVERAGE
OR FOOD ESTABLISHMENTS.
   (A)   As used in this section, the term “beverages” shall include, but shall
not be limited to, alcoholic beverages.
   (B)   No person shall, while acting as a server, waiter, waitress,
entertainer or employee in an establishment which serves food alone, beverages
alone, or food and beverages, for consumption on the premises of the
establishment:
      (1)   Expose his or her genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal
region or pubic-hair region;
      (2)   Expose any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance
of or simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region or
pubic-hair region; or
      (3)   Expose any portion of the female breast at or below the areola
thereof.
   (C)   A person shall be deemed to be a server, waiter, waitress, entertainer
or employee if such person acts in that capacity without regard to whether or
not such person is paid any compensation by the owner or management of the
establishment in which the activity is performed.
   (D)   No person shall cause, permit, procure, counsel or assist any person
to expose or simulate exposure as prohibited in division (B) hereof.
(Ord. 28-93, passed 3-1-1993)
§ 810.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 811:  CABLE TELEVISION
Section
811.01   Regulation of basic cable television rates
811.02   Establishment and duties of cable regulatory staff
811.03   Computation of time
811.04   Effective date of rate regulation for basic service and equipment
811.05   Initiation of review of basic cable service and equipment rates
811.06   Participation of interested parties
811.07   Staff and Council review of basic cable rates and equipment costs
811.08   Additional time for review of rates for basic service and equipment
811.09   Small systems
811.10   Written decision
811.11   Proprietary information
811.12   Forfeitures for noncompliance
811.13   Burden of proof
811.14   Notification of proposed rate increase
811.15   Change in status of cable operator
811.16   VSP fees
Cross-reference:
   Dish-type satellite receiving stations, see
Chapter 1326
   “Property” defined to include cable television service, see §
606.01
   “Services” defined to include cable television service, see §
642.01
   Wireless telecommunications facilities, see
Chapter 1344
Statutory reference:
   Cable television contracts, see Ohio R.C. 505.90 et seq.
   Interrupting or impairing television service, see Ohio R.C. 2909.04
   Regulation of political broadcasts, see Ohio R.C. 3599.09
§ 811.01  REGULATION OF BASIC CABLE TELEVISION RATES.
   The city hereby adopts, by this chapter, the rate regulation rules
promulgated by the FCC pursuant to the Cable Television Consumer Protection and
Competition Act of 1992 (“1992 Cable Act”), 47 C.F.R., Part 76, Subpart N,
being 47 C.F.R. §§ 76.901 et seq. The determination of the lawfulness of any
cable television rate within the city’s jurisdiction will be made pursuant to
these FCC rules or any successor FCC regulations. All terms used herein have
the same meaning and application as in the FCC’s cable rate regulation rules.
(Ord. 120-93, passed 12-6-1993)
§ 811.02  ESTABLISHMENT AND DUTIES OF CABLE REGULATORY STAFF.
   (A)   A cable regulatory staff (“the staff”) for the city will be organized
by the Mayor with the assistance, as desired, of the Cuyahoga County Mayors and
Managers Association, in order to administer the regulation of basic cable
service and equipment rates pursuant to FCC’s cable rate regulations and the
1992 Cable Act, with the aid of counsel and other consultants as may be needed.
The Council may at any time delegate additional duties to the staff.
   (B)   In all instances involving the determination of the lawfulness of a
cable television service rate or rates, the staff will present to the Council a
recommended decision based on the record. The Council may adopt, amend or
remand for further review a recommended decision of the staff. The Council may
also direct the staff at any time to investigate issues pertaining to cable
rate regulation and provide a recommended decision. Any adoption by the Council
of any recommended decision by the staff regarding the lawfulness of a cable
television service rate or rates shall be considered a final decision. The
staff shall communicate the results of final decisions to the affected cable
operators in writing.
(Ord. 120-93, passed 12-6-1993)
§ 811.03  COMPUTATION OF TIME.
   This section only applies to time periods that need to be computed for
participation in cable rate regulation proceedings administered by the staff or
the Council.
   (A)   The term “day” shall apply to all days, regardless of holidays.
   (B)   The term “business day” means all days which are not “holidays.”
   (C)   If the date for any event specified in these rules falls on a holiday,
the relevant date will be the next business day.
   (D)   The term “holiday” means Saturday, Sunday, officially recognized legal
holidays and any other day on which the staff offices are not open. For
example, a regularly scheduled staff business day may become a “holiday” if its
offices are closed for all or part of regular working hours due to adverse
weather or emergency conditions.
   (E)   The first day to be counted in any period of time is the day after the
event which initiates the period. For example, if comments are to be filed
within five days of a public notice issued on November 12, the deadline for
filing the comments would be November 17.
(Ord. 120-93, passed 12-6-1993)
§ 811.04  EFFECTIVE DATE OF RATE REGULATION FOR BASIC SERVICE AND EQUIPMENT.
   Pursuant to 47 C.F.R. §§ 76.910(e)(2) and 76.922, the initial date of
regulation for the basic service tier shall be the date on which local notice
is given to the cable operator that the provision of the basic service tier is
subject to rate regulation. This local notice will be in the form of a letter
sent by the staff to the cable operator.
(Ord. 120-93, passed 12-6-1993)
§ 811.05  INITIATION OF REVIEW OF BASIC CABLE SERVICE AND EQUIPMENT RATES.
   Pursuant to 47 C.F.R. § 76.930, a cable operator shall file its schedule of
rates for the basic service tier and associated equipment with the staff within
30 days of receiving written notification from the staff that the city has been
certified by the FCC to regulate rates for the basic service tier. To comply
with this provision, a cable operator must file a Form 393 regarding rates that
were charged since September 1, 1993, or one year prior to the commencement of
the city’s rate regulation, whichever is the shorter period, and a second Form
393 regarding any proposed rate increases.
(Ord. 120-93, passed 12-6-1993)
§ 811.06  PARTICIPATION OF INTERESTED PARTIES.
   (A)   For purposes of this chapter, “public notice” shall mean publication
in a newspaper of general circulation as described in Ohio R.C. 7.12.
   (B)   Pursuant to 47 C.F.R. § 76.935, the staff shall, within a reasonable
time, but in any case within the 21 days after receiving the cable operator’s
Form 393 and any related material, issue a public notice stating that it has
received this information.
   (C)   The notice will provide the address of the city or staff office where
the operator’s Form 393 and any related material will be available for public
viewing within specified times. The notice will also provide the address and
telephone number of the cable operator. The cable operator is required to
provide interested parties, upon request, with copies of the Form 393 and any
related materials filed with the staff.
   (D)   After the staff issues the public notice described in divisions (A)
through (C) of this section, interested parties will have five business days to
file written comments with the staff. There is no prescribed format for these
comments.
(Ord. 120-93, passed 12-6-1993)
§ 811.07  STAFF AND COUNCIL REVIEW OF BASIC CABLE RATES AND EQUIPMENT COSTS.
   (A)   Pursuant to 47 C.F.R. § 76.933(a), after a cable operator has
submitted for review its existing or past rates for the basic service tier and
associated equipment costs, or a proposed increase in these rates (including
increases in the baseline channel change that results from reductions in the
number of channels in a tier), the existing rates will remain in effect or the
proposed rates will become effective after 30 days from the date of submission;
provided, however, that the staff may toll this 30-day deadline for an
additional time by issuing a brief written order as described in division (B)
hereof within 30 days of the rate submission explaining that it needs
additional time to review the rates.
   (B)   Pursuant to 47 C.F.R. § 76.933(b), if the staff is unable to
determine, based upon the material submitted by the cable operator, that the
past, existing or proposed rates are within the FCC’s permitted basic service
tier charge or actual cost of equipment as defined in 47 C.F.R. §§ 76.922 and
76.923, or if a cable operator has submitted a cost-of-service showing pursuant
to 47 C.F.R. §§ 76.937(c) and 76.924, seeking to justify a rate above the FCC’s
basic service tier charge as defined in 47 C.F.R. §§ 76.922 and 76.923, then
the staff may toll the 30-day deadline set forth in division (A) above to
request and consider additional information or to consider the comments from
interested parties as follows:
      (1)   For an additional 90 days in cases not involving cost-of-service
showings, for a total of 120 days from the filing by the cable operator of the
Form 393; or
      (2)   For an additional 150 days in cases involving cost-of-service
showings, for a total of 180 days from the filing by the cable operator of the
Form 393.
   (C)   Pursuant to 47 C.F.R. § 76.933(c), if the staff has availed itself of
the additional 90 or 150 days permitted under division (B) hereof, whichever is
applicable, and has taken no action within these additional time periods, then
the proposed rates will go into effect at the end of the 90- or 150-day
periods, whichever is applicable, or, if no new rates have been proposed, then
the existing rates will remain in effect at such times. All rates allowed into
effect under this division (C) will remain subject to refunds if the staff
subsequently issues a written decision disapproving any portion of such rates;
provided, however, that in order to order refunds, the staff must have issued a
brief written order to the cable operator by the end of the 90- or 150-day
period permitted under division (B) hereof, whichever is applicable, directing
the operator to keep an accurate account of all amounts received by reason of
the rate in issue and on whose behalf such amounts were paid.
   (D)   If the staff does not seek additional time, the staff will, within the
30-day deadline, submit a recommended decision to the Council about the
reasonableness of the cable operator’s rates. If, within the 30-day period, the
Council does not act upon the staff’s recommended decision, then the
recommended decision will be considered a final decision.
(Ord. 120-93, passed 12-6-1993)
§ 811.08  ADDITIONAL TIME FOR REVIEW OF RATES FOR BASIC SERVICE AND EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   If the staff has availed itself of the additional 90 or 150 days
permitted in 47 C.F.R. § 76.933(b), whichever is applicable, then the staff
shall publish a schedule for the issuance of a recommended decision within the
additional time and for the submission of comments by interested parties.
   (B)   Thirty days before the ninetieth day or the one hundred fiftieth day,
whichever is applicable, the staff shall publish a draft of its recommended
decision. Interested parties will then have five business days to file comments
with the staff regarding the recommended decision.
   (C)   Upon the expiration of the comment period set forth in division (B)
hereof, the record for the cable rate regulation proceeding will close. The
Council will then have an opportunity to review the recommended decision and
any comments or documents filed in the rate proceeding. Nothing in this
division (C) prohibits the Council from reviewing the staff’s draft recommended
decision or documents filed with the staff at any time.
   (D)   If the Council does not act upon the staff’s recommended decision by
the ninetieth or the one hundred fiftieth day, whichever is applicable, then
the recommended decision will be considered the final decision.
   (E)   Within the 90 or 150-day period, whichever is applicable, the Council
may remand the recommended decision to the staff for further review based on
the Council’s recommendations.
   (F)   If the period for additional review by the staff extends beyond the
applicable period specified in division (A) hereof, then the proposed rates
will go into effect at the end of the 90 or 150-day period, whichever is
applicable, or, if no new rates have been proposed, then the existing rates
will remain in effect at such times. All rates allowed into effect under this
division (F) will remain subject to refunds in the event that the staff
subsequently issues a written decision, pursuant to 47 C.F.R. § 76.933(c),
disapproving any portion of such rates.
(Ord. 120-93, passed 12-6-1993)
§ 811.09  SMALL SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Pursuant to 47 C.F.R. § 76.934, the Council may permit a small system,
as defined in 47 C.F.R. § 76.901, to certify that the small system’s rates for
basic service and associated equipment comply with 47 C.F.R. § 76.922.
   (B)   A system seeking the certification described in division (A) hereof
must file a petition to this effect with the staff.
   (C)   Within a reasonable time of receiving such a petition, the staff shall
issue a public notice, as described in §
811.06, stating that it has received such a petition. The notice will provide
the address of the staff office where the petition will be available for public
viewing within specified times. The notice will also provide the address and
telephone number of the cable operator. The cable operator is required to
provide interested parties with copies of the petition. In addition, the notice
will also provide a date for the presentation of a recommended decision by the
staff to the Council and shall set a date by which the Council must act upon
the recommended decision, which shall be at least 30 days after the submission
of the staff’s recommended decision. If the Council takes no action by the date
designated by the staff, then the recommended decision shall be considered a
final decision.
   (D)   After the staff issues the public notice described in division (C)
hereof, interested parties will have five business days to file written
comments with the staff. There is no prescribed format for these comments.
(Ord. 120-93, passed 12-6-1993)
§ 811.10  WRITTEN DECISION.
   (A)   Pursuant to 47 C.F.R. § 76.936, the staff will issue a written
decision in a ratemaking proceeding whenever it or the Council disapproves an
initial or past rate for the basic service tier or associated equipment in
whole or in part, disapproves a request for a rate increase in whole or in
part, or approves a request for an increase in whole or in part over the
objections of interested parties. In the event that the Council has taken
action which constitutes a final decision of such nature, the written decision
will not issue until approved by Council.
   (B)   The staff is not required to issue a written decision that approves an
unopposed past, existing or proposed rate for the basic service tier or
associated equipment. The written decision may follow the announcement of a
final decision by a period not to exceed 30 days, unless additional time is
necessary for Council approval as required in this section.
(Ord. 120-93, passed 12-6-1993)
§ 811.11  PROPRIETARY INFORMATION.
   (A)   Pursuant to 47 C.F.R. § 76.938, the staff may require the production
of proprietary information by the cable operator to make a rate determination
and in such cases the staff will devise and apply procedures analogous to those
set forth in 47 C.F.R. § 0.459 regarding requests for confidentiality. If no
request for confidentiality is made, or if the staff denies a request for
confidentiality, the information will be made available for public inspection
pursuant to Ohio R.C. 149.43.
   (B)   A cable operator may appeal to the Council a denial by the staff of a
request for confidentiality. The material which is subject to the request for
confidentiality will not be made available for public inspection pending a
Council decision on the request.
(Ord. 120-93, passed 12-6-1993)
§ 811.12  FORFEITURES FOR NONCOMPLIANCE.
   (A)   Pursuant to 47 C.F.R. § 76.943(a), Council hereby authorizes the Mayor
to impose a civil monetary forfeiture on any cable operator that does not
comply with a rate decision or a refund order directed specifically at the
cable operator. In his or her decision to impose such a forfeiture, the Mayor
may consider the pendency of any appeals or legal action involving the rate
decision or refund order, the amount of the refund or rate reduction, and the
intentional or unintentional nature of the noncompliance.
   (B)   Such forfeitures may be imposed pursuant to the following schedule:
      (1)   Failure to implement a rate reduction or refund within 60 days of
the date of the communication to the cable operator of the written decision
ordering such rate reduction or refund: $10,000; and
      (2)   Failure to implement a rate reduction or refund after 60 days of
the date of the communication to the cable operator of the written decision
ordering such rate reduction or refund: $1,000 per day for each day of
noncompliance.
(Ord. 120-93, passed 12-6-1993)
§ 811.13  BURDEN OF PROOF.
   (A)   Pursuant to 47 C.F.R. § 76.937(a), a cable operator has the burden of
proving that its past, existing or proposed rates for basic service and
associated equipment comply with 47 U.S.C. § 543 and 47 C.F.R. §§ 76.922 and
76.923.
   (B)   For a past, existing or proposed rate for basic tier service or
associated equipment that is within the permitted tier charge and actual cost
of equipment, as set forth in §§ 76.922 and 76.923, the cable operator must
submit the appropriate FCC form.
   (C)   For a past, existing or proposed rate for basic tier service that
exceeds the permitted tier charge, as set forth in 47 C.F.R. §§ 76.922 and
76.923, the cable operator must submit a cost-of-service showing to justify the
proposed rate.
(Ord. 120-93, passed 12-6-1993)
§ 811.14  NOTIFICATION OF PROPOSED RATE INCREASE.
   Pursuant to 47 C.F.R. § 76.922, a cable operator shall provide written
notice to a subscriber of any increase in the price to be charged for the basic
service tier or associated equipment at least 30 days before any proposed
increase is effective. The notice shall include the name and address of the
Council and the staff.
(Ord. 120-93, passed 12-6-1993)
§ 811.15  CHANGE IN STATUS OF CABLE OPERATOR.
   (A)   Pursuant to 47 C.F.R. § 76.916, a cable operator may petition the city
for a change in its regulatory status based on a showing of effective
competition. The operator bears the burden of proving the existence of
effective competition.
   (B)   Within a reasonable time of receiving a cable operator’s petition for
a change in regulatory status, the staff shall issue a public notice stating
that the city has received such a petition. The notice will contain a date for
the presentation of a recommended decision by the staff to the Council. The
notice will also contain the address of the staff office where the operator’s
petition will be available for public viewing within specified times. The
notice will also provide the name and address of the cable operator. The cable
operator is required to provide interested parties with copies of the petition
upon request.
   (C)   Pursuant to 47 C.F.R. § 76.916(a), oppositions to the operator’s
petition may be filed with the staff within 15 days of public notice of the
filing of the petition, and must be served on the operator. The cable operator
may reply within seven days of filing of oppositions.
   (D)   The initial public notice issued by the staff will contain a schedule
for the presentation of a recommended decision to the Council. Pursuant to 47
C.F.R. § 76.916(b), decisions on petitions for change in status must be made
within 30 days after the pleading cycle set forth in divisions (B) and (C)
hereof closes. The staff must notify the FCC within ten days of any decision
changing regulatory status. Unless the FCC receives an opposition to such
change in status, the decision will become effective 30 days after adoption by
the Council.
   (E)   Pursuant to 47 C.F.R. § 76.916(c), if there is a final determination
by the Council that effective competition exists, then the Council and the
staff will cease regulating basic cable service rates. A final determination
that there is no effective competition may be appealed to the FCC pursuant to
the FCC’s rules.
(Ord. 120-93, passed 12-6-1993)
§ 811.16  VSP FEES.
   (A)   In accordance with the requirements of Ohio R.C. 1332.32, and subject
to its taking effect, all video service providers providing video service
within the city, pursuant to a video service authorization obtained from the
Director of the Ohio Department of Commerce, shall pay video service provider
fees (“VSP fees”) in the amount of 5% of gross revenues received from providing
video services in the city, which gross revenue base shall include advertising
revenues as permitted and defined by Ohio R.C. 1332.32(B)(2)(g). The VSP fee
shall be paid quarterly, not sooner than 45 days nor later than 60 days after
the end of each calendar quarter.
   (B)   The Mayor is hereby authorized and directed, upon receipt of notice
from a video service provider that it will begin providing video service in the
city pursuant to a state-issued video service authorization, to provide such
video service provider with notice of the VSP fee as determined by this Council
above, which notice may be given by overnight (return receipt), certified mail
or other manner of delivery no later than ten days from receipt of the
provider’s notice.
(Ord. 22-08, passed 2-19-2008; Ord. 57-08, passed 4-28-2008)
CHAPTER 812:  DISTRIBUTION OF HANDBILLS
Section
812.01   Definitions
812.02   Exemption for mail and newspapers
812.03   Inhabited private premises
812.04   Posted private premises
812.05   Uninhabited or vacant premises
812.06   Placing on vehicles
812.07   Distribution in public places
812.08   Application of chapter
812.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Advertising on traffic control devices, see §
414.07
   Peddlers and solicitors, see
Chapter 828
   Posting handbills, posters, placards, see §
642.27
§ 812.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter.
   “Handbill.” Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, or any
dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or other printed or
otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature.
   “Newspaper.” Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law,
any newspaper duly entered with the Post Office Department of the United
States, in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper
filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law. In
addition, “newspaper” means and includes any periodical or current magazine
regularly published with not less than four issues per year and sold to the
public, and any other copyrighted material.
   “Vehicle.” Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or
may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively
upon stationary rails or tracks.
§ 812.02  EXEMPTION FOR MAIL AND NEWSPAPERS.
   The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the distribution of mail
by the United States, or to newspapers, except that newspapers shall be placed
on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or
deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or
upon private property.
§ 812.03  INHABITED PRIVATE PREMISES.
   No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill in or upon private
premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such
handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or
upon such private premises. However, in the case of inhabited private premises
which are not posted, a person, unless requested by anyone upon such premises
not to do so, may place or deposit a handbill in or upon such premises if such
handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from
being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other
public places, except that mailboxes may not be so used when prohibited by
federal postal law or regulation.
§ 812.04  POSTED PRIVATE PREMISES.
   No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any handbill upon any private
premises if requested by anyone thereon not to do so or if there is placed on
such premises a sign bearing the words: “No Trespassing”, “No Peddlers or
Agent”, “No Advertisement” or similar notice indicating in any manner that the
occupants of such premises do not wish to have their right of privacy disturbed
or to have any handbills left upon such premises.
§ 812.05  UNINHABITED OR VACANT PREMISES.
   No person shall knowingly throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any
private premises which are uninhabited or vacant.
§ 812.06  PLACING ON VEHICLES.
   No person shall throw or deposit any handbill in or upon any vehicle.
§ 812.07  DISTRIBUTION IN PUBLIC PLACES.
   No person shall hand out, distribute or sell any handbill in any public
place, except that a handbill may be personally delivered to any person willing
to accept the same.
§ 812.08  APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
   The provisions of this chapter shall be deemed to apply to any person
carrying, distributing, scattering or placing handbills, posters, advertising
matter, newspapers or periodicals or other similar matter and to any person
responsible for the publication or circulation thereof or in whose interest the
same are published or distributed, including the advertisers therein.
§ 812.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 813:  BINGO
Section
813.01   Non-charity instant bingo prohibited
813.02   Profit by owner of premises prohibited
Cross-reference:
   Gambling devices, see §§
816.02,
816.09
   Gambling generally, see
Chapter 630
§ 813.01  NON-CHARITY INSTANT BINGO PROHIBITED.
   (A)   “Scheme or game of chance conducted for profit” means any scheme or
game of chance, including, but not limited to instant bingo, designed to
produce income for the person who conducts or operates the scheme or game of
chance, but does not include a charitable bingo game.
   (B)   This section does not apply to schemes of chance conducted by a
charitable organization that is and has received from the Internal Revenue
Service a determination letter that is currently in effect, stating that the
organization is exempt from federal income taxation under § 501(a)(1) and
described in § 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, provided that all of the
money or assets received from such scheme of chance after deduction only of
prizes paid out during the conduct of the scheme of chance are used by, or
given, donated or otherwise transferred to, any organization that is described
in §§ 509(a)(1), 509(a)(2) or 509(a)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code, being 26
U.S.C. § 509, and is either a governmental unit or an organization that is tax
exempt under § 501(a) and described in § 509(a)(3) of the Internal Revenue
Code, being 26 U.S.C. §§ 501 through 509, and provided that the scheme of
chance is not conducted during or within ten hours of a bingo game conducted
for amusement purposes only, pursuant to §
630.09 of this Code of Ordinances.
   (C)   Except as provided in division (B) of this section and except for the
sale of raffle tickets by a charitable organization and lottery tickets
sponsored by the state, schemes of chance shall be conducted on premises owned
by the charitable organization for a period of no less than one year
immediately preceding the conducting of the schemes of chance, on premises
leased or licensed from a governmental unit or on premises that are leased from
a veteran’s fraternal organization for a period of no less than one year
immediately preceding the conducting of the schemes of chance.
(Ord. 124-01, passed 10-1-2001)
§ 813.02  PROFIT BY OWNER OF PREMISES PROHIBITED.
   (A)   No person being the owner or lessee, or having custody, control or
supervision of any premises, shall use or occupy any premises or portion
thereof for the sale, transfer or distribution, whether done manually or
through any mechanical or electronic device, of “Instant Bingo” tickets or
similar items in which, in exchange for some consideration, a person receives a
ticket or other item or the electronic or mechanical simulation thereof, that
can reveal that the holder or player has won a prize in cash or otherwise,
unless same is done in conjunction with a bingo game conducted by a duly
authorized organization that has obtained a bingo license pursuant to Ohio R.C.
2915.08 and provided further that it is conducted only during the times as
stated on the bingo license and not at any other time.
   (B)   This section shall not apply to the sale, transfer or distribution of
any items by the Ohio Lottery Commission or its duly authorized agents pursuant
to state law.
(Ord. 124-01, passed 10-1-2001)
CHAPTER 814:  HOTELS, MOTELS, TOURIST COURTS AND ROOMING HOUSES
Section
814.01   Hotel defined
814.02   License required; fees
814.03   License application
814.04   License display
814.05   License revocation
814.06   License transfer
814.07   Indecency prohibited
814.08   Registration of guests
814.09   Numbering of rooms
814.10   Liability of innkeeper
814.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Defrauding a hostelry, see §
642.17
   Hotel tax, see
Chapter 884
Statutory reference:
   Hotels, see Ohio R.C. 3731.01 et seq.
   Innkeepers, see Ohio R.C. 4721.01 et seq.
§ 814.01  HOTEL DEFINED.
   As used in this chapter, the word “hotel” means and includes hotels, motels,
tourist courts and rooming and lodging houses, where sleeping accommodations
are offered to guests for less than 30 days.
(Ord. 46-81, passed 9-8-1981)
§ 814.02  LICENSE REQUIRED; FEES.
   (A)   No person shall conduct, keep, manage, operate or cause to be
conducted, kept, managed and operated, either as owner, lessor, lessee, agent
or attorney, any hotel, motel, tourist court or rooming or lodging house in the
city without first having obtained a license from the Building Commissioner to
do so. The fee for each license shall be in accordance with the following
schedule:
      (1)   Hotels: $100 plus $10 for each individual unit;
      (2)   Motels: $100 plus $10 for each individual unit;
      (3)   Tourist courts: $100 plus $10 for each individual unit; and
      (4)   Rooming and lodging houses: $100.
   (B)   Every license shall expire on December 31 of each year. The first year
shall be pro-rated on a monthly basis.
(Ord. 46-81, passed 9-8-1981; Ord. 44-92, passed 4-20-1992)
§ 814.03  LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   No license shall be issued to any person to conduct a hotel, motel,
tourist court or rooming or lodging house in the city unless such person has
first made application and presented information required by the Chief of
Police. When application for a license is made by or on behalf of a
partnership, corporation or association, such application shall be made by the
manager, officer, agent or other person who will have the charge and management
of such hotel, motel, tourist court, rooming house or lodging house.
   (B)   The Chief of Police shall report to the Building Commissioner the
results of his or her investigation of each applicant.
(Ord. 46-81, passed 9-8-1981; Ord. 44-92, passed 4-20-1992)
§ 814.04  LICENSE DISPLAY.
   Every person to whom a license is issued, as provided in this chapter, shall
display such license in a conspicuous manner in the office of the hotel, motel,
tourist court, rooming house or lodging house to which such license relates.
(Ord. 46-81, passed 9-8-1981)
§ 814.05  LICENSE REVOCATION.
   The Building Commissioner may revoke any license issued under this chapter
for violation of any provision of such chapter. Before such revocation,
however, the licensee shall be notified and upon request shall have a hearing
before a board consisting of the Building Commissioner, Chief of Police and
Director of Law.
(Ord. 44-92, passed 4-20-1992)
§ 814.06  LICENSE TRANSFER.
   No license issued under this chapter shall be transferred or assigned.
(Ord. 46-81, passed 9-8-1981)
§ 814.07  INDECENCY PROHIBITED.
   No person to whom a license is issued, as provided in this chapter, shall
suffer or permit the hotel, motel, tourist court, rooming house or lodging
house to which such license relates, to be used for the purpose of prostitution
or showing of pornographic movies.
(Ord. 46-81, passed 9-8-1981)
§ 814.08  REGISTRATION OF GUESTS.
   Every owner or operator of a hotel shall require every occupant of the
sleeping or living quarters to register prior to occupancy, with a full name,
address and motor vehicle make and license number, if any. Records of such
registration shall be maintained in a permanent volume and such records shall
be retained in such form for a period of at least three years in the case of
each registration. Such registration shall be made available and accessible to
any member of the Police Department in the exercise of his or her official
duties.
(Ord. 18-92, passed 3-2-1992)
§ 814.09  NUMBERING OF ROOMS.
   Any person to whom a license has been issued shall cause each sleeping room
in such hotel to which such license relates, to be numbered in a plain and
conspicuous manner, the number to be placed on the outside of the door to such
room. No two doors shall bear the same number.
(Ord. 46-81, passed 9-8-1981)
§ 814.10  LIABILITY OF INNKEEPER.
   (A)   Where a license has been issued to any partnership, corporation or
association to conduct a hotel, motel, tourist court, rooming house or lodging
house, any person having charge, management or control of such places shall be
liable to prosecution for any violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter, but is not responsible for the correctness of the information required
by §
814.08.
   (B)   For the purpose of determining the liability of any person to
prosecution for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, it shall be
sufficient to show that such person was, at the time of the act of violation
complained of, the person in actual charge, management or control of the hotel
in which such act is alleged to have been committed.
(Ord. 46-81, passed 9-8-1981)
§ 814.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree. Punishment shall be as
provided in §
202.99.
(Ord. 46-81, passed 9-8-1981)
CHAPTER 816:  JUKE BOXES AND MECHANICAL AMUSEMENT DEVICES
Section
816.01   Definitions
816.02   Gambling devices prohibited
816.03   License required
816.04   License application
816.05   Investigation and inspection
816.06   License fee; term
816.07   License display; transfer
816.08   License revocation; hearing
816.09   Seizure and destruction of gambling devices
816.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Gambling, see
Chapter 630
   Making or using slugs, see §
642.16
   Tampering with coin machines, see §
642.13
§ 816.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   “Juke box.” Any music vending machine, contrivance or device which, upon the
insertion of a coin, slug, token, plate, disc or key into any slot, crevice or
other opening, or by the payment of any price, operates or may be operated for
the emission of songs, music or similar amusement.
   “Mechanical amusement device.” Any machine which, upon the insertion of a
coin, slug, token, plate or disc, may be operated by the public generally for
use as a game, entertainment or amusement, whether or not registering a score.
It includes such devices as marble machines, pinball machines, skill ball
machines, mechanical grab machines and all games, operations or transactions
similar thereto under whatever name they may be indicated, including electronic
or video games.
   “Person.” Includes any person, firm, corporation or association who or which
owns any such machines; the person, firm, corporation or association in whose
place of business any such machine is placed for use by the public; and the
person, firm, corporation or association having control over such machines.
(Ord. 17-87, passed 4-6-1987)
§ 816.02  GAMBLING DEVICES PROHIBITED.
   Nothing in this chapter shall in any way be construed to authorize, license
or permit any gambling device whatsoever, or any mechanism that has been
judicially determined to be a gambling device or in any way contrary to law, or
that may be contrary to any future law of the state or municipality.
(Ord. 17-87, passed 4-6-1987)
§ 816.03  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall display for public patronage or keep for operation any juke
box or mechanical amusement device without first obtaining a license therefor
upon payment of a license fee. An application for such a license shall be made
to the Mayor upon a form to be supplied by the municipality. An owner or
operator of such a device in existence on the date of adoption of this chapter
(Ordinance 17-87, passed April 6, 1987) shall have 30 days to comply with this
chapter.
(Ord. 17-87, passed 4-6-1987)
§ 816.04  LICENSE APPLICATION.
   (A)   The application for a juke box or mechanical amusement device license
shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The name and address of the applicant and his or her age, date and
place of birth;
      (2)   Prior felony convictions or convictions of any crimes involving
moral turpitude of the applicant, if any;
      (3)   The place where the machine or device is to be displayed or
operated and the business conducted at that place; and
      (4)   A description of the machine to be covered by the license, its
mechanical features, the name of the manufacturer and the serial number.
   (B)   Such application shall be made out in duplicate. One copy shall be
referred to the Police Chief and the other copy shall be referred to the Mayor.
(Ord. 17-87, passed 4-6-1987)
§ 816.05  INVESTIGATION AND INSPECTION.
   (A)   The Chief of Police shall investigate the location wherein it is
proposed to operate a juke box or mechanical amusement device, ascertain if the
applicant is a person of good moral character and either approve or disapprove
the application for a license required by this chapter.
   (B)   The Building Commissioner shall inspect all wiring and connections to
the machine, determine if such wiring and connections comply with the National
Electrical Code and either approve or disapprove the application.
   (C)   No license shall be issued to any applicant unless the application is
approved by the Chief of Police, the Building Commissioner and Council.
(Ord. 17-87, passed 4-6-1987)
§ 816.06  LICENSE FEE; TERM.
   (A)   Every applicant, approved and accepted, before being granted a license
required by this chapter, shall pay an annual license fee of $50 for the
privilege of operating or maintaining for operation each juke box or mechanical
amusement device.
   (B)   Each license shall expire on January 1 of each year. The applicant
will pay a pro rata portion of the annual license fee for his or her first year
of operation, the same to be determined by the part of the calendar year which
is still remaining at the time of application.
(Ord. 17-87, passed 4-6-1987)
§ 816.07  LICENSE DISPLAY; TRANSFER.
   (A)   The license for a juke box or mechanical amusement device shall be
posted permanently and conspicuously at the location of the machine on the
premises where the device is to be operated or maintained.
   (B)   Such license may be transferred from one machine or device to another
similar machine upon application to the Mayor to such effect, upon the
furnishing of a description and the serial number of the new machine or device
within 48 hours of the transfer, and upon payment of a $5 transfer fee. Not
more than one machine shall be operated under one license. The applicant or
licensee shall secure a license for each machine displayed or operated by him
or her.
   (C)   If the licensee moves his or her place of business to another location
in the municipality, the license may be transferred to such new location upon
application to the Mayor, giving the street and number of the new location.
   (D)   The new location shall be approved by the Chief of Police and the
Building Commissioner in the same manner provided in §
816.05.
(Ord. 17-87, passed 4-6-1987)
§ 816.08  LICENSE REVOCATION; HEARING.
   Every license issued under this chapter is subject to revocation if the
licensee, directly or indirectly, permits the operation of any juke box or
mechanical amusement device in violation of any of the provisions of this
chapter, the ordinances of the municipality or the laws of the state. Such
license may be revoked by the Mayor, after written notice to the licensee,
which notice shall specify the ordinance or law violation with which the
licensee is charged, if, after a hearing, the licensee is found to be guilty of
such violation. Ten days’ notice of the hearing shall be given to the licensee.
At such hearing, the licensee and his or her attorney may present and submit
evidence or witnesses in his or her defense.
(Ord. 17-87, passed 4-6-1987)
§ 816.09  SEIZURE AND DESTRUCTION OF GAMBLING DEVICES.
   If the Chief of Police has reason to believe that any mechanical amusement
device is used as a gambling device, such device may be seized by the police
and impounded. If, as the result of a trial of an exhibitor for allowing such
device to be used as a gambling device, the exhibitor is found guilty, such
device shall be destroyed by the police.
(Ord. 17-87, passed 4-6-1987)
§ 816.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be fined not more than $500 or imprisoned not more than six
months, or both, for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.
(Ord. 17-87, passed 4-6-1987)
CHAPTER 818:  LANDFILLS
Section
818.01   Operation prohibited; waiver
818.02   As accessory uses
818.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Garbage and rubbish collection and disposal, see
Chapter 1060
   Landfill Closure Fund, see §
236.18
   Noxious odors; filthy accumulations, see §
660.04
Statutory reference:
   Sanitary districts, see Ohio R.C. Chapter 6115
§ 818.01  OPERATION PROHIBITED; WAIVER.
   (A)   No person, firm, partnership, corporation or public body shall operate
a dump, sanitary landfill, waste transfer station or recycling facility in the
city.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision contained herein, the City Council
may waive the application of this section by separate resolution in any case
where the Council finds that the operation of one of the above facilities would
not constitute the operation of a public nuisance in the city. For purposes of
determining whether said facility constitutes a nuisance, the Council shall
consider the danger to the health or safety of the community, and whether or
not the facility causes offensive noise, vibration, dust, heat, smoke, odor,
glare or other objectionable influence to an extent substantially greater than
that normally resulting from the conduct of other businesses within the city.
The Council shall also determine whether or not the facility creates traffic
substantially greater than that of other businesses in the city and whether or
not such traffic can be controlled by reasonable means.
(Ord. 15-90, passed 2-19-1990)
§ 818.02  AS ACCESSORY USES.
   No dump, sanitary landfill or waste transfer station shall be permitted as
an accessory use in any district set forth in the Zoning Code of the city.
(Ord. 60-70, passed 10-26-1970)
§ 818.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 820:  MASS MUSICAL OR PUBLIC ENTERTAINMENT
Section
820.01   Promotion of events and use of land; permit required
820.02   Issuance of permit
820.03   Application for permit; information required
820.04   Public hearing; notice
820.05   Permit fee; conditions; effective period
820.06   Bond required
820.07   Exempted events
820.08   Equitable remedies; interpretation
820.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Minor’s curfew, see §
648.10
   Parades and assemblages, see §
412.06
   Peace disturbances, see
Chapter 648
§ 820.01  PROMOTION OF EVENTS AND USE OF LAND; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall maintain, conduct, promote or operate on any lands,
premises or picnic groves in the city, other than in established theaters or
auditoriums licensed or permitted for public occupancy as limited by law, any
mass musical or public entertainment, of various designations, including, but
not limited to, “pop festival”, “rock music festival”, “rock festival”, “jazz
festival” or “rock and roll music festival”, except pursuant to a special
permit issued by a two-thirds affirmative vote of Council as hereinafter
provided.
   (B)   No owner, lessee, licensee or other person having a right to, or
interest in, any real property within the jurisdiction of the city, shall
license, rent, lease or otherwise permit the use of such real property, or a
part thereof, for any mass musical or public entertainment, as provided in
division (A) hereof, other than in established theaters or auditoriums licensed
or permitted for public occupancy as limited by law, except pursuant to a
special permit issued by Council.
(Ord. 54-71, passed 6-28-1971)
§ 820.02  ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   Council may issue a special permit required by §
820.01 upon written application made by the person who proposes to maintain,
conduct, promote or operate the mass musical or public entertainment, together
with the owner, lessee or licensee who proposes to license, rent, lease or
otherwise permit such mass musical or public entertainment, both of whom are
hereinafter designated as the applicant, in accordance with the procedures
hereinafter stated.
(Ord. 54-71, passed 6-28-1971)
§ 820.03  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; INFORMATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   The applicant shall file a verified application with the Clerk of
Council at least 60 days prior to the date or dates upon which the event is to
take place.
   (B)   The application shall include the following information and such other
information that the Department of Public Safety may require:
      (1)   The number of persons expected to attend such event and the
location thereof;
      (2)   The duration of the event;
      (3)   The date or dates requested; and
      (4)   The means of accommodating the attendees, including provision for:
         (a)   Food;
         (b)   Shelter (if an overnight stay is contemplated);
         (c)   Facilities for toilet and other personal sanitary needs for men
and women;
         (d)   Emergency first-aid;
         (e)   Parking of cars, showing the means of ingress, egress and
parking areas; and
         (f)   Provision for public safety, including guards or special police
assisting in the control of traffic and the supervision of the attendees.
(Ord. 54-71, passed 6-28-1971)
§ 820.04  PUBLIC HEARING; NOTICE.
   Council shall hold a public hearing within 30 days after the submission of
an application. Such public hearing shall be held pursuant to the publication
of a notice of hearing published at least once in the local newspaper five days
prior to the hearing date.
(Ord. 54-71, passed 6-28-1971)
§ 820.05  PERMIT FEE; CONDITIONS; EFFECTIVE PERIOD.
   Council, after the hearing referred to in §
820.04 and after due consideration of the facts and circumstances pertaining
thereto, may issue the special permit, for a fee of $250, upon such terms and
conditions as it may deem necessary and proper to ensure the health, safety and
welfare of the residents of the city and those individuals who may be within
the jurisdiction of the city during the time of the event. Such special permit
shall be valid for not more than 96 hours.
(Ord. 54-71, passed 6-28-1971)
§ 820.06  BOND REQUIRED.
   The applicant shall post a cash or surety bond in an amount designated by
Council to be sufficient, after due consideration of the circumstances, to
ensure adequate clean-up and restoration of the area in which the event is to
be held within 48 hours after the conclusion of such event.
(Ord. 54-71, passed 6-28-1971)
§ 820.07  EXEMPTED EVENTS.
   This chapter shall not be applicable where there are to be less than 300
people attending the event and where such event is not to last more than eight
consecutive hours, provided that the Police Department is notified of the event
at least 48 hours in advance by written notice duly receipted by the Police
Department.
(Ord. 54-71, passed 6-28-1971)
§ 820.08  EQUITABLE REMEDIES; INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   Nothing contained in this chapter or in §
202.99 shall be construed to prevent the enforcement of any other remedy at law
concurrent or otherwise available to the city or other law enforcement
authority to avoid or prevent any violation or attempted violation of any of
the provisions of this chapter, such as, but not limited to, injunction or
restraining order.
   (B)   This chapter is in addition to any other law, ordinance or regulation
affecting the subject herein and is not in limitation thereof.
(Ord. 54-71, passed 6-28-1971)
§ 820.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 824:  OIL AND GAS WELLS
Section
824.01   Permit required
824.02   Application for permit; fee
824.03   Map and spill prevention plan
824.04   Landscape plan required
824.05   Performance standards
824.06   Investigation of application; issuance of permit
824.07   Insurance; indemnification
824.08   Duties of permittee
824.09   Effective period of permits; renewal; fee
824.10   Permit limitations; termination of permits
824.11   Hours and period of operation
824.12   Plugging and abandonment of wells
824.13   Rejection of permit application
824.14   Drilling in residential districts
824.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Barricades and warning lights, see §
660.09
   Gas, see
Chapter 1045
   License or permit to possess dangerous ordnance, see §
672.05
Statutory reference:
   Oil and gas, see Ohio R.C. Chapter 1509
§ 824.01  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person, partnership, corporation or other legal entity shall drill a well
for oil or gas, or deepen an existing well for oil or gas, or carry on such
development within the city, without first obtaining a permit therefor from the
Mayor, as provided in this chapter.
(Ord. 18-98, passed 2-2-1998)
§ 824.02  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; FEE.
   Permits required by §
824.01 may be obtained by making application therefor to the Mayor upon such
forms as he or she may prescribe. Such application shall be accompanied by a
nonrefundable fee of $5,000. A separate application and fee shall be filed and
paid for each well contemplated.
(Ord. 18-98, passed 2-2-1998)
§ 824.03  MAP AND SPILL PREVENTION PLAN.
   (A)   At the time of the application for the permit required by §
824.01, the person owning or leasing property for the purpose of drilling oil
or gas thereon shall provide a map prepared by a registered surveyor at the
time of making the application, showing the exact location, by address, where
the proposed well is to be drilled. Where no address is assigned, the permanent
parcel number and the nearest municipal address to the drilling site shall be
set forth. The map should also identify the location, type and size of the
proposed pipeline, either above or below ground, and any structure within 300
feet of the well location. Additionally, the map shall indicate the location of
all power shut-offs, together with a detailed description of the operation of
the same, the location of all transmission lines, the location of oil flow
shut-offs, together with a detailed description of the operation of the same,
and the location of any access roads and roads to the well and tank site
locations. Any amendment to this map shall be immediately filed with the
Building Commissioner. If the permit is granted, the map shall remain on file
with the City Engineer. Amendments to the map require the approval of the
permit authority.
   (B)   Within 30 days of completion of the well, a spill prevention plan must
be in effect in accordance with the laws of the state and must be on file at
the City Hall and the Fire Chief’s office.
(Ord. 18-98, passed 2-2-1998)
§ 824.04  LANDSCAPE PLAN REQUIRED.
   A detailed landscape plan shall be provided. The plan shall graphically
depict all pipelines, tanks and other structures, as well as proposed landscape
features to adequately screen them from public view. This landscape plan will
be presented to the Planning Commission for approval prior to issuance of a
permit.
(Ord. 18-98, passed 2-2-1998; Ord. 137-12, passed 9-17-2012)
§ 824.05  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   All oil and gas activities shall be conducted pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter
1509, as amended, and any administrative regulations promulgated thereunder,
and pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, to ensure the public health,
safety and general welfare. In case of a conflict between said administrative
regulations and the regulations herein, the more restrictive regulation shall
prevail.
   (A)   Storage tanks, separators and well installations shall be entirely
enclosed by a minimum eight-foot high chain link-type fence, with three strands
of barbed wire above such fence, which fence and barbed wire shall be installed
within six weeks after fracturing or completing the well or within six months
after commencement of drilling, whichever occurs first.
   (B)   All hatch lids eight inches in diameter or larger must be equipped
with a wire insert to prevent accidental entry into such tanks.
   (C)   No waste, sludge, water or effluent of any kind shall in any manner be
emptied or drained into any storm drainage course or sanitary sewer or
otherwise be disposed of so as to cause any pollution of the waters or land of
the city or create an environmental hazard. After any spill, leak or
malfunction, the responsible party shall remove or cause to be removed to the
satisfaction of the Building Commissioner all oil and waste materials from any
public or private property affected by such spill, leak or malfunction. The
responsible party shall also be liable for any and all damage to municipal
utility services and for any extraordinary expense incurred by the city
regarding the use of safety forces at an emergency caused by the drilling
operation.
   (D)   All pits used in the drilling and fracturing process shall be
constructed and adequately lined so as to prevent ground absorption of any
waste, brine, sludge, oil, oil byproducts or any other substance that is
harmful or deleterious to the environment. All pits must be maintained with
watertight integrity and must be nonleaking. Within 45 days of the completion
of the well, all substances contained in such pits shall be completely removed
and safely disposed of and all pits shall be filled, leveled and landscaped.
   (E)   Prior to the commencement of the drilling operation and prior to the
installation of any tank, the permit holder shall provide ingress and egress
roads to all well sites. All roads to tank sites shall be constructed of
asphalt or concrete and shall be maintained in good condition, free of mud and
dust. Should mud or other materials be carried onto any public street, the
permit holder shall immediately remove the same from such street to the
satisfaction of the Director of Public Service. Compliance with this division
(E) shall be verified by the Director prior to any equipment for drilling being
placed on the premises.
   (F)   The permit holder shall notify the Police Department prior to moving
the drilling rig onto or off the well site.
   (G)   No drilling site, storage tank or other equipment shall be located
within 600 feet of any habitable building in a commercial or industrial zoning
district or within 600 feet of any other zoning district. No drilling site may
be within 150 feet of any dedicated street or railroad right-of-way. For good
cause shown, the Council may approve a drilling site or a storage tank or other
equipment located within a lesser distance than those delineated herein if the
Council finds that such modified location will not adversely affect the public
health, safety and welfare.
   (H)   Only fluid rotary-type drilling rigs sufficiently muffled against
noise emissions shall be used in drilling operations.
   (I)   All storage tanks and/or separators shall be diked in accordance with
the requirements of the Ohio Fire Code as adopted by the city in Chapter 1610
of the Fire Prevention Code. Dikes are to be maintained during the entire time
period of well construction and subsequent operational phases.
   (J)   Tanks used in the storage of oil or water may not exceed ten feet in
height or 140 barrels in capacity and are to be painted in a color approved by
the Building Commissioner so as not to contrast with the surrounding
environment. Not more than one oil or gas storage tank per well site shall be
permitted (one tank for oil and one tank for brine).
   (K)   All gates are to be padlocked with a copy of the key given to the Fire
Chief and the Police Chief. All oil and water lines with valves extending
beyond the chain link fence shall be locked and capped.
   (L)   Emergency telephone numbers of gas and oil well operators shall be
made available to the Police Chief and the Fire Chief in the event an emergency
occurs at the well site. Answering services are not acceptable. Any cost
incurred due to the unavailability of a well operator in the case of an
emergency condition where professional outside assistance is required shall be
the responsibility of the well operator.
   (M)   After the issuance of a permit to drill, and again after completion of
the project, the Director of Public Service, a Council representative of the
Street Committee, the City Engineer and the driller shall inspect the public
roads that may service the heavy equipment. The driller shall be held
responsible for any road damage, and a cash bond determined by the City
Engineer shall be posted in advance of equipment being placed on the premises.
(Ord. 18-98, passed 2-2-1998)
§ 824.06  INVESTIGATION OF APPLICATION; ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   The Mayor shall refer each application for a permit required by §
824.01 to Council. Council shall forward the application to the Planning
Commission, which shall investigate the premises for which such permit is
sought and which shall hold a public hearing thereon. The Commission shall send
a notice of the hearing by regular mail to all property owners within a 500-
foot radius of the property proposed as a drilling site. When the Commission
completes its investigation, the application and the report of the Commission
shall be forwarded to Council for its consideration. If the same are found to
comply in all respects with this chapter, Council shall recommend the granting
of the permit; otherwise, it shall recommend rejection of such application. The
Mayor shall issue or reject the permit upon the recommendation of Council
within ten days of such recommendation.
(Ord. 18-98, passed 2-2-1998)
§ 824.07  INSURANCE; INDEMNIFICATION.
   The applicant shall provide with his, her or its application proof of
insurance. Insurance must be to the extent of $1,000,000 per person for general
liability and personal injury with an aggregate per incident limit of
$3,000,000, and $1,000,000 for property damage to any one person with an
aggregate per incident limit of $3,000,000. Such insurance policies shall
insure the city and any person suffering any personal injury or property damage
as a result of the drilling or operation of the well. Such policies shall be in
full force and effect prior to the issuance of a permit and shall continue in
effect until the well is plugged or abandoned as hereinafter provided. Current
proof of insurance coverage shall always be provided to the city. Further, the
applicant, by submitting an application for a permit under this chapter, shall
be considered to agree to hold the city harmless from any loss, claim, demand
or cause of action, including reasonable attorney’s fees and costs of suit, and
to indemnify the city for the same, in the event any claim, demand of cause of
action is brought against the city as a result of any activity engaged in by
the applicant or his, her or its contractors in the furtherance of the
drilling, operation or abandonment of the gas or oil well in the city. The
Clerk in the Building Department shall retain a file of all insurance policies.
The responsible party shall be notified if a policy is not current or in
effect.
(Ord. 18-98, passed 2-2-1998)
§ 824.08  DUTIES OF PERMITTEE.
   The owner of the property, the drilling company and the operation company
shall be equally liable and responsible for complying with this chapter. The
permittee shall observe all federal, state and municipal laws relative to the
drilling and operation of oil and gas wells. The permittee shall also restore
to their former condition the streets, sidewalks and other public places which
may be disturbed or damaged as a result of the operation and shall clear the
area of all litter, machinery, derricks, buildings, oil and other substances
erected, used or allowed in the drilling or production operation, except as may
be there for the proper drilling or operation of the well, within 30 days after
completion of the drilling site. The permittee shall pay to the owner of any
building, improvement, goods or chattels located contiguous to the property
upon which the well is located any extra cost of insurance on such building,
improvement, goods or chattels which is imposed by reason of the granting of
the permit and the operations conducted thereunder.
(Ord. 18-98, passed 2-2-1998)
§ 824.09  EFFECTIVE PERIOD OF PERMITS; RENEWAL; FEE.
   The effective period of a permit issued under this chapter, and of all
rights and privileges granted in or under authority of this chapter, shall not
exceed 20 years from the date of issuance of such permit. At the end of such
20-year period, if the well is still in operation and the permittee is not in
violation of any federal, state or municipal law relative to the drilling and
operation of oil and gas wells, the Mayor, upon recommendation of Council, may
renew such permit upon proper application and payment of a reasonable permit
fee to be determined by the city at the time of renewal.
(Ord. 18-98, passed 2-2-1998)
 
§ 824.10  PERMIT LIMITATIONS; TERMINATION OF PERMITS.
   No permit shall be issued for the drilling of a well upon ground owned by
the applicant or held by the applicant under an oil and gas lease or drilling
contract from the owner, except by separate written permission of the owner
thereof, and nothing contained herein, nor any permit issued hereunder, shall
be deemed to grant any right or license to a permittee to enter upon or occupy
in any respect, in drilling or production operations, any land except by the
written permission of the owner thereof. When a permit has been issued, the
same shall terminate and become inoperative without any action on the part of
the city unless, within 180 days from the date of issuance of such permit,
actual drilling of the well has commenced. The cessation of production of oil
or gas from the well after production has commenced, except for mandatory shut-
ins by a gas purchaser and except for equipment repair, shall operate to
terminate and cancel the permit and, in such a case, the well shall be
condemned or abandoned for all purposes of this chapter and no person shall
thereafter drill or operate any such well without the issuance of another
permit.
(Ord. 18-98, passed 2-2-1998)
§ 824.11  HOURS AND PERIOD OF OPERATION.
   No drilling, tool dressing or any work or labor which causes noise or
disturbance, except in an emergency affecting life or property, shall be
permitted before the hour of 7:00 a.m. or after the hour of 10:00 p.m. in any
area where there are inhabited dwellings located within 2,000 feet of the
drilling operation. No drilling shall be conducted from February 15 through
April 30.
(Ord. 18-98, passed 2-2-1998)
§ 824.12  PLUGGING AND ABANDONMENT OF WELLS.
   No person shall plug and/or abandon a gas or oil well without first
obtaining a permit therefor from the Mayor, the fee for which shall be $100.
Upon granting such permit, the Mayor shall mark notice of such fact upon the
map provided at the time of the original permit application. Such plugging and/
or abandonment of a gas or oil well shall be in accordance with the laws of the
state. Such plugging and/or abandonment shall be done under the supervision of
a representative of the State Division of Oil and Gas.
(Ord. 18-98, passed 2-2-1998)
§ 824.13  REJECTION OF PERMIT APPLICATION.
   When a permit is refused, $4,250 of the deposit of cash required to be made
with the application shall be returned to the applicant.
(Ord. 18-98, passed 2-2-1998)
§ 824.14  DRILLING IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   There shall be no drilling of gas or oil wells in residentially zoned
districts.
   (B)   Notwithstanding division (A) hereof, the Council may recommend to the
Mayor the issuance of a permit in a residential district and the Mayor shall
issue the same when an applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Council that the issuance of a permit in a residential district will:
      (1)   Not impede the public health, safety and welfare; and
      (2)   Not depreciate adjoining property values.
   (C)   Prior to making a determination pursuant to division (B) hereof, the
Council shall hold a public hearing with notice as otherwise provided in this
Code of Ordinances, as well as certified mail notice, return receipt requested,
to all landowners within 500 feet of the proposed drilling site, for the
purpose of hearing any comments and/or objections to the issuance of said
permit.
(Ord. 18-98, passed 2-2-1998)
§ 824.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 828:  PEDDLERS AND SOLICITORS
Section
828.01   Definitions
828.02   Permitted hours for solicitations
828.03   Calling at premises displaying no solicitation signs
828.04   Traversing private property
828.05   Resident prohibition by notice
828.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Distribution of handbills, see
Chapter 812
Statutory reference:
   Charitable solicitations, see Ohio R.C. Chapter 1716
   Frozen desserts, see Ohio R.C. 3717.51 et seq.
   Home solicitation sales, see Ohio R.C. 1345.21 et seq.
   Sales of goods and services within right-of-way of state highways, see Ohio
R.C. 5515.07
§ 828.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter.
   “Peddler.” Any person traveling either by foot, automobile, truck or another
type of conveyance from place to place, door to door or street to street,
taking or attempting to take orders for profit by the sale of goods, wares, and
merchandise or personal property of any nature whatsoever for immediate or
future delivery or for services to be furnished or performed immediately or in
the future.
   “Solicitor.” Any person who obtains or seeks to obtain funds for any cause
whatsoever by traveling door to door either by foot, automobile, truck or any
other type of conveyance upon the private residences, including any house,
apartment or other dwelling, within the city.
(Ord. 134-06, passed 9-18-2006)
§ 828.02  PERMITTED HOURS FOR SOLICITATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall go upon any residential premises and ring the
doorbell, or rap or knock on the door, or create any sound in a manner
calculated to attract the attention of the occupant of the residence for the
purpose of engaging or attempting to engage in a home solicitation transaction
between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.
   (B)   Division (A) hereof shall not apply to a visit to the premises as a
result of a request or appointment made by the occupant.
(Ord. 106-05, passed 8-22-2005; Ord. 134-06, passed 9-18-2006)
§ 828.03  CALLING AT PREMISES DISPLAYING NO SOLICITATION SIGNS.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code of Ordinances, no
person engaged in peddling or soliciting shall call on any residence in the
city which displays a “No Solicitation” sign, or a sign substantially
equivalent thereto, giving notice that the residents thereof desire not to be
solicited. Furthermore, no person engaged in peddling or soliciting shall call
on any residence in the city which is part of a homeowners’ association if the
homeowners’ association has posted a “No Solicitation” sign, or a sign
substantially equivalent thereto at all entrances, giving notice that the
residents thereof desire not to be solicited.
   (B)   All “No Solicitations” signs, or signs substantially equivalent
thereto, erected in the city, shall conform to the requirements of Chapter 1328
with respect to the regulation of signs in the city.
(Ord. 5-93, passed 1-4-1993; Ord. 101-05, passed 7-26-2005; Ord. 106-05, passed
8-22-2005; Ord. 134-06, passed 9-18-2006; Ord. 134-08, passed 10-20-2008)
§ 828.04  TRAVERSING PRIVATE PROPERTY.
   Peddlers and solicitors shall use only residential sidewalks and driveways
for ingress to and egress from residences of the city, unless otherwise
permitted by a resident of the property involved in the sale and transactions.
(Ord. 136-94, passed 11-7-1994; Ord. 101-05, passed 7-26-2005; Ord. 106-05,
passed 8-22-2005; Ord. 134-06, passed 9-18-2006)
§ 828.05  RESIDENT PROHIBITION BY NOTICE.
   (A)   The Director of Public Safety shall establish a Peddlers/Solicitors Do
Not Call Registry.
   (B)   Any person in lawful possession and occupancy of any residence, house,
apartment or other dwelling in the city may require the city to place and
maintain his or her residence, house, apartment or other dwelling on the
Peddlers/Solicitors Do Not Call Registry by submitting a request on forms(s)
supplied by the Director of Public Safety, which shall contain the following
information:
      (1)   The signature of the person completing the form(s), unless
submission is done electronically with a secure password on the city’s website;
      (2)   The complete address of the residence, house, apartment or other
dwelling to be placed on the registry;
      (3)   The date the form was completed; and
      (4)   A statement that no peddlers or solicitors shall call at this
address or words of similar import on the form.
   (C)   Any person in lawful possession and occupancy of any residence, house,
apartment or other dwelling in the city may require the city to remove his or
her residence, house, apartment, or other dwelling from the Peddlers/Solicitors
Do Not Call Registry by submitting a Notice of Removal on forms(s) supplied by
the Director of Public Safety, which shall contain the following information:
      (1)   The signature of the person completing the form(s), unless the
submission is done electronically with a secure password on the city website;
      (2)   The complete address of the residence, house, apartment or other
dwelling to be removed from the registry;
      (3)   The date the form was completed; and
      (4)   A statement that the residence, house, apartment or other dwelling
be removed from the Peddlers/Solicitors Do Not Call Registry.
   (D)   The decision whether to place a residence, house, apartment or other
dwelling on the Peddlers/Solicitors Do Not Call Registry shall be solely that
of the lawful possessor and occupant thereof, and no official agent or employee
of the city shall interfere with said decision.
   (E)   A residence, house, apartment or other dwelling, after being lawfully
placed on the Peddlers/Solicitors Do Not Call Registry shall remain on said
registry until the earliest of any of the following:
      (1)   The city receives notice of removal pursuant to division (C) of
this section; or
      (2)   The city receives notice that the person who submitted the form
pursuant to division (B) of this section is not or is no longer a lawful
possessor and occupant of the premises.
   (F)   A copy of the Peddlers/Solicitors Do Not Call Registry and a copy of
the Solicitors Do Not Call Registry shall be made available for public
inspection at all times on the internet website of the city and during normal
business hours at the office of the Director of Public Safety.
   (G)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no peddler/
solicitor, while peddling and soliciting, shall call upon, knock at the door or
ring the doorbell of any residence, house, apartment or other dwelling in the
city which is at that time on the Peddlers/Solicitors Do Not Call Registry
established and maintained pursuant to this chapter, or upon which there is
posted at the entrance a notice which reads “No Peddlers of Solicitors
Allowed”, or words of similar import, which clearly prohibit peddlers and
solicitors on the premises, unless such peddler has previously been invited
upon the premises by the lawful possessor and occupant thereof.
(Ord. 134-06, passed 9-18-2006; Ord. 33-2018, passed 10-15-2018)
§ 828.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a first
degree misdemeanor.
(Ord. 101-05, passed 7-26-2005; Ord. 106-05, passed 8-22-2005; Ord. 134-06,
passed 9-18-2006)
CHAPTER 830:  PRIVATE SALES
Section
830.01   Sales of merchandise from private land restricted
830.02   Garage sales
830.03   Established businesses
830.04   Sale of used motor vehicles
830.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Distribution of handbills, see
Chapter 812
Statutory reference:
   Charitable solicitations, see Ohio R.C. Chapter 1716
   Frozen desserts, see Ohio R.C. 3717.51 et seq.
   Home solicitation sales, see Ohio R.C. 1345.21 et seq.
   Sales of goods and services within right-of-way of state highways, see Ohio
R.C. 5515.07
§ 830.01  SALES OF MERCHANDISE FROM PRIVATE LAND RESTRICTED.
   Except as otherwise provided herein, no person shall display or sell any
merchandise, including, but not limited to, motor vehicles, on private land
within the municipality except within a permanently constructed building and as
may otherwise be regulated pursuant to this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 4-92, passed 1-6-1992)
§ 830.02  GARAGE SALES.
   (A)   Garage Sales Permitted. The sale of property from a garage and/or area
immediately adjacent thereto in a residential district by the owner of the
premises, upon which the property is sold, shall be permitted.
   (B)   Permit Required; Fee. No property or premises in the city shall be
used for the purpose of conducting a garage sale, estate sale, driveway sale
and similar sale thereon unless the owner or occupant of such property or
premises first obtains a permit therefor from the Building Department. Such
permit shall be known as a garage sale permit. The permit fee for each event
will be waived but a permit is still required.
   (C)   Scope of Permit; Period of Sale.
      (1)   The permit shall authorize the purchaser (purchaser being an
individual or group) thereof to conduct a garage sale on the subject premises
for not more than three consecutive days, and the three consecutive days shall
be specified on the permit.
      (2)   The garage sale shall be held only between the hours of 9:00 a.m.
and 6:00 p.m.
      (3)   Only two signs per garage sale shall be permitted and shall be two
feet inside the property line.
      (4)   Permit shall be displayed in a visible place.
   (D)   Prohibitions.
      (1)   Sales shall be prohibited on Sunday.
      (2)   Sales shall be limited to the area of the garage and driveway and
shall not be in excess of 20 feet beyond and front setback line and solely on
the driveway.
      (3)   Items sold at such sales shall consist of used household
merchandise, fixtures, appliances and personal items.
      (4)   No person shall conduct or act as a sponsor of a garage sale more
than two times in a calendar year. Furthermore, no more than two garage sales
can be held per calendar year by any one location.
      (5)   Maximum sign area shall not be larger than three square feet per
side.
      (6)   Signs and notices shall not be on the public rights-of-way.
      (7)   Any such sign or signs shall be removed immediately upon expiration
of the permit.
   (E)   Penalty. Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the
provisions of this section is guilty of a minor misdemeanor and shall be fined
not more than $100 for each offense. A separate offense shall be deemed
committed each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or
continues.
(Ord. 4-92, passed 1-6-1992; Ord. 117-04, passed 10-4-2004; Ord. 15-2020,
passed 3-23-2020)
§ 830.03  ESTABLISHED BUSINESSES.
   A duly established and (if necessary) licensed business, where a sale
facility has been approved by the city as being in conformance with the city’s
Planning and Zoning Code, may sell any and all products from its property where
the sale of said products is commonly incident to the conduct of said business,
subject to any other regulations contained in this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 4-92, passed 1-6-1992)
§ 830.04  SALE OF USED MOTOR VEHICLES.
   Notwithstanding §
830.01, any resident of the municipality shall, at any given time, be permitted
to sell and/or display in the open one used motor vehicle, of which he or she
is the owner, on property of which he or she is the owner, upon satisfaction of
the following conditions.
   (A)   The sale and/or display of the motor vehicle shall be allowed only in
a driveway. No motor vehicle shall be sold from any lawn or ground area.
   (B)   Said motor vehicle must be set back at least 20 feet from the city
right-of-way.
   (C)   For purposes of this chapter, “motor vehicle” shall have the same
meaning as that contained in Ohio R.C. 4501.01(B).
   (D)   Permission to display and sell hereunder shall be limited to two motor
vehicles per year with a time limit of 15 days per vehicle, provided that if
only one vehicle per year is to be sold, this time period may be extended an
additional 15 days for said vehicle.
(Ord. 4-92, passed 1-6-1992; Ord. 22-92, passed 3-16-1992; Ord. 03-07, passed
1-16-2007)
§ 830.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 832:  PUBLIC PICNIC AND RECREATION PLACES
Section
832.01   Definitions
832.02   Owners and operators; license required
832.03   Application for license; information required
832.04   Water closets or toilets required
832.05   Sanitation; refuse containers
832.06   Inspections
832.07   License fee; appeal from refusal to issue; expiration date
832.08   License revocation or forfeiture
832.09   Sponsors; permit required; fee
832.10   Termination of activities and vacation of premises
832.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Minor’s curfew, see §
648.10
   Parks and recreation areas, see
Chapter 1062
   Peace disturbances, see
Chapter 648
   Swimming and wading pools, see
Chapter 1332
§ 832.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter.
   “Public picnic.” Any gathering or assembly of persons at any public picnic
or recreation place to which admission can be had by payment of a fee or by the
purchase, possession or presentation of a ticket or token, or in which a charge
is made for caring for clothing or other property, or any other gathering or
assembly of persons at a public picnic or recreation place to which the general
public may gain admission with or without the payment of a fee.
   “Public picnic or recreation place.” Any place where any person (other than
the owner of such place) or the general public is allowed or permitted to
enter, frequent, come into or use, either free and without charge or for hire
or upon payment of some fee or charge or thing therefor, for the purpose of
rest, relaxation, recreation, amusement, eating, lunching, picnicking, social
intercourse or diversion.
(Ord. 53-71, passed 6-28-1971)
§ 832.02  OWNERS AND OPERATORS; LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall establish, maintain or operate a public picnic or recreation
place without being licensed to do so as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 53-71, passed 6-28-1971)
§ 832.03  APPLICATION FOR LICENSE; INFORMATION REQUIRED.
   (A)   Application for the license required by §
832.02 shall be made in writing to the Mayor or the Director of Public Safety,
or in their absence, to the Chef of Police.
   (B)   The application shall set forth the name of the applicant and, if a
corporation, the name and residence of the principal officers. It shall state
the location for which the license is desired and shall contain a correct
description of the land and premises together with the correct boundaries of
the same and, if the land and premises contain more than one acre of ground,
there shall be an accurate map thereof attached to the petition and identified
with the name of the applicant. There shall be indicated on the application a
description of all buildings and structures on the premises with a statement of
the number and kind of rooms in the buildings and the purpose for which such
buildings and structures are designed to be used in connection with the
license.
   (C)   The application shall state the number of water closets or toilets on
the premises and their location with respect to the premises.
(Ord. 53-71, passed 6-28-1971)
§ 832.04  WATER CLOSETS OR TOILETS REQUIRED.
   No license shall be issued unless there are erected and in suitable working
order two separate and distinct water closets or toilets on the premises
constructed and installed in accordance with state law and/or the ordinances
and regulations of the city, as required.
(Ord. 53-71, passed 6-28-1971)
§ 832.05  SANITATION; REFUSE CONTAINERS.
   All public picnic or recreation places and buildings, structures and toilets
thereon and things appurtenant thereto shall be maintained in good repair,
thoroughly clean and free from any accumulation of filth, garbage, rubbish and
other waste. Receptacles sufficient to contain all of the garbage, rubbish and
other waste accumulated therein shall be provided as required by ordinance or
regulation of the city.
(Ord. 53-71, passed 6-28-1971)
§ 832.06  INSPECTIONS.
   Any police officer, the Director of Public Safety and the Chief of Fire
shall at all times have the right to enter, inspect and examine any public
picnic or recreation place and for such purpose to remain there for any length
of time as the officer deems necessary.
(Ord. 53-71, passed 6-28-1971)
§ 832.07  LICENSE FEE; APPEAL FROM REFUSAL TO ISSUE; EXPIRATION DATE.
   (A)   A fee for a license for a public picnic or recreation place as
provided in this chapter shall be paid to the Clerk of the city at the time of
issuing the license. If the Mayor, the Director of Public Safety or the Chief
of Police refuses to issue the license, an appeal may be had therefrom to
Council and the decision of Council shall be final.
   (B)   The license fee shall be $50 and each license granted hereunder shall
expire on May 15 of each year.
(Ord. 53-71, passed 6-28-1971)
§ 832.08  LICENSE REVOCATION OR FORFEITURE.
   (A)   The license may be revoked or forfeited by the Mayor, the Director of
Public Safety or the Chief of Police for disorderly or immoral conduct on the
premises or for violation of any of the provisions of this chapter, of state
law or any ordinance of the city perpetrated or committed on the premises or by
the licensee under this chapter.
   (B)   If any license is so revoked or forfeited then at least six months
shall elapse before another license is issued to the licensee.
(Ord. 53-71, passed 6-28-1971)
§ 832.09  SPONSORS; PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.
   (A)   No person shall hold, conduct or sponsor a public picnic without first
obtaining a permit therefor. Applications for such permits shall be made to the
Mayor, the Director of Public Safety or the Chief of Police. They shall issue
such permits upon being satisfied that the proposed public picnic will in no
way be detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare and upon payment to
the Clerk of the city by the applicant of a fee of $10.
   (B)   All such applications shall be filed as specified in this section not
later than 14 days prior to the date of the public picnic.
(Ord. 53-71, passed 6-28-1971; Ord. 53-86, passed 5-19-1986)
§ 832.10  TERMINATION OF ACTIVITIES AND VACATION OF PREMISES.
   (A)   The owners and/or operators of picnic groves that are rented for
parties, gatherings and the like, within the city, are hereby required to stop
by 10:00 p.m. on Sunday through Thursday and shall further require the grounds
to be vacated, except for management and cleaning personnel, by 10:30 p.m. on
such nights.
   (B)   The owners and/or operators of picnic groves within the city are
hereby required to stop all music, dancing, parties or assemblies by 11:30 p.m.
on Friday and Saturday nights and shall further require the grounds to be
vacated, except for management and cleaning personnel, by 12:00 midnight on
such nights.
(Ord. 113-79, passed 3-17-1980)
§ 832.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of §
832.10 is guilty of a misdemeanor of the fourth degree and shall be fined not
more than $250 or imprisoned not more than 30 days, or both, for each offense.
(Ord. 113-79, passed 3-17-1980)
Editor’s note:
   See §
202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 840:  SNOW REMOVAL SERVICES
Section
840.01   Method; permit; definition.
840.99   Penalty.
Cross-reference:
   Snow emergencies, see §
452.13
   Snow removal for senior citizens, physically disabled persons and city
officials, see Ch. 1028
Statutory reference:
   Snow removal equipment, see Ohio R.C. 4511.04, 4513.18
§ 840.01  METHOD; PERMIT; DEFINITION.
   (A)   Snow from any driveway, parking lot or sidewalk, either public,
private, industrial, commercial or residential, shall be disposed of by the
person removing such snow in such a manner as not to obstruct the sidewalks,
public streets or other rights-of-way for pedestrians or motor vehicles.
Further, such snow shall be disposed of upon the property from which it is
being removed, or upon other property only with the written consent of the
owner.
   (B)   (1)   Any person who contracts or performs snow removal services in
the city, on other than his or her own personal property, and for compensation,
shall make application to the Mayor’s office for a snow removal permit for each
snow removal vehicle used by such applicant in the city. Each permit shall be
granted for a one-year period at the cost of $5 per vehicle.
      (2)   In addition to other requirements, the applicant must display,
prior to securing such permit, an insurance liability policy with coverage as
prescribed by the financial security laws of the state. The permit as issued
from the office of the Mayor shall be conspicuously displayed on the windshield
of the snow removal vehicle.
   (C)   Snow removal equipment shall be illuminated with emergency flashers as
provided by the laws of the state.
   (D)   “Snow removal vehicles” and “snow removal equipment” mean any type of
vehicle which is authorized and licensed by the state, or by any other state,
to be operated upon public thoroughfares and which is used by the owner or
lessee thereof, on a full or part-time basis, for the removal of snow from
driveways, parking lots or sidewalks.
(Ord. 77-80, passed 11-3-1980)
§ 840.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of §
840.01 shall be fined not more than $25 for each offense. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation occurs or
continues.
(Ord. 77-80, passed 11-3-1980)
CHAPTER 848:  TREE REMOVAL AND SALES
Section
848.01   Definitions
848.02   Permit required; exception
848.03   Permit application; plans; fee; deposit; effective period
848.04   Review of applications and plans
848.05   Bond
848.06   Cutting trees less than 16 inches in diameter; clear cutting
prohibited
848.07   Performance standards; maintenance of streets and cleared areas;
replacement of trees
848.08   Noise
848.09   Compliance with laws; restoration of sidewalks; responsibility for
damages
848.10   Conditions for nonissuance of permits
848.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Fee for tree planting, see §§
1448.03,
1449.07
   Shade Tree Commission, see
Chapter 288
   Street trees in subdivisions, see §
1248.09
   Trees, see
Chapter 1026
Editor’s note:
   This chapter, previously a codification of Ordinance 14-78, passed April 3,
1978, and Ordinance 114-79, passed December 17, 1979, was re-enacted in its
entirety by Ordinance 82-86, passed August 18, 1986, as amended by Ordinance
40-90, passed May 7, 1990, and Ordinance 05-15, passed February 2, 2015.
§ 848.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   “Clearing.” The cutting and/or removal by other means of any tree, which
cutting or removal is not included in the definition of “logging” below.
   “Logging.” The cutting and/or removal by other means of any tree for
exchange, in consideration of any money or other thing of value, to any person
other than the landowner. For purposes of this chapter, any cutting and/or
removal involving exchange shall be considered “logging”, regardless of whether
or not such removal also accomplishes another purpose.
   “Logging operator.” A contractor who performs logging.
   “Permit holder.” A landowner on whose property logging is performed and who
has secured a permit therefor pursuant to this chapter.
   “Tree.” Is defined as six inches in diameter, as calipered four feet above
natural grade.
(Ord. 40-90, passed 5-7-1990; Ord. 05-15, passed 2-2-2015)
§ 848.02  PERMIT REQUIRED; EXCEPTION.
   (A)   No person shall offer for sale for money or any other thing of value,
or sell, trees from any property located within the city without first
obtaining a logging permit therefor from the Building Commissioner, subject to
the approval of Council upon review and recommendation by the Shade Tree
Commission. Said review and recommendation shall be conducted pursuant to the
criteria set forth in §
1026.03 of the Streets, Utilities and Public Services Code.
   (B)   (1)   No permit shall be required for any clearing operation,
involving residential or nonresidential development except as otherwise
provided in this chapter and no person shall engage in such clearing operation
unless and until all building development plans for residential and
nonresidential developments are given final approval as provided in Chapter
1448 of the Building and Housing Code.
      (2)   Notwithstanding the requirements contained in this division (B),
the Building Commission may, upon application properly made, grant an exception
to the requirements of this division (B) when it is in the best interest of the
public health, safety and welfare and the future development of the city to
grant such exception, subject to the approval of Council. Factors to be taken
into consideration in exercising such discretion shall include, but not be
limited to, the importance of the project to the overall development of the
city, the prior reputation of the applicant with respect to satisfactorily
completing projects in the city, the likely disruption, if any, to adjacent
property owners, and any other reasonably related matters that in the
individual case are deemed to be of significance in considering said
application for approval. In the case of the granting of said exception,
Council may impose such reasonable conditions as it deems fit and as may
otherwise be consistent with this chapter to secure the satisfactory
performance of the clearing operation and to assure the proper appearance of
the property subsequent thereto.
   (C)   An exception to division (A) is also made for a clearing operation of
five or fewer trees to be removed on a parcel during a one year period; in this
case no logging permit is required.
   (D)   An exception to division (B) is also made if the tree(s) to be removed
on a parcel are diseased or dead and is a possible threat to health and safety;
the owner shall notify the city prior to such removal. In this case no logging
permit is required.
   (E)   No building permit authorizing the commencement of the installation of
a subdivision and/or building(s) shall be issued unless and until a guarantee
in lieu of installation as provided in §
1248.13 of the Planning and Zoning Code, or a cash bond in an amount determined
by the Building Commissioner in consultation with the City Engineer, has been
posted with the city in order to facilitate the rehabilitation of any property
cleared but not subsequently developed.
   (F)   Notwithstanding any other provision contained in this chapter, no
permit shall be required for logging or clearing operations in the city if such
logging or clearing occurs on any land designated as an agricultural district
pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 929 at the time that such clearing or logging is
conducted. It shall be incumbent upon the landowner to demonstrate that the
property in question is formally accepted pursuant to Ohio R.C. Chapter 929 as
an agricultural district at the time that the clearing and/or logging operation
is conducted.
(Ord. 40-90, passed 5-7-1990; Ord. 108-92, passed 10-19-1992; Ord. 121-98,
passed 6-15-1998; Ord. 111-99, passed 6-7-1999; Ord. 05-15, passed 2-2-2015;
Ord. 49-2019, passed 12-16-2019)
§ 848.03  PERMIT APPLICATION; PLANS; FEE; DEPOSIT; EFFECTIVE PERIOD.
   (A)   (1)   Subject to the provisions of §
848.02, the Building Commissioner shall issue a permit for logging of trees
from property within the city only after he or she has been presented with an
application filled out by the person proposing such logging, along with a
detailed plan or sketch indicating the purpose for the removal and the areas to
be logged, and only after the same have been approved by the City Engineer and
Council.
      (2)   The permit fee shall be $100, nonrefundable to any applicant, in
addition to a cash deposit in favor of the city in the amount up to $2,500 as
security against any fees or costs incurred by the city for the review by the
City Engineer. The required cost will be determined by the City Engineer. In
the case where logging is planned for multiple adjacent parcels, if the parcels
have the same owner, only one permit fee and cash deposit is required. Such
permit shall be valid for a time frame not to exceed 180 days in which logging
activities will occur, commencing from the date of approval by the City
Engineer and Council. Logging shall be fully performed within such 180-day
period.
   (B)   Any cost incurred due to unavailability of the logging operator in the
case of an emergency condition where professional outside assistance is
required shall be the sole responsibility of the logging operator.
(Ord. 40-90, passed 5-7-1990; Ord. 05-15, passed 2-2-2015)
§ 848.04  REVIEW OF APPLICATIONS AND PLANS.
   (A)   In his or her review of the detailed plan or sketch and the logging
permit application required in §
848.03, the City Engineer shall ascertain that the cutting of trees will not
cause an improper balance in the environment in the area to be logged; that
appropriate buffer areas and natural screening by trees will not be eliminated;
that soil erosion or flooding will not be a result of such logging; and that
the manner of the removal or logging of such trees will not cause damage in any
manner whatsoever to adjacent properties, to city property or to the
environment. A reclamation plan is not required unless determined by the City
Engineer.
   (B)   In order to accomplish the requirements of division (A) hereof, the
City Engineer shall submit the proposed detailed plan or sketch and the
application to the United States Department of Agriculture, Soil and
Conservation Service, for its review, and shall request from them a report and
recommendation as to the potential risks of, and necessary protection against,
soil erosion and injury to secondary or future growth on the parcel of land to
be logged. Such reports and recommendations received from the Soil and
Conservation Service shall be attached to the application once approved by the
City Engineer.
   (C)   If a reclamation plan is required, the City Engineer may hire an
arborist to formulate a reclamation plan for the area to be logged. The cost of
such plan will be charged to the applicant in addition to other charges
delineated in this chapter.
(Ord. 40-90, passed 5-7-1990; Ord. 05-15, passed 2-2-2015)
§ 848.05  BOND.
   A party obtaining a permit for the logging of trees or for the sale of such
trees shall be required to post a cash bond in the amount up to $10,000, as
determined by the City Engineer. The bond shall be placed in the city
depository and shall be forfeited in proportion to the damage to public
property caused by the logging of trees. The bond shall in no way limit the
city or other persons from pursuing any other legal remedies for claims in
excess of or in addition to the amounts covered by the bond. Such bond shall be
in addition to the bond required by §
848.03.
(Ord. 40-90, passed 5-7-1990; Ord. 05-15, passed 2-2-2015)
§ 848.06  CUTTING TREES LESS THAN 16 INCHES IN DIAMETER; CLEAR CUTTING
PROHIBITED.
   (A)   As part of a landowner’s logging operation for which he or she has
received an approved permit, no person shall cut a tree under 16 inches in
diameter, as calipered four feet above natural grade, within the city, unless
and until a recommendation and approval (with specific reasons set forth
therein) of the same are received from a certified forester.
   (B)   Clear cutting is not permitted by a landowner and any permit
requesting such will be denied. The harvesting of lumber by a landowner will be
selective, and trees to be logged will be pre-marked as per the landowner’s
permitting application.
(Ord. 40-90, passed 5-7-1990; Ord. 05-15, passed 2-2-2015)
§ 848.07  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS; MAINTENANCE OF STREETS AND CLEARED AREAS;
REPLACEMENT OF TREES.
   All logging of trees shall conform to the following provisions to ensure the
public health, safety and general welfare of the municipality and its
residents.
   (A)   A permit holder and his or her logging operator shall be jointly and
severally responsible to pay for any damage to municipal utility services and
any extraordinary expenses incurred by the city regarding the use of safety
forces at any emergency caused by the logging operation.
   (B)   If mud or other materials are carried onto any public street as a
result of the logging operations, the permit holder shall immediately remove
the same from such street to the satisfaction of the Director of Public
Service. Compliance with this division (B) shall be verified by the Director of
Public Service prior to any equipment for logging being placed on the premises.
   (C)   The permit holder shall notify the Police Department prior to moving
logs or heavy logging equipment onto or off the logging site.
   (D)   Emergency telephone numbers of logging operators shall be made
available to the Director of Public Safety, the Police Chief and the Fire Chief
in the event an emergency occurs at the logging site. An answering service is
not acceptable. Any cost incurred due to unavailability of the logging operator
in the case of an emergency condition where professional outside assistance is
required shall be the sole responsibility of the logging operator.
   (E)   After the issuance of a permit to log, and again after completion of
the project, the Director of Public Service, the City Engineer and the logger
shall inspect the public roads that may service the heavy equipment. The city
may, in its discretion, require the logger to videotape the route(s) to be used
in the logging operation. The permit holder and logging operator shall be held
jointly and severally responsible for any road damage caused by the logging
operation. The permit holder and/or the logging operator shall cause any such
damage to be repaired within 30 days of such inspection. If the permit holder
and/or the logging operator fail to repair such damage within 30 days, then the
city shall repair the damage at the permit holder’s expense and deduct the cost
thereof from the bond posted as required in §
848.05.
   (F)   Trees to be cut and removed that are over 16 inches in diameter, as
calipered four feet above natural grade, shall be tagged and the count shown on
the permit application. Unless otherwise specified and if an approved
reclamation plan is required pursuant to §
848.04(C), trees that are removed shall be replaced by the permit holder within
30 days of the completion of the logging operation, with six-foot high trees
that have been inspected, sprayed and calipered one and one-half inches three
feet above the root line. Proof of planting of trees shall be submitted to the
Director of Public Service and an on-site inspection shall immediately follow.
   (G)   The area in which trees are logged shall be cleared of all debris and
no dead falls are to remain. No cut trees shall remain in waterways. All debris
shall be cleaned up within 180 days after completion of the logging operation.
   (H)   No bond, fee or any cost(s) shall be refunded to the person posting
such funds (i.e., the permit holder, logger, agent, and the like) for a period
of 60 days after completion, to allow the Director of Public Service, the Shade
Tree Commission or other responsible personnel to inspect the logged/cleared
area before the City Engineer and Law Director certify that all ordinances,
resolutions, rules and environmental procedures have been complied with.
   (I)   The provisions concerning conservation are hereby incorporated into
this section by reference as fully written herein. The permit holder shall
comply with the provisions contained therein.
(Ord. 40-90, passed 5-7-1990; Ord. 05-15, passed 2-2-2015)
§ 848.08  NOISE.
   All logging operations performed in the city shall be subject to compliance
with the noise regulations set forth in §
648.09 of the General Offenses Code.
(Ord. 40-90, passed 5-7-1990; Ord. 05-15, passed 2-2-2015)
§ 848.09  COMPLIANCE WITH LAWS; RESTORATION OF SIDEWALKS; RESPONSIBILITY FOR
DAMAGES.
   The permit holder and the logging operator shall be jointly and severally
liable and responsible for compliance with the following:
   (A)   Observing all applicable state and federal laws and city ordinances
that are now passed or that may be passed, relative to logging operations;
   (B)   Restoration of sidewalks and other public places, which may be
disturbed or damaged as a result of the operation, to their condition prior to
commencement of the logging operation; and
   (C)   Restitution for damage to any property of another caused by the
logging operation.
(Ord. 40-90, passed 5-7-1990; Ord. 05-15, passed 2-2-2015)
§ 848.10  CONDITIONS FOR NONISSUANCE OF PERMITS.
   Council may recommend the rejection of any application for a logging permit
where granting such a permit would not serve the interests of the public
health, safety and general welfare, as determined after a review of noise
pollution, watershed and environmental impact by the City Engineer and a
subsequent recommendation that the application be rejected.
(Ord. 40-90, passed 5-7-1990; Ord. 05-15, passed 2-2-2015)
§ 848.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Except as provided in division (B) hereof, whoever violates any of the
provisions of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and
shall be fined not more than $1,000 or imprisoned not more than 180 days, or
both.
   (B)   Any corporation or limited partnership violating any of the provisions
of this chapter is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree and shall be
fined not more than $3,000.
   (C)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on
which a violation of this chapter occurs or continues.
(Ord. 40-90, passed 5-7-1990; Ord. 05-15, passed 2-2-2015)
TITLE FOUR:  TAXATION
   
CHAP. 880.   EARNED INCOME TAX, EFFECTIVE THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2015
   
CHAP. 881.  EARNED INCOME TAX, EFFECTIVE BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2016
   
CHAP. 884.  HOTEL TAX
   
CHAP. 886.  MOTOR VEHICLE EXCISE TAX
   
CHAP. 888.  COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT AREAS
CHAPTER 880:  EARNED INCOME TAX, EFFECTIVE THROUGH DECEMBER 31, 2015
880.01   Purpose
880.02   Definitions
880.03   Imposition of tax; rate and income taxable
880.04   Effective period
880.05   Determination of allocation of tax; method of determination
880.06   Sales made in the city
880.07   Total allocation
880.08   Rentals
880.09   Operating loss carry-forward
880.10   Exemptions; sources of income not taxed
880.11   Returns; when return required to be made
880.12   Form and content of return
880.13   Extension of time for filing returns
880.14   Consolidated returns
880.15   Amended returns
880.16   Payment of tax; payment on filing of return
880.17   Collection at source
880.18   Declaration of income; payment of estimated tax
880.19   Filing declaration
880.20   Form of declaration
880.21   Payment to accompany declaration
880.22   Annual return
880.23   Interest on unpaid tax
880.24   Surcharges on unpaid tax
880.25   Exceptions
880.26   Abatement of interest and surcharge
880.27   Violations
880.28   Limitation on prosecution
880.29   Failure to procure forms no excuse
880.30   Collection of unpaid taxes
880.31   Refunds of taxes erroneously paid
880.32   Amounts of less than $1
880.33   Relief and reciprocity provisions; nonresident taxpayers (repealed)
880.34   Resident taxpayers
880.35   Claim for credit or refund
880.36   Disbursement of funds collected
880.37   Duties and authority of the Administrator; duty to receive tax imposed
880.38   Duty to enforce collection
880.39   Authority to make and enforce regulations
880.40   Authority to arrange installment payments
880.41   Authority to determine amount of tax due
880.42   Authority to make investigations
880.43   Authority to compel production of records
880.44   Refusal to produce records
880.45   Confidential nature of information obtained
880.46   Taxpayer required to retain records
880.47   Authority to contract for central collection facilities
880.48   Board of Review established
880.49   Duty to approve regulations and to hear appeals
880.50   Right of appeal
880.51   Separability
880.52   Collection of tax after termination of chapter
880.53   Amendments
880.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Limitation on levying an income or receipts tax, see
CHTR. Art. XI, § 3
   Registration of contractors with Income Tax Administrator, see §§
1446.01,
1446.03
Statutory reference:
   Payroll deductions, see R.C. Chapter 9.42
   Income taxes, see R.C. Chapter 718
§ 880.01  PURPOSE.
   To provide funds for the purposes of general municipal functions of the
city, there is hereby levied a tax on all salaries, wages, commissions and
other compensation, and on net profits, as hereinafter provided.
(Ord. 66-67, passed 12-18-1967)
§ 880.02  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   “Administrator.” The individual appointed by the Mayor and approved by
Council and designated to enforce the provisions of this chapter.
   “Association.” A partnership, limited partnership or any other form of
unincorporated enterprise owned by two or more persons.
   “Board of Review.”  The Board created by and constituted as provided in §
880.48.
   “Business.”  Any enterprise, activity, profession or undertaking of any
nature conducted for profit or ordinarily conducted for profit, whether by an
individual, partnership, association, corporation or any other entity,
excluding, however, all nonprofit corporations which are exempt from the
payment of federal income tax.
   “Corporation.”  A corporation or joint stock association organized under the
laws of the United States, the state or any other state, territory or foreign
country or dependency.
   “Employee.”  One who works for wages, salary, commission or other type of
compensation in the service of an employer.
   “Employer.”  An individual, partnership, association, corporation,
government body, unit or agency or any other entity, whether or not organized
for profit, who or that employs one or more persons on a salary, wage,
commission or other basis of compensation.
   “Fiscal year.”  An accounting period of twelve months or less ending on any
day other than December 31.
   “Gross receipts.”  The total income from any source whatever.
   “Net profits.”  A net gain from the operation of a business, profession,
enterprise or other activity after provision for all ordinary and necessary
expenses either paid or accrued in accordance with the accounting system used
by the taxpayer for federal income tax purposes without deduction of taxes
imposed by this chapter or federal, state or other taxes based on income, and,
in the case of an association, without deduction of salaries paid to partners
and other owners.
   “Nonresident.”  An individual domiciled outside the city.
   “Nonresident unincorporated business entity.”  An unincorporated business
entity not having an office or place of business within the city.
   “Person.”  Every natural person, partnership, fiduciary, association or
corporation. Whenever used in any clause prescribing and imposing a penalty,
the word “person,” as applied to any unincorporated entity, means the partners
or members thereof, and as applied to corporations, the officers thereof.
   “Place of business.”  Any bona fide office (other than a mere statutory
office), factory, warehouse or other space which is occupied and used by a
taxpayer in carrying on any business activity individually or through one or
more of his regular employees regularly in attendance.
   “Resident.” An individual domiciled in the city.
   “Resident unincorporated business entity.”  An unincorporated business
entity having an office or place of business within the city.
   “Taxable income.”  Wages, salaries and other compensation paid by an
employer before any deduction and/or the net profits from the operation of a
business, profession or other enterprise or activity adjusted in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter.  “Taxable income” shall also mean lottery
winnings and income derived from gaming, wagering, lotteries or schemes of
chance in the amount of $10,000 or more.
   “Taxable year.”  The calendar year or the fiscal year upon the basis of
which the net profits are to be computed under this chapter, and, in the case
of a return for a fractional part of a year, the period for which such return
is required to be made.
   “Taxpayer.”  A person, whether an individual, partnership, association,
corporation or other entity, required under this chapter to file a return or
pay a tax.
(Ord. 66-67, passed 12-18-1967; Ord. 17-04, passed 2-17-2004)
§ 880.03  IMPOSITION OF TAX; RATE AND INCOME TAXABLE.
   An annual tax for the purposes specified in §
880.01 shall be imposed on and after January 1, 1986, at the rate of 2% per
year upon the following:
   (A)   On all salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation, including
but not limited to lottery winnings and income derived from gaming, wagering,
lotteries or schemes of chance in the amount of $10,000 or more earned on and
after January 1, 1986, by residents of the city;
   (B)   On all salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation, including
but not limited to lottery winnings and income derived from gaming, wagering,
lotteries or schemes of chance earned on and after January 1, 1986, by
nonresidents of the city for work done, lottery winnings received or income
received from gaming, wagering, lotteries or schemes of chance in the amount of
$10,000 or more or services performed or rendered within the city;
   (C)   On the portion attributable to the city of the net profits earned on
and after January 1, 1986, of all resident unincorporated business entities or
professions or other activities, derived from sales made, work done, services
performed or rendered and business or other activities conducted in the city;
   (D)   On the portion of the distributive share of the net profits earned on
and after January 1, 1986, of a resident partner or owner of a resident
unincorporated business entity not attributable to the city and not levied
against such unincorporated business entity by the city;
   (E)   On the portion attributable to the city of the net profits earned on
or after January 1, 1986, of all nonresident unincorporated business entities,
professions or other activities, derived from sales made, work done, services
performed or rendered and business or other activities conducted in the city,
whether or not such unincorporated business entity has an office or place of
business in the city;
   (F)   On the portion of the distributive share of the net profits earned on
and after January 1, 1986, of a resident partner or owner of a nonresident
unincorporated business entity not attributable to the city and not levied
against such unincorporated business entity by the city; and
   (G)   On the portion attributable to the city of the net profits earned on
and after January 1, 1986, of all corporations, derived from sales made, work
done, services performed or rendered and business or other activities conducted
in the city, whether or not such corporations have an office or place of
business in the city.
(Ord. 12-86, passed 2-10-1986; Ord. 17-04, passed 2-17-2004)
§ 880.04  EFFECTIVE PERIOD.
   The tax shall be levied, collected and paid with respect to the salaries,
wages, commissions and other compensation, and with respect to the net profits
of businesses, professions or other activities, earned on and after January 1,
1968.
(Ord. 66-67, passed 12-18-1967)
§ 880.05  DETERMINATION OF ALLOCATION OF TAX; METHOD OF DETERMINATION.
   In the taxation of income which is subject to city income tax, if the books
and records of a taxpayer conducting a business or profession both within and
without the boundaries of the city disclose with reasonable accuracy what
portion of its net profit is attributable to that part of the business or
profession conducted within the boundaries of the city, then only such portion
shall be considered as having a taxable situs in the city for the purposes of
municipal income taxation. The portion of the entire net profits of a taxpayer
to be allocated as having been derived from within the city, in the absence of
actual records thereof, shall be determined as follows:
   Multiply the entire net profits by a business allocation percentage to be
determined by a three-factor formula of property, payroll and sales, each of
which shall be given equal weight, as follows:
   (A)   The average net book value of the real and tangible personal property
owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession in the city during
the taxable period to the average net book value of all real and tangible
personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession
during the same period, wherever situated. As used in this division (A), real
property includes property rented or leased by the taxpayer and the value of
such property shall be determined by multiplying the annual rental thereon by
eight.
   (B)   Wages, salaries and other compensation paid during the taxable period
to persons employed in the business or profession for services performed in the
city to wages, salaries and other compensation paid during the same period to
persons employed in the business or profession, wherever their services are
performed.
   (C)   Gross receipts of the business or profession from sales made and
services performed during the taxable period in the city to gross receipts of
the business or profession during the same period from sales and services,
wherever made or performed.
   In the event that the foregoing allocation formula does not produce an
equitable result, another basis may, under uniform regulations, be substituted
so as to produce such result.
(Ord. 66-67, passed 12-18-1967)
§ 880.06  SALES MADE IN THE CITY.
   As used in division §
880.05(C), “sales made in the city” means:
   (A)   All sales of tangible personal property which is delivered within the
city regardless of where title passes if shipped or delivered from a stock of
goods within the city;
   (B)   All sales of tangible personal property which is delivered within the
city regardless of where title passes even though transported from a point
outside the city if the taxpayer is regularly engaged, through its own
employees, in the solicitation or promotion of sales within the city and the
sales result from such solicitation or promotion; and
   (C)   All sales of tangible personal property which is shipped from a place
within the city to purchasers outside the city regardless of where title passes
if the taxpayer is not, through its own employees, regularly engaged in the
solicitation or promotion of sales at the place where delivery is made.
(Ord. 66-67, passed 12-18-1967)
§ 880.07  TOTAL ALLOCATION.
   (A)   Add together the percentages determined in accordance with §
880.05(A), (B) and (C) or such of the aforesaid percentages as are applicable
to the particular taxpayer and divide the total so obtained by the number of
percentages used in deriving such total in order to obtain the business
allocation percentage referred to in §
880.05.
   (B)   A factor is applicable even though it may be allocable entirely in or
outside the city.
(Ord. 66-67, passed 12-18-1967)
§ 880.08  RENTALS.
   (A)   Rental income received by a taxpayer shall be included in the
computation of net profits from business activities under §
880.03 (C) through (G) only if and to the extent that the rental, ownership,
management or operation of the real estate from which such rentals are derived
(whether so rented, managed or operated by a taxpayer individually or through
agents or other representatives) constitutes a business activity of the
taxpayer in whole or in part.
   (B)   Where the gross monthly rental of any and all real properties,
regardless of number and value, aggregates in excess of $250 per month, it
shall be prima-facie evidence that the rental, ownership, management or
operation of such properties is a business activity of such taxpayer, and the
net income of such rental property shall be subject to tax, provided that in
the case of commercial property, the owner shall be considered engaged in a
business activity when the rental is based on a fixed or fluctuating percentage
of gross or net sales, receipts or profits of the lessee, whether or not such
rental exceeds $250 per month,  and provided, further, that the person who
operates a licensed rooming house shall be considered in business whether or
not the gross income exceeds $250 per month.
(Ord. 15-72, passed 1-3-1972)
§ 880.09  OPERATING LOSS CARRY-FORWARD.
   (A)   The portion of a net operating loss sustained in any taxable year
subsequent to January 1, 1968, allocable to the city may be applied against the
portion of the profit of succeeding tax years allocable to the city until
exhausted but in no event for more than five taxable years immediately
following the year in which the loss occurred. No portion of a net operating
loss shall be carried back against net profits of any prior year.
   (B)   The portion of net operating loss sustained shall be allocated to the
city in the same manner as provided herein for allocating net profits to the
city.
   (C)   The Administrator shall provide by rules and regulations the manner in
which such net operating loss carry-forward shall be determined.
(Ord. 66-67, passed 12-18-1967)
§ 880.10  EXEMPTIONS; SOURCES OF INCOME NOT TAXED.
   The tax provided for herein shall not be levied on the following:
   (A)   Pay or allowance of active members of the Armed Forces of the United
States or the income of religious, fraternal, charitable, scientific, literary
or educational institutions to the extent that such income is derived from tax
exempt real estate, tax exempt tangible or intangible property or tax exempt
activities;
   (B)   Poor relief, unemployment insurance benefits, old age pensions or
similar payments, including disability benefits received from local, state or
federal governments or charitable, religious or educational organizations;
   (C)   Proceeds of insurance paid by reason of the death of the insured;
pensions, disability benefits, annuities or gratuities not in the nature of
compensation for services rendered from whatever source derived;
   (D)   Receipts from seasonal or casual entertainment, amusements, sports
events and health and welfare activities when any such are conducted by bona
fide charitable, religious or educational organizations and associations;
   (E)   Alimony received;
   (F)   Personal earnings of any natural person under eighteen years of age;
   (G)   Compensation for personal injuries or for damages to property by way
of insurance or otherwise;
   (H)   Interest, dividends and other revenue from intangible property;
   (I)   Gains from involuntary conversion, cancellation of indebtedness,
interest on federal obligations, items of income already taxed by the state
which the city is specifically prohibited from taxing, and income of a
decedent’s estate during the period of administration (except such income from
the operation of a business);
   (J)   Salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation and net profits
the taxation of which is prohibited by the United States Constitution or any
act of Congress limiting the power of the states or their political
subdivisions to impose net income taxes on income derived from interstate
commerce; and
   (K)   Salaries, wages, commissions and other compensation and net profits
the taxation of which is prohibited by the Constitution of the state or any act
of the Ohio General Assembly limiting the power of the city to impose net
income taxes.
(Ord. 66-67, passed 12-18-1967)
§ 880.11  RETURNS; WHEN RETURN REQUIRED TO BE MADE.
   Each taxpayer shall, whether or not a tax is due thereon, make and file a
return on or before April 30 of the year following the effective date of this
section (Ordinance 15-72, passed January 3, 1972) and on or before April 30 of
each year thereafter. When the return is made for a fiscal year or other period
different from the calendar year, the return shall be filed within four months
from the end of such fiscal year or period.
(Ord. 15-72, passed 1-3-1972)
§ 880.12  FORM AND CONTENT OF RETURN.
   The return shall be filed with the Administrator on a form or forms
furnished by or obtainable upon request from such Administrator, setting forth:
   (A)   The aggregate amounts of salaries, wages, commissions and other
compensation earned and gross income from a business, profession or other
activity, less allowable expenses incurred in the acquisition of such gross
income earned during the preceding year and subject to the tax;
   (B)   The amount of the tax imposed by this chapter on such earnings and
profits; and
   (C)   Such other pertinent statements, information returns or other
information as the Administrator may require.
(Ord. 66-67, passed 12-18-1967)
§ 880.13  EXTENSION OF TIME FOR FILING RETURNS.
   The Administrator may extend the time for filing the annual return, upon the
request of the taxpayer, for a period not to exceed six months, or one month
beyond any extension requested of or granted by the Internal Revenue Service
for the filing of the Federal Income Tax Return. The Administrator may require
a tentative return, accompanied by payment of the amount of tax shown to be due
thereon by the date the return is normally due. No penalty or interest shall be
assessed in those cases in which the return is filed and the final tax paid
within the period as extended.
(Ord. 66-67, passed 12-18-1967)
§ 880.14  CONSOLIDATED RETURNS.
   (A)   Filing of consolidated returns may be permitted or required in
accordance with rules and regulations prescribed by the Administrator.
   (B)   In the case of a corporation that carried on transactions with its
stockholders or with other corporations related by stock ownership,
interlocking directorates or some other method, or in the case of a person who
operated a division, branch, factory, office, laboratory or activity within the
city constituting a portion only of its total business, the Administrator shall
require such additional information as he may deem necessary to ascertain
whether net profits are properly allocated to the city. If the Administrator
finds that net profits are not properly allocated to the city by reason of
transactions with stockholders or with other corporations related by stock
ownership, interlocking directorates or some other method, or transactions with
such division, branch, factory, office, laboratory or activity, he or she shall
make such allocation as he or she deems appropriate to produce a fair and
proper allocation of net profits to the city.
(Ord. 66-67, passed 12-18-1967)
§ 880.15  AMENDED RETURNS.
   (A)   Where necessary, an amended return must be filed in order to report
additional income and pay any additional tax due, or claim a refund of tax
overpaid, subject to the requirements, limitations, or both, contained in §§
880.30 through
880.35. Such amended return shall be on a form obtainable on request from the
Administrator. A taxpayer may not change the method of accounting or
apportionment of net profits after the due date for filing the original return.
   (B)   Within three months from the final determination of any federal tax
liability affecting the taxpayer’s city tax liability, such taxpayer shall make
and file an amended city return showing income subject to the city tax, based
upon such final determination of Federal tax liability, and pay any additional
tax shown due thereon or make a claim for refund of any overpayment.
(Ord. 66-67, passed 12-18-1967)
§ 880.16  PAYMENT OF TAX; PAYMENT ON FILING OF RETURN.
   (A)   The taxpayer making a return shall, at the time of filing thereof, pay
to the Administrator the amount of taxes shown as due thereon, provided,
however, that
      (1)   Where any portion of the tax so due has been deducted at the source
pursuant to §
880.17;
      (2)   Where any portion of the tax has been paid by the taxpayer pursuant
to §
880.18; or
      (3)   Where an income tax has been paid on the same income to another
municipality, credit for the amount so deducted or paid, or credit to the
extent provided for in §§
880.33 through
880.35, shall be deducted from the amount shown to be due and only the balance,
if any, shall be due and payable at the time of filing such return.
   (B)   A taxpayer who has overpaid the amount of tax to which the city is
entitled under the provisions of this chapter may have such overpayment applied
against any subsequent liability hereunder or, at his or her election,
indicated on the return, such overpayment (or a part thereof) shall be
refunded, provided that no additional taxes or refunds of less than $1 shall be
collected or refunded.
(Ord. 15-72, passed 1-3-1972)
§ 880.17  COLLECTION AT SOURCE.
   (A)   In accordance with rules and regulations prescribed by the
Administrator, each employer within or doing business within the city shall
deduct, at the time of the payment thereof, the tax called for in §
880.03 on the gross salaries, wages, commissions or other compensation due from
such employer to his or her employees and shall, on or before the last day of
each month, make a return and pay to the Director of Finance the amount of
taxes so deducted during the previous month. However, if the amount of the tax
so deducted by any employer in any one month is less than $100, the employer
may defer the filing of a return and payment of the amount deducted until the
last day of the month following the end of the calendar quarter in which such
month occurred.
   (B)   Such returns shall be on a form or forms prescribed or acceptable to
the Administrator and shall be subject to the rules and regulations prescribed
therefor by the Administrator. Such employer shall be liable for the payment of
tax required to be deducted and withheld whether or not such taxes have, in
fact, been withheld.
   (C)   Such employer, in collecting such tax, shall be deemed to hold the
same, until payment is made by such employer to the city, as a Trustee for the
benefit of the city, and any such tax collected by such employer from his or
her employees shall, until the same is paid to the city, be deemed a trust fund
in the hands of such employer.
   (D)   No person shall be required to withhold the tax on wages or other
compensation paid to domestic servants employed by him or her exclusively in or
about such person's residence, even though such residence is in the city, but
such employee shall be subject to all of the requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 15-72, passed 1-3-1972; Ord. 108-10, passed 9-7-2010)
§ 880.18  DECLARATION OF INCOME; PAYMENT OF ESTIMATED TAX.
   Except as otherwise provided in this section, every person shall file a
declaration setting forth taxable income, including distributive shares of net
profits of unincorporated business entities, estimated to be earned by the
taxpayer during the current tax year, together with the estimated tax due
thereon, less tax withheld within the city, and less the tax credit allowed in
§§
880.33 through
880.35, unless such taxpayer anticipates that such tax will be fully withheld
within the city and any income earned outside the city will be fully taxed at
the same or a higher rate of tax in another municipality. If the estimated tax
for the current year, less the tax to be withheld and less such tax credit,
amounts to not more than $10, no declaration or payment of estimated tax is
required.
(Ord. 76-73, passed 11-19-1973)
§ 880.19  FILING DECLARATION.
   (A)   The filing required by §
880.18 shall be filed on or before April 15 of each year during the effective
period set forth in §
880.04 or within four months of the date the taxpayer becomes subject to the
tax for the first time.
   (B)   Those taxpayers reporting on a fiscal year basis shall file a
declaration within four months after the beginning of each fiscal year or
period.
(Ord. 66-67, passed 12-18-1967; Ord. 17-14, passed 5-5-2014)
§ 880.20  FORM OF DECLARATION.
   (A)   The declaration required by §
880.18 shall be filed upon a form furnished by or obtainable from the
Administrator. As provided in §
880.18, credit shall be taken for the city tax to be withheld from any portion
of such income, and credit shall be taken for tax to be paid or withheld and
remitted to another taxing municipality in accordance with the provisions of §§
880.33 through
880.35.
   (B)   The original declaration or any subsequent amendment thereof may be
increased or decreased on or before any subsequent quarterly payment date as
provided herein.
(Ord. 15-72, passed 1-3-1972)
§ 880.21  PAYMENT TO ACCOMPANY DECLARATION.
   The declaration of estimated tax to be paid to the city shall be accompanied
by a payment of at least one- fourth of the estimated annual tax and at least a
similar amount shall be paid on or before the last day of the seventh and tenth
months after the beginning of the taxable year, and on or before the last day
of the first month of the succeeding year following the taxable year. However,
in case an amended declaration has been filed, the unpaid balance shown to be
due thereon shall be paid in equal installments on or before the remaining
payment dates.
(Ord. 76-73, passed 11-19-1973)
§ 880.22  ANNUAL RETURN.
   On or before the last day of the fourth month of the year following that for
which a declaration or amended declaration was filed, an annual return shall be
filed and any balance which may be due the City shall be paid therewith in
accordance with the provisions of §
880.16. However, any taxpayer may file, on or before the last day of the first
month of the year following that for which such declaration or amended
declaration was filed, an annual return and pay any balance due at such time in
lieu of filing such declaration or an amended declaration and in lieu of paying
the final quarterly installment based upon a declaration or amended declaration
of estimated tax.
(Ord. 15-72, passed 1-3-1972)
§ 880.23  INTEREST ON UNPAID TAX.
   All taxes imposed and all moneys withheld or required to be withheld by
employers and all installments of estimated taxes required to be paid under the
provisions of this chapter and remaining unpaid after they become due shall
bear interest at the rate of 14% per year.
(Ord. 19-85, passed 3-18-1985)
§ 880.24  SURCHARGES ON UNPAID TAX.
   In addition to interest as provided in Section 880.23, surcharges based on
the unpaid tax are imposed as follows:
   (A)   For failure to file a return, 8% per year, but not less than $25;
   (B)   For failure to pay taxes, including estimated payments, when due,
other than taxes withheld, 8% per year with a minimum penalty of not less than
$25; and
   (C)   For failure to remit taxes withheld from employees, 10% per month or
fraction thereof, but the accumulated surcharge shall not exceed 50% upon any
unpaid amount and shall not be less than $25.
(Ord. 19-85, passed 3-18-1985; Ord. 108-10, passed 9-7-2010)
§ 880.25  EXCEPTIONS.
   A surcharge shall not be assessed on an additional tax assessment made by
the Administrator when a return has been filed in good faith and the tax paid
thereon within the time prescribed by the Administrator. Further, in the
absence of fraud, neither a surcharge nor interest shall be assessed on any
additional tax assessment resulting from a federal audit, provided that an
amended return is filed and the additional tax is paid within three months
after a final determination of the federal tax liability.
(Ord. 66-67, passed 12-18-1967)
§ 880.26  ABATEMENT OF INTEREST AND SURCHARGE.
   Upon recommendation of the Administrator, the Board of Review may abate a
surcharge or interest, or both, or upon an appeal from the refusal of the
Administrator to recommend abatement of a surcharge or interest, the Board may
nevertheless abate a surcharge or interest, or both, for good cause shown.
(Ord. 66-67, passed 12-18-1967)
§ 880.27  VIOLATIONS.
   No person shall:
   (A)   Fail, neglect or refuse to make any return or declaration required by
this chapter;
   (B)   Make any incomplete, false or fraudulent return;
   (C)   Fail, neglect or refuse to pay the tax, surcharges or interest imposed
by this chapter;
   (D)   Fail, neglect or refuse to withhold the tax from his or employees or
to remit such withholding to the Administrator;
   (E)   Refuse to permit the Administrator or any duly authorized agent or
employee to examine books, records, papers and federal income tax returns
relating to the income or net profits of a taxpayer;
   (F)   Fail to appear before the Administrator and to produce books, records,
papers or federal income tax returns relating to the income or net profits of a
taxpayer upon order or subpoena of the Administrator;
   (G)   Refuse to disclose to the Administrator any information with respect
to the income or net profits of a taxpayer;
   (H)   Fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any order or
subpoena of the Administrator authorized hereby;
   (I)   Give to an employer false information as to his true name, correct
social security number and residence address or fail to promptly notify an
employer of any change in residence address and the date thereof;
   (J)   Fail to use ordinary diligence in maintaining proper records of
employees' residence addresses, total wages paid and city tax withheld, or
knowingly give the Administrator false information; or
   (K)   Attempt to do anything whatever to avoid the payment of the whole or
any part of the tax, surcharges or interest imposed by this chapter.
(Ord. 66-67, passed 12-18-1967)
§ 880.28  LIMITATION ON PROSECUTION.
   All prosecutions under this chapter must be commenced within the periods
stipulated in R.C. § 718.06.
§ 880.29  FAILURE TO PROCURE FORMS NO EXCUSE.
   The failure of any employer or person to receive or procure a return,
declaration or other required form shall not excuse him from making any
information return, return or declaration, from filing such form or from paying
the tax.
(Ord. 66-67, passed 12-18-1967)
§ 880.30  COLLECTION OF UNPAID TAXES.
   All taxes imposed by this chapter shall be collectible, together with any
interest and surcharges thereon, by suit, as other debts of like amount are
recoverable. Except in the case of fraud, of omission of a substantial portion
of income subject to the tax, or of failure to file a return, an additional
assessment shall not be made after three years from the time the return was due
or filed, whichever is later, provided, however, that in those cases in which a
Commissioner of Internal Revenue and the taxpayer have executed a waiver of the
federal statute of limitations, the period within which an additional
assessment may be made by the Administrator shall be one year from the time of
the final determination of the federal tax liability.
(Ord. 66-67, passed 12-18-1967)
§ 880.31  REFUNDS OF TAXES ERRONEOUSLY PAID.
   Taxes erroneously paid shall not be refunded unless a claim for refund is
made within three years from the date on which such payment was made or the
return was due, or within three months after the final determination of the
federal tax liability, whichever is later.
(Ord. 66-67, passed 12-18-1967)
§ 880.32  AMOUNTS OF LESS THAN $1.
   Amounts of less than $1 shall not be collected or refunded.
(Ord. 66-67, passed 12-18-1967)
§ 880.33  RELIEF AND RECIPROCITY PROVISIONS; NONRESIDENT TAXPAYERS (REPEALED).
   Section 880.33 was repealed by Ordinance 49-14, passed December 15, 2014.
§ 880.34  RESIDENT TAXPAYERS.
   A resident of the city who is required to and does pay, or has acknowledged
liability for, a municipal tax on or measured by income, to another
municipality upon the same income taxable under the provisions  of this
chapter, may claim a credit of equal to 75% of the amount obtained by
multiplying the lower of the tax rate of such other municipality or of the city
by the taxable income earned in or attributable to the municipality of
employment or business activity.
(Ord. 88-98, passed 8-15-1988; Ord. 47-14, passed 12-1-2014)
§ 880.35  CLAIM FOR CREDIT OR REFUND.
   A claim for credit or refund under §§
880.33 and
880.34 shall be made in such manner as the Administrator may by regulation
provide.  If the city resident fails, neglects or refuses to file an annual
return or declaration on the form prescribed by the Administrator, he or she
shall not be entitled to such credit or refund and shall be considered in
violation of this chapter for failure to file a return.
(Ord. 15-72, passed 1-3-1972)
§ 880.36  DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS COLLECTED.
   The funds collected under this chapter shall be disbursed in the following
manner:
   (A)   First, such part thereof as is necessary to defray all expenses of
collecting the tax and of administering and enforcing the provisions of this
chapter shall be paid.
   (B)   The balance remaining after payment of the expenses referred to in
division (A) hereof shall be apportioned to the following funds beginning with
the January, 1998, collections received by the city in February, 1998, using
the following percentages:
 
General Fund                     70.20%
Streets Capital Improvement Fund 23.00%
Safety Department Equipment Fund 2.40%
Fire Equipment Fund              2.40%
Service Equipment Fund           1.00%
Storm Sewer Fund                 1.00%
 
(Ord. 66-67, passed 12-18-1967; Ord. 9-98, passed 1-20-1998)
§ 880.37  DUTIES AND AUTHORITY OF THE ADMINISTRATOR; DUTY TO RECEIVE TAX
IMPOSED.
   It shall be the duty of the Administrator to receive the tax imposed by this
chapter, in the manner prescribed herein, from the taxpayer; to keep an
accurate record thereof; and to report all moneys so received.
(Ord. 66-67, passed 12-18-1967)
§ 880.38  DUTY TO ENFORCE COLLECTION.
   It shall be the duty of the Administrator to enforce payment of all taxes
owning to the city and to keep accurate records for a minimum of five years,
showing the amount due from each taxpayer required to file a declaration and
make any return, or both, including taxes withheld, and showing the dates and
amounts of payments thereof.
(Ord. 66-67, passed 12-18-1967)
§ 880.39  AUTHORITY TO MAKE AND ENFORCE REGULATIONS.
   The Administrator is hereby charged with the enforcement of the provisions
of this chapter and is hereby authorized, subject to the approval of the Board
of Review, to adopt, promulgate and enforce rules and regulations relating to
any matter or thing pertaining to the collection of taxes and the
administration and enforcement of this chapter, including provisions for the
re-examination and correction of returns.
(Ord. 66-67, passed 12-18-1967)
§ 880.40  AUTHORITY TO ARRANGE INSTALLMENT PAYMENTS.
   (A)   The Administrator is hereby authorized to arrange for the payment of
unpaid taxes, interest and surcharges on a schedule of installment payments,
when the taxpayer has proved to the Administrator that, due to certain hardship
conditions, he is unable to pay the full amount of the tax due.  Such
authorization shall not be granted until proper returns are filed by the
taxpayer for all amounts owned by him or her under this chapter.
   (B)   Failure to make any deferred payment when due shall cause the total
unpaid amount, including surcharge and interest, to become payable on demand
and the provisions of §§
880.27 and
880.30 shall apply.
(Ord. 66-67, passed 12-18-1967)
§ 880.41  AUTHORITY TO DETERMINE AMOUNT OF TAX DUE.
   In any case where a taxpayer has failed to file a return or has filed a
return which does not show the proper amount of tax due, the Administrator may
determine the amount of tax appearing to be due the city from the taxpayer and
shall send to such taxpayer a written statement showing the amount of tax so
determined together with interest and surcharges thereon, if any.
(Ord. 66-67, passed 12-18-1967)
§ 880.42  AUTHORITY TO MAKE INVESTIGATIONS.
   The Administrator, or any authorized employee, is hereby authorized to
examine the books, papers, records and federal income tax returns of any
employer or of any taxpayer or person subject to, or whom the Administrator
believes is subject to, the provisions of this chapter, for the purpose of
verifying the accuracy of any return made or, if no return was made, to
ascertain the tax due under this chapter.  Every such employer, supposed
employer, taxpayer or supposed taxpayer is hereby directed and required to
furnish, upon written request by the Administrator, or his or her duly
authorized agent or employee, the means, facilities and opportunity for making
such examinations and investigations as are hereby authorized.
(Ord. 66-67, passed 12-18-1967)
§ 880.43  AUTHORITY TO COMPEL PRODUCTIONS OF RECORDS.
   The Administrator is hereby authorized to order any person presumed to have
knowledge of the facts to appear before him or her and may examine such person,
under oath, concerning any income which was or should have been returned for
taxation, or any transaction tending to affect such income, and for this
purpose may compel the production of books, papers, records and federal income
tax returns and the attendance of all persons before him or her, whether as
parties or witnesses, whenever he believes such persons have knowledge of such
income or information pertinent to such inquiry.
(Ord. 66-67, passed 12-18-1967)
§ 880.44  REFUSAL TO PRODUCE RECORDS.
   The refusal to produce books, papers, records and federal income tax
returns, or the refusal to submit to such examination, by any employer or
person subject or presumed to be subject to the tax, or by any officer, agent
or employee of a person subject to the tax or required to withhold tax, or the
failure of any person to comply with the provisions of this chapter or with an
order or subpoena of the Administrator authorized hereby, shall be deemed a
violation of this chapter punishable as provided in §
880.99.
(Ord. 66-67, passed 12-18-1967)
§ 880.45  CONFIDENTIAL NATURE OF INFORMATION OBTAINED.
   Any information gained as the result of any return, investigation, hearing
or verification required or authorized by this chapter shall be confidential
except for official purposes or except in accordance with proper judicial
order. No person shall divulge such information in violation of this section.
(Ord. 66-67, passed 12-18-1967)
§ 880.46  TAXPAYER REQUIRED TO RETAIN RECORDS.
   Every taxpayer shall retain all records necessary to compute his tax
liability for a period of five years from the date his or her return is filed
or the withholding taxes are paid.
(Ord. 66-67, passed 12-18-1967)
§ 880.47  AUTHORITY TO CONTRACT FOR CENTRAL COLLECTION FACILITIES.
   The city, having already entered into an agreement for the establishment of
a Regional Council of Governments, which Council has organized a municipal tax
collection agency known as the Regional Income Tax Agency, hereby authorizes
the Board of Trustees of such Regional Income Tax Agency to administer and
enforce the provisions of this chapter as the agent of the city, and the duties
and authorities of the Administrator hereunder may be performed by the Board of
Trustees of such Agency through the Administrator of such Agency. However, the
Administrator of such Agency shall have no authority to abate surcharges or
interest provided for in §§
880.23 and
880.24.
(Ord. 15-72, passed 1-3-1972)
§ 880.48  BOARD OF REVIEW ESTABLISHED.
   There is hereby established a Board of Review which shall consist of the
Director of Finance, the Director of Law and an elected Councilman to be
appointed by the Mayor and approved by Council. The  Board shall select, each
year for a one-year term, one of its members to serve as Chairman and one to
serve as Secretary. A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a
quorum. The Board shall adopt its own procedural rules and shall keep a record
of its transactions. Any hearing by the Board may be conducted privately and
the provisions of §
880.45 with reference to the confidential character of information required to
be disclosed by this chapter shall apply to such matters as may be heard before
the Board on appeal.
(Ord. 66-67, passed 12-18-1967)
§ 880.49  DUTY TO APPROVE REGULATIONS AND TO HEAR APPEALS.
   All rules and regulations and amendments or changes thereof, which are
adopted by the Administrator under the authority conferred by this chapter,
must be approved by the Board of Review before the same become effective. The
Board shall hear and pass on appeals from any ruling or decision of the
Administrator and, at the request of the taxpayer or the Administrator, is
authorized to substitute alternate methods of allocation.
(Ord. 66-67, passed 12-18-1967)
§ 880.50  RIGHT OF APPEAL.
   Any person dissatisfied with any ruling or decision of the Administrator
which is made under the authority of this chapter may appeal therefrom to the
Board of Review within 30 days from the announcement of such ruling or decision
by the Administrator. The Board shall, on hearing, have jurisdiction to affirm,
reverse or modify any such ruling or decision, or any part thereof.
(Ord. 66-67, passed 12-18-1967)
§ 880.51  SEPARABILITY.
   If any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter, or any tax against
any individual or any of the several groups specified herein, is found to be
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or
invalidity shall affect only such clause, sentence, section or part of this
chapter and shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections or parts of this chapter. It is hereby declared to
be the intention of Council that this chapter would have been adopted had such
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, clause, section or part thereof
not been included herein.
(Ord. 66-67, passed 12-18-1967)
§ 880.52  COLLECTION OF TAX AFTER TERMINATION OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   This chapter shall continue effective insofar as the levy of taxes is
concerned until repealed, and insofar as the collection of taxes levied
hereunder and actions and proceedings for collecting any tax so levied or
enforcing any provision of this chapter are concerned, it shall continue
effective until all of such taxes levied in the aforesaid period are fully paid
and any and all suits and prosecutions for the collection of such taxes or for
the punishment of violations of this chapter have been fully terminated,
subject to the limitations contained in §§
880.27 through
880.29 and
880.30 through
880.32.
   (B)   Annual returns due for all or any part of the last effective year of
this chapter shall be due on the date provided in §§
880.11 and
880.17 as though the same were continuing.
(Ord. 66-67, passed 12-18-1967)
§ 880.53  AMENDMENTS.
   This chapter may be amended from time to time in the manner provided in
Article IX of the City Charter. However, no amendment to this chapter which
provides for a rate of tax other than that imposed by §
880.03, or which imposes the tax provided for herein on persons or income other
than as specified herein, shall be enacted unless approved by a majority of
those voting upon such question at a general election as provided in
Section 2, Article XI, of the City Charter.
(Ord. 66-67, passed 12-18-1967)
§ 880.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   See §
202.99 for general code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
   (B)   In addition to the penalty provided in §
202.99, any employee of the city who violates §
880.45 shall be subject to immediate dismissal.
(Ord. 66-67, passed 12-18-1967)
CHAPTER 881:  EARNED INCOME TAX, EFFECTIVE BEGINNING JANUARY 1, 2016
Section
881.01   Authority to levy tax; purpose of tax
881.02   Definitions
881.03   Imposition of tax
881.04   Collection at source
881.05   Annual return; filing
881.06   Credit for tax paid to other municipalities
881.07   Estimated taxes
881.08   Rounding of amounts
881.09   Requests for refunds
881.10   Second municipality imposing tax after time period allowed for refund
881.11   Amended returns
881.12   Limitations
881.13   Audits
881.14   Service of assessment
881.15   Administration of claims
881.16   Tax information confidential
881.17   Fraud
881.18   Interest and penalties
881.19   Authority of Tax Administrator; verification of information
881.20   Request for opinion of the Tax Administrator
881.21   Board of Tax Review
881.22   Authority to create rules and regulations
881.23   Rental and leased property
881.24   Savings clause
881.25   Collection of tax after termination of chapter
881.26   Adoption of RITA Rules and Regulations
881.27   Election to be subject to R.C. §§ 718.80 to 718.95
881.99   Violations; penalties
Cross-reference:
   Limitation on levying an income or receipts tax, see
CHTR. Art. XI, § 3
   Registration of contractors with Income Tax Administrator, see §§
1446.01,
1446.03
Statutory reference:
   Income taxes, see Ohio R.C. Chapter 718
   Payroll deductions, see Ohio R.C. 9.42
§ 881.01  AUTHORITY TO LEVY TAX; PURPOSE OF TAX.
   (A)   To provide funds for the purposes of general municipal operations,
maintenance, new equipment, extension and enlargement of municipal services and
facilities and capital improvements, the city hereby levies an annual municipal
income tax on income, qualifying wages, commissions and other compensation, and
on net profits as hereinafter provided.
   (B)   The annual tax is levied at a rate of 2%. The tax is levied at a
uniform rate on all persons residing in or earning or receiving income in the
city. The tax is levied on income, qualifying wages, commissions and other
compensation, and on net profits as hereinafter provided in §
880.03 of this chapter and other sections as they may apply.
   (C)   The tax on income and the withholding tax established by this
Chapter 881 are authorized by Article XVIII, Section 3 of the Ohio
Constitution. The tax is levied in accordance with, and is intended to be
consistent with, the provisions and limitations of Ohio R.C. Chapter 718.
(Ord. 22-15, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 881.02  DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   Any term used in this chapter that is not otherwise defined in this
chapter has the same meaning as when used in a comparable context in laws of
the United States relating to federal income taxation or in Ohio R.C. Title 57,
unless a different meaning is clearly required. If a term used in this chapter
that is not otherwise defined in this chapter is used in a comparable context
in both the laws of the United States relating to federal income tax and in
Ohio R.C. Title 57 and the use is not consistent, then the use of the term in
the laws of the United States relating to federal income tax shall control over
the use of the term in Ohio R.C. Title 57.
   (B)   The singular shall include the plural, and the masculine shall include
the feminine and the gender neutral.
   (C)   As used in this chapter.
      (1)   “Adjusted federal taxable income.” For a person required to file as
a C corporation, or for a person that has elected to be taxed as a C
corporation under division (C)(24)(e) of this section, means a C corporation’s
federal taxable income before net operating losses and special deductions as
determined under the Internal Revenue Code, adjusted as follows:
         (a)   Deduct intangible income to the extent included in federal
taxable income. The deduction shall be allowed regardless of whether the
intangible income relates to assets used in a trade or business or assets held
for the production of income;
         (b)   Add an amount equal to 5% of intangible income deducted under
division (C)(1)(a) of this section, but excluding that portion of intangible
income directly related to the sale, exchange, or other disposition of property
described in § 1221 of the Internal Revenue Code;
         (c)   Add any losses allowed as a deduction in the computation of
federal taxable income if the losses directly relate to the sale, exchange or
other disposition of an asset described in §§ 1221 or 1231 of the Internal
Revenue Code;
         (d)   1.   Except as provided in (C)(1)(d)2. of this section, deduct
income and gain included in federal taxable income to the extent the income and
gain directly relate to the sale, exchange or other disposition of an asset
described in §§ 1221 or 1231 of the Internal Revenue Code; and
            2.   Division (C)(1)(d)1. of this section does not apply to the
extent the income or gain is income or gain described in §§ 1245 or 1250 of the
Internal Revenue Code.
         (e)   Add taxes on or measured by net income allowed as a deduction in
the computation of federal taxable income;
         (f)   In the case of a real estate investment trust or regulated
investment company, add all amounts with respect to dividends to, distributions
to, or amounts set aside for or credited to the benefit of investors and
allowed as a deduction in the computation of federal taxable income;
         (g)   Deduct, to the extent not otherwise deducted or excluded in
computing federal taxable income, any income derived from a transfer agreement
or from the enterprise transferred under that agreement under Ohio R.C.
4313.02;
         (h)   Deduct exempt income to the extent not otherwise deducted or
excluded in computing adjusted federal taxable income;
         (i)   Deduct any net profit of a pass-through entity owned directly or
indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer’s federal taxable
income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that net profit in
the group’s federal taxable income in accordance with §
881.05(V)(3)(b); and
         (j)   Add any loss incurred by a pass-through entity owned directly or
indirectly by the taxpayer and included in the taxpayer’s federal taxable
income unless an affiliated group of corporations includes that loss in the
group’s federal taxable income in accordance with §
881.05(V)(3)(b).
         (k)   If the taxpayer is not a C corporation, is not a disregarded
entity that has made an election described in division (C)(48)(b) of this
section, is not a publicly traded partnership that has made the election
described in division (C)(24)(e) of this section, and is not an individual, the
taxpayer shall compute adjusted federal taxable income under this section as if
the taxpayer were a C corporation, except guaranteed payments and other similar
amounts paid or accrued to a partner, former partner, shareholder, former
shareholder, member, or former member shall not be allowed as a deductible
expense unless such payments are in consideration for the use of capital and
treated as payment of interest under § 469 of the Internal Revenue Code or
United States Treasury regulations. Amounts paid or accrued to a qualified
self-employed retirement plan with respect to a partner, former partner,
shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member of the taxpayer,
amounts paid or accrued to or for health insurance for a partner, former
partner, shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member, and amounts
paid or accrued to or for life insurance for a partner, former partner,
shareholder, former shareholder, member, or former member shall not be allowed
as a deduction.
         (l)   Nothing in division (C)(1) of this section shall be construed as
allowing the taxpayer to add or deduct any amount more than once or shall be
construed as allowing any taxpayer to deduct any amount paid to or accrued for
purposes of federal self-employment tax.
      (2)   “Assessment.”
         (a)   A written finding by the Tax Administrator that a person has
underpaid municipal income tax, or owes penalty and interest, or any
combination of tax, penalty, or interest, to the municipal corporation that
commences the person’s time limitation for making an appeal to the Board of Tax
Review pursuant to §
881.21, and has “ASSESSMENT” written in all capital letters at the top of such
finding.
         (b)   “Assessment” does not include a notice denying a request for
refund issued under §
881.09(C)(3), a billing statement notifying a taxpayer of current or past-due
balances owed to the municipal corporation, a Tax Administrator’s request for
additional information, a notification to the taxpayer of mathematical errors,
or a Tax Administrator’s other written correspondence to a person or taxpayer
that does not meet the criteria prescribed by division (C)(2)(a) of this
section.
      (3)   “Audit.” The examination of a person or the inspection of the
books, records, memoranda or accounts of a person, ordered to appear before the
Tax Administrator, for the purpose of determining liability for a municipal
income tax.
      (4)   “Board of Tax Review” or “Board of Review” or “Board of Tax
Appeals”, or “other named local board constituted to hear appeals of municipal
income tax matters.” The entity created under §
881.21.
      (5)   “Calendar quarter.” The three-month period ending on the last day
of March, June, September or December.
      (6)   “Casino operator” and “casino facility.” Have the same meanings as
in Ohio R.C. 3772.01.
      (7)   “Certified mail”, “express mail”, “United States mail”, “postal
service”, and similar terms. Include any delivery service authorized pursuant
to Ohio R.C. 5703.056.
      (8)   “Disregarded entity.” A single member limited liability company, a
qualifying subchapter S subsidiary, or another entity if the company,
subsidiary, or entity is a disregarded entity for federal income tax purposes.
      (9)   “Domicile.” The true, fixed and permanent home of a taxpayer and to
which, whenever absent, the taxpayer intends to return. A taxpayer may have
more than one residence but not more than one “domicile”.
      (10)   “Employee.” An individual who is an employee for federal income
tax purposes.
      (11)   “Employer.” A person that is an employer for federal income tax
purposes.
      (12)   “Exempt income.” All of the following:
         (a)   The military pay or allowances of members of the armed forces of
the United States or members of their reserve components, including the
National Guard of any state;
         (b)   Intangible income;
         (c)   Social Security benefits, railroad retirement benefits,
unemployment compensation, pensions, retirement benefit payments, payments from
annuities, and similar payments made to an employee or to the beneficiary of an
employee under a retirement program or plan, disability payments received from
private industry or local, state or federal governments or from charitable,
religious or educational organizations, and the proceeds of sickness, accident
or liability insurance policies. As used in this division (C)(12)(c),
“unemployment compensation” does not include supplemental unemployment
compensation described in § 3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code;
         (d)   The income of religious, fraternal, charitable, scientific,
literary or educational institutions to the extent such income is derived from
tax-exempt real estate, tax-exempt tangible or intangible property, or tax-
exempt activities;
         (e)   Compensation paid under Ohio R.C. 3501.28 or 3501.36 to a person
serving as a precinct election official to the extent that such compensation
does not exceed $1,000 for the taxable year. Such compensation in excess of
$1,000 for the taxable year may be subject to taxation by a municipal
corporation. A municipal corporation shall not require the payer of such
compensation to withhold any tax from that compensation;
         (f)   Dues, contributions, and similar payments received by
charitable, religious, educational, or literary organizations or labor unions,
lodges and similar organizations;
         (g)   Alimony and child support received;
         (h)   Compensation for personal injuries or for damages to property
from insurance proceeds or otherwise, excluding compensation paid for lost
salaries or wages or compensation from punitive damages;
         (i)   Income of a public utility when that public utility is subject
to the tax levied under Ohio R.C. 5727.24 or 5727.30. This division (C)(12)(i)
does not apply for purposes of Ohio R.C. Chapter 5745;
         (j)   Gains from involuntary conversions, interest on federal
obligations, items of income subject to a tax levied by the state and that a
municipal corporation is specifically prohibited by law from taxing, and income
of a decedent’s estate during the period of administration except such income
from the operation of a trade or business;
         (k)   Compensation or allowances excluded from federal gross income
under § 107 of the Internal Revenue Code;
         (l)   Employee compensation that is not “qualifying wages” as defined
in division (C)(35) of this section;
         (m)   Compensation paid to a person employed within the boundaries of
a United States Air Force base under the jurisdiction of the United States Air
Force that is used for the housing of members of the United States Air Force
and is a center for Air Force operations, unless the person is subject to
taxation because of residence or domicile. If the compensation is subject to
taxation because of residence or domicile, tax on such income shall be payable
only to the municipal corporation of residence or domicile;
         (n)   An S corporation shareholder’s share of net profits of the S
corporation, other than any part of the share of net profits that represents
wages as defined in § 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code or net earnings from
self-employment as defined in § 1402(a) of the Internal Revenue Code;
         (o)   All of the income of individuals under 18 years of age;
         (p)   1.   Except as provided in divisions (C)(12)(p)2., 3. and 4. of
this section, qualifying wages described in §
881.04(C)(2) or (C)(5) to the extent the qualifying wages are not subject to
withholding for the city under either of those divisions;
            2.   The exemption provided in division (C)(12)(p)1. of this
section does not apply with respect to the municipal corporation in which the
employee resided at the time the employee earned the qualifying wages;
            3.   The exemption provided in division (C)(12)(p)1. of this
section does not apply to qualifying wages that an employer elects to withhold
under §
881.04(C)(4)(b);
            4.   The exemption provided in division (C)(12)(p)1. of this
section does not apply to qualifying wages if both of the following conditions
apply:
               a.   For qualifying wages described in §
881.04(C)(2), the employee’s employer withholds and remits tax on the
qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the employee’s principal
place of work is situated, or, for qualifying wages described in §
881.04(C)(5), the employee’s employer withholds and remits tax on the
qualifying wages to the municipal corporation in which the employer’s fixed
location is located; and
               b.   The employee receives a refund of the tax described in
division (C)(12)(p)4.a. of this section on the basis of the employee not
performing services in that municipal corporation.
         (q)   1.   Except as provided in division (C)(12)(q)2. or 3. of this
section, compensation that is not qualifying wages paid to a nonresident
individual for personal services performed in the city on not more than 20 days
in a taxable year.
            2.   The exemption provided in division (C)(12)(q)1. of this
section does not apply under either of the following circumstances:
               a.   The individual’s base of operation is located in the
municipal corporation; or
               b.   The individual is a professional athlete, professional
entertainer or public figure and the compensation is paid for the performance
of services in the individual’s capacity as a professional athlete,
professional entertainer or public figure. For purposes of division (C)(12)
(q)2.b. of this section, “professional athlete”, “professional entertainer” and
“public figure” have the same meanings as in §
881.04(C).
            3.   Compensation to which division (C)(12)(q) of this section
applies shall be treated as earned or received at the individual’s base of
operation. If the individual does not have a base of operation, the
compensation shall be treated as earned or received where the individual is
domiciled.
            4.   For purposes of division (C)(12)(q) of this section, “base of
operation” means the location where an individual owns or rents an office,
storefront, or similar facility to which the individual regularly reports and
at which the individual regularly performs personal services for compensation.
         (r)   Compensation paid to a person for personal services performed
for a political subdivision on property owned by the political subdivision,
regardless of whether the compensation is received by an employee of the
subdivision or another person performing services for the subdivision under a
contract with the subdivision, if the property on which services are performed
is annexed to a municipal corporation pursuant to Ohio R.C. 709.023 on or after
March 27, 2013, unless the person is subject to such taxation because of
residence. If the compensation is subject to taxation because of residence,
municipal income tax shall be payable only to the municipal corporation of
residence; and
         (s)   1.   Income the taxation of which is prohibited by the
Constitution or laws of the United States.
            2.   Any item of income that is exempt income of a pass-through
entity under division (C) of this section is exempt income of each owner of the
pass-through entity to the extent of that owner’s distributive or proportionate
share of that item of the entity’s income.
      (13)   “Form 2106.” Internal Revenue Service Form 2106 filed by a
taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (14)   “Generic form.” An electronic or paper form that is not prescribed
by a particular municipal corporation and that is designed for reporting taxes
withheld by an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer, estimated
municipal income taxes, or annual municipal income tax liability or for filing
a refund claim.
      (15)   “Gross receipts.” The total revenue derived from sales, work done,
or service rendered.
      (16)   “Income.” Includes the following:
         (a)   1.   For residents, all income, salaries, qualifying wages,
commissions and other compensation from whatever source earned or received by
the resident, including the resident’s distributive share of the net profit of
pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by the resident and any net
profit of the resident, except as provided in (C)(24)(e) of this section;
            2.   For the purposes of division (C)(16)(a)1. of this section:
               a.   Any net operating loss of the resident incurred in the
taxable year and the resident’s distributive share of any net operating loss
generated in the same taxable year and attributable to the resident’s ownership
interest in a pass-through entity shall be allowed as a deduction, for that
taxable year and the following five taxable years, against any other net profit
of the resident or the resident’s distributive
share of any net profit attributable to the resident’s ownership interest in a
pass-through entity until fully utilized, subject to division (C)(16)(a)4. of
this section; and
               b.   The resident’s distributive share of the net profit of each
pass-through entity owned directly or indirectly by the resident shall be
calculated without regard to any net operating loss that 7is carried forward by
that entity from a prior taxable year and applied to reduce the entity’s net
profit for the current taxable year.
            3.   Division (C)(16)(a)2. of this section does not apply with
respect to any net profit or net operating loss attributable to an ownership
interest in an S corporation unless shareholders’ shares of net profits from S
corporations are subject to tax in the municipal corporation as provided in
division (C)(12)(n) of this section; and
            4.   Any amount of a net operating loss used to reduce a taxpayer’s
net profit for a taxable year shall reduce the amount of net operating loss
that may be carried forward to any subsequent year for use by that taxpayer. In
no event shall the cumulative deductions for all taxable years with respect to
a taxpayer’s net operating loss exceed the original amount of that net
operating loss available to that taxpayer.
         (b)   In the case of nonresidents, all income, salaries, qualifying
wages, commissions and other compensation from whatever source earned or
received by the nonresident for work done, services performed or rendered, or
activities conducted in the municipal corporation, including any net profit of
the nonresident, but excluding the nonresident’s distributive share of the net
profit or loss of only pass-through entities owned directly or indirectly by
the nonresident;
         (c)   For taxpayers that are not individuals, net profit of the
taxpayer; and
         (d)   Lottery, sweepstakes, gambling and sports winnings, winnings
from games of chance and prizes and awards. If the taxpayer is a professional
gambler for federal income tax purposes, the taxpayer may deduct related
wagering losses and expenses to the extent authorized under the Internal
Revenue Code and claimed against such winnings.
      (17)   “Intangible income.” Income of any of the following types: income
yield; interest; capital gains; dividends or other income arising from the
ownership, sale, exchange or other disposition of intangible property
including, but not limited to, investments, deposits, money or credits as those
terms are defined in Ohio R.C. Chapter 5701; and patents, copyrights,
trademarks, tradenames, investments in real estate investment trusts,
investments in regulated investment companies and appreciation on deferred
compensation. “Intangible income” does not include prizes, awards or other
income associated with any lottery winnings, gambling winnings or other similar
games of chance.
      (18)   “Internal Revenue Code.” The same meaning as in Ohio R.C. 5747.01.
      (19)   “Limited liability company.” A limited liability company formed
under Ohio R.C. Chapter 1705 or under the laws of another state.
      (20)   “Municipal corporation.” Includes a joint economic development
district or joint economic development zone that levies an income tax under
Ohio R.C. 715.691, 715.70 or 715.71.
      (21)   “Municipal taxable income.”
         (a)   Includes the following:
            1.   For a person other than an individual, income apportioned or
sitused to the city under §
881.03, and further as applicable reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss
carryforward available to the person for the city; and
            2.   a.   For an individual who is a resident of the city, income
reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income, then
reduced as provided in division (C)(21)(b) of this section, and further reduced
by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to the individual for
the municipal corporation.
               b.   For an individual who is a nonresident of the city, income
reduced by exempt income to the extent otherwise included in income and then,
as applicable, apportioned or sitused to the municipal corporation under §
881.03, then reduced as provided in division (C)(21)(b) of this section, and
further reduced by any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward available to
the individual for the city.
         (b)   In computing the municipal taxable income of a taxpayer who is
an individual, the taxpayer may subtract, as provided in division (C)(21)
(a)2.a. or this division (C)(21)(b) of this section, the amount of the
individual’s employee business expenses reported on the individual’s Form 2106
that the individual deducted for federal income tax purposes for the taxable
year, subject to the limitation imposed by § 67 of the Internal Revenue Code.
For the municipal corporation in which the taxpayer is a resident, the taxpayer
may deduct all such expenses allowed for federal income tax purposes, but only
to the extent the expenses do not relate to exempt income. For a municipal
corporation in which the taxpayer is not a resident, the taxpayer may deduct
such expenses only to the extent the expenses are related to the taxpayer’s
performance of personal services in that nonresident municipal corporation and
are not related to exempt income.
      (22)   “Municipality.” The same as the City of Broadview Heights.
      (23)   “Net operating loss.” A loss incurred by a person in the operation
of a trade or business. “Net operating loss” does not include unutilized losses
resulting from basis limitations, at-risk limitations or passive activity loss
limitations.
      (24)   “Net profit.”
         (a)   For a person who is an individual, means the individual’s net
profit required to be reported on Schedule C, Schedule E or Schedule F reduced
by any net operating loss carried forward. For the purposes of this division
(C)(24)(a), the net operating loss carried forward shall be calculated and
deducted in the same manner as provided in division (C)(24)(c) of this section.
         (b)   “Net profit” for a person other than an individual means
adjusted federal taxable income reduced by any net operating loss incurred by
the person in a taxable year beginning on or after January 1, 2017, subject to
the limitations of division (C)(24)(c) of this section.
         (c)   1.   The amount of such operating loss shall be deducted from
the net profit to the extent necessary to reduce municipal taxable income to
zero, with any remaining unused portion of the net operating loss carried
forward to not more than five consecutive taxable years following the taxable
year in which the loss was incurred, but in no case for more than necessary for
the deduction to be fully utilized.
            2.   No person shall use the deduction allowed by division (C)(24)
(c) of this section to offset qualifying wages.
            3.   a.   For taxable years beginning in 2018, 2019, 2020, 2021 and
2022, a person may not deduct more than 50% of the amount of the deduction
otherwise allowed by division (C)(24)(c) of this section.
               b.   For taxable years beginning in 2023 or thereafter, a person
may deduct the full amount allowed by (C)(24)(c) of this section without regard
to the limitation of division (C)(24)(c)3.a. of this section.
            4.   Any pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward deduction that is
available may be utilized before a taxpayer may deduct any amount pursuant to
(C)(24)(c) of this section.
            5.   Nothing in division (C)(24)(c)3.a. of this section precludes a
person from carrying forward, for use with respect to any return filed for a
taxable year beginning after 2018, any amount of net operating loss that was
not fully utilized by operation of division (C)(24)(c)3.a. of this section. To
the extent that an amount of net operating loss that was not fully utilized in
one or more taxable years is carried forward for use with respect to a return
filed for a taxable year beginning in 2019, 2020, 2021 or 2022, the limitation
described in division (C)(24)(c)3.A of this section shall apply to the amount
carried forward.
         (d)   For the purposes of this chapter, and notwithstanding division
(C)(24)(b) of this section, net profit of a disregarded entity shall not be
taxable as against that disregarded entity, but shall instead be included in
the net profit of the owner of the disregarded entity.
         (e)   A publicly traded partnership that is treated as a partnership
for federal income tax purposes, and that is subject to tax on its net profits
by the city, may elect to be treated as a C corporation for the city, and shall
not be treated as the net profit or income of any owner or the partnership. The
election shall be made on the annual return for the city. The city will treat
the publicly traded partnership as a C corporation if the election is so made.
      (25)   “Nonresident.” An individual that is not a resident.
      (26)   “Ohio Business Gateway.” The online computer network system,
created under Ohio R.C. 125.30, that allows persons to electronically file
business reply forms with state agencies and includes any successor electronic
filing and payment system.
      (27)   “Other payer.” Any person, other than an individual’s employer or
the employer’s agent, that pays an individual any amount included in the
federal gross income of the individual. “Other payer” includes casino operators
and video lottery terminal sales agents.
      (28)   “Pass-through entity.” A partnership not treated as an association
taxable as a C corporation for federal income tax purposes, a limited liability
company not treated as an association taxable as a C corporation for federal
income tax purposes, an S corporation, or any other class of entity from which
the income or profits of the entity are given pass-through treatment for
federal income tax purposes. “Pass-through entity” does not include a trust,
estate, grantor of a grantor trust, or disregarded entity.
      (29)   “Pension.” Any amount paid to an employee or former employee that
is reported to the recipient on an IRS Form 1099-R, or successor form.
“Pension” does not include deferred compensation, or amounts attributable to
nonqualified deferred compensation plans, reported as FICA/Medicare wages on an
IRS Form W-2, Wage and Tax Statement, or successor form.
      (30)   “Person.” Includes individuals, firms, companies, joint stock
companies, business trusts, estates, trusts, partnerships, limited liability
partnerships, limited liability companies, associations, C corporations, S
corporations, governmental entities and any other entity.
      (31)   “Postal service.” The United States postal service.
      (32)   “Postmark date,” “date of postmark,” and similar terms. Include
the date recorded and marked in the manner described in Ohio R.C. 5703.056(B)
(3).
      (33)   “Pre-2017 net operating loss carryforward.”
         (a)   Means any net operating loss incurred in a taxable year
beginning before January 1, 2017, to the extent such loss was permitted, by a
resolution or ordinance of the city that was adopted by the city before January
1, 2016, to be carried forward and utilized to offset income or net profit
generated in the city in future taxable years.
         (b)   For the purpose of calculating municipal taxable income, any
pre-2017 net operating loss carry forward may be carried forward to any taxable
year, including taxable years beginning in 2017 or thereafter, for the number
of taxable years provided in the resolution or ordinance or until fully
utilized, whichever is earlier.
      (34)   “Publicly traded partnership.” Any partnership, an interest in
which is regularly traded on an established securities market. A “publicly
traded partnership” may have any number of partners.
      (35)   “Qualifying wages.” Wages, as defined in § 3121(a) of the Internal
Revenue Code, without regard to any wage limitations, adjusted as follows:
         (a)   Deduct the following amounts:
            1.   Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes
compensation attributable to a plan or program described in § 125 of the
Internal Revenue Code;
            2.   Any amount included in wages if the amount constitutes payment
on account of a disability related to sickness or an accident paid by a party
unrelated to the employer, agent of an employer or other payer; and
            3.   Any amount included in wages that is exempt income.
         (b)   Add the following amounts:
            1.   Any amount not included in wages solely because the employee
was employed by the employer before April 1, 1986;
            2.   Any amount not included in wages because the amount arises
from the sale, exchange or other disposition of a stock option, the exercise of
a stock option, or the sale, exchange or other disposition of stock purchased
under a stock option. This division (C)(35)(b)2. applies only to those amounts
constituting ordinary income;
            3.   Any amount not included in wages if the amount is an amount
described in §§ 401(k), 403(b), or 457 of the Internal Revenue Code. This
division (C)(35)(b)3. applies only to employee contributions and employee
deferrals;
            4.   Any amount that is supplemental unemployment compensation
benefits described in § 3402(o)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code and not
included in wages;
            5.   Any amount received that is treated as self-employment income
for federal tax purposes in accordance with § 1402(a)(8) of the Internal
Revenue Code; and
            6.   Any amount not included in wages if all of the following
apply:
               a.   For the taxable year the amount is employee compensation
that is earned outside the United States and that either is included in the
taxpayer’s gross income for federal income tax purposes or would have been
included in the taxpayer’s gross income for such purposes if the taxpayer did
not elect to exclude the income under § 911 of the Internal Revenue Code;
               b.   For no preceding taxable year did the amount constitute
wages as defined in § 3121(a) of the Internal Revenue Code;
               c.   For no succeeding taxable year will the amount constitute
wages; and
               d.   For any taxable year the amount has not otherwise been
added to wages pursuant to either division (C)(35)(b) of this section or Ohio
R.C. 718.03, as that section existed before the effective date of H.B. 5 of the
130th General Assembly, March 23, 2015.
      (36)   “Related entity.” Any of the following:
         (a)   An individual stockholder, or a member of the stockholder’s
family enumerated in § 318 of the Internal Revenue Code, if the stockholder and
the members of the stockholder’s family own directly, indirectly, beneficially
or constructively, in the aggregate, at least 50% of the value of the
taxpayer’s outstanding stock;
         (b)   A stockholder, or a stockholder’s partnership, estate, trust, or
corporation, if the stockholder and the stockholder’s partnerships, estates,
trusts, or corporations own directly, indirectly, beneficially or
constructively, in the aggregate, at least 50% of the value of the taxpayer’s
outstanding stock;
         (c)   A corporation, or a party related to the corporation in a manner
that would require an attribution of stock from the corporation to the party or
from the party to the corporation under division (C)(36)(d) of this section,
provided the taxpayer owns directly, indirectly, beneficially or
constructively, at least 50% of the value of the corporation’s outstanding
stock; and
         (d)   The attribution rules described in § 318 of the Internal Revenue
Code apply for the purpose of determining whether the ownership requirements in
divisions (C)(36)(a) to (c) of this section have been met.
      (37)   “Related member.” A person that, with respect to the taxpayer
during all or any portion of the taxable year, is either a related entity, a
component member as defined in § 1563(b) of the Internal Revenue Code, or a
person to or from whom there is attribution of stock ownership in accordance
with § 1563(e) of the Internal Revenue Code except, for purposes of determining
whether a person is a related member under this division, “twenty percent
(20%)” shall be substituted for “five percent (5%)” wherever “five percent
(5%)” appears in § 1563(e) of the Internal Revenue Code.
      (38)   “Resident.” An individual who is domiciled in the municipal
corporation as determined under §
881.03(E) of this code.
      (39)   “S corporation.” A person that has made an election under
Subchapter S of Chapter 1 of Subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code for its
taxable year.
      (40)   “Schedule C.” Internal Revenue Service Schedule C (Form 1040)
filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (41)   “Schedule E.” Internal Revenue Service Schedule E (Form 1040)
filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (42)   “Schedule F.” Internal Revenue Service Schedule F (Form 1040)
filed by a taxpayer pursuant to the Internal Revenue Code.
      (43)   “Single member limited liability company.” A limited liability
company that has one direct member.
      (44)   “Small employer.” Any employer that had total revenue of less than
$500,000 during the preceding taxable year. For purposes of this division,
“total revenue” means receipts of any type or kind, including, but not limited
to: sales receipts; payments; rents; profits; gains, dividends and other
investment income; compensation; commissions; premiums; money; property;
grants; contributions; donations; gifts; program service revenue; patient
service revenue; premiums; fees, including premium fees and service fees;
tuition payments; unrelated business revenue; reimbursements; any type of
payment from a governmental unit, including grants and other allocations; and
any other similar receipts reported for federal income tax purposes or under
generally accepted accounting principles. “Small employer” does not include:
the federal government; any state government, including any state agency or
instrumentality; any political subdivision; or any entity treated as a
government for financial accounting and reporting purposes.
      (45)   “Tax Administrator.”
         (a)   Means the individual charged with direct responsibility for
administration of an income tax levied by the city in accordance with this
chapter. “Tax Administrator” does not include the State Tax Commissioner.
         (b)   “Tax Commissioner” means the tax commissioner appointed under §
121.03 of the revised code.
      (46)   “Tax return preparer.” Any individual described in § 7701(a)(36)
of the Internal Revenue Code and 26 C.F.R. part 301 or § 7701-15.
      (47)   “Taxable year.” The corresponding tax reporting period as
prescribed for the taxpayer under the Internal Revenue Code.
      (48)   “Taxpayer.”
         (a)   Means a person subject to a tax levied on income by a municipal
corporation in accordance with this chapter. “Taxpayer” does not include a
grantor trust or, except as provided in division (C)(48)(b)1. of this section,
a disregarded entity.
         (b)   1.   A single member limited liability company that is a
disregarded entity for federal tax purposes may be a separate taxpayer from its
single member in all state municipal corporations in which it either filed as a
separate taxpayer or did not file for its taxable year ending in 2003, if all
of the following conditions are met:
               a.   The limited liability company’s single member is also a
limited liability company;
               b.   The limited liability company and its single member were
formed and doing business in one or more state municipal corporations for at
least five years before January 1, 2004;
               c.   Not later than December 31, 2004, the limited liability
company and its single member each made an election to be treated as a separate
taxpayer under Ohio R.C. 718.01(L) as that section existed on December 31,
2004;
               d.   The limited liability company was not formed for the
purpose of evading or reducing Ohio municipal corporation income tax liability
of the limited liability company or its single member; and
               e.   The state municipal corporation that was the primary place
of business of the sole member of the limited liability company consented to
the election.
            2.   For purposes of division (C)(48)(b)1.e. of this section, a
municipal corporation was the primary place of business of a limited liability
company if, for the limited liability company’s taxable year ending in 2003,
its income tax liability was greater in that municipal corporation than in any
other municipal corporation in Ohio, and that tax liability to that municipal
corporation for its taxable year ending in 2003 was at least $400,000.
      (49)   “Taxpayers’ rights and responsibilities.” The rights provided to
taxpayers in §§
881.09,
881.12,
881.13,
881.19(B),
881.20 and
881.21 of this chapter, and Ohio R.C. 5717.011 and 5717.03, and the
responsibilities of taxpayers to file, report, withhold, remit and pay
municipal income tax and otherwise comply with Ohio R.C. Chapter 718 and
resolutions, ordinances, and rules and regulations adopted by the city for the
imposition and administration of a municipal income tax.
      (50)   “Video lottery terminal.” The same meaning as in Ohio R.C.
3770.21.
      (51)   “Video lottery terminal sales agent.” A lottery sales agent
licensed under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3770 to conduct video lottery terminals on
behalf of the state pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3770.21.
(Ord. 22-15, passed 11-2-2015; Ord. 01-2018, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 881.03  IMPOSITION OF TAX.
   The income tax levied by the city at a rate of 2.0% is levied on the
municipal taxable income of every person residing in and/or earning and/or
receiving income in the city.
   (A)   Individuals; Residents. For residents of the city, the income tax
levied herein shall be on all income, salaries, qualifying wages, commissions
and other compensation from whatever source earned or received by the resident,
including the resident’s distributive share of the net profit of pass-through
entities owned directly or indirectly by the resident and any net profit of the
resident. This is further detailed in the definition of income (§
881.02 (C)(16)).
   (B)   Individuals; Nonresidents. For nonresidents, all income, salaries,
qualifying wages, commissions and other compensation from whatever source
earned or received by the nonresident for work done, services performed or
rendered, or activities conducted in the municipal corporation, including any
net profit of the nonresident, but excluding the nonresident’s distributive
share of the net profit or loss of only pass-through entities owned directly or
indirectly by the nonresident.
   (C)   Municipal Taxable Income. For residents and nonresidents, income can
be reduced to “municipal taxable income” as defined in §
881.02 (C)(21). Exemptions which may apply are specified in §
881.02 (C)(12).
   (D)   Refundable Credit for Nonqualified Deferred Compensation Plan.
      (1)   As used in this division (D).
         “Nonqualified deferred compensation plan.” Means a compensation plan
described in § 3121(v)(2)(C) of the Internal Revenue Code.
         “Qualifying loss.” Means the amount of compensation attributable to a
taxpayer’s nonqualified deferred compensation plan, less the receipt of money
and property attributable to distributions from the nonqualified deferred
compensation plan. Full loss is sustained if no distribution of money and
property is made by the nonqualified deferred compensation plan. The taxpayer
sustains a “qualifying loss” only in the taxable year in which the taxpayer
receives the final distribution of money and property pursuant to that
nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
         “Qualifying tax rate.”
            1.   Means the applicable tax rate for the taxable year for the
which the taxpayer paid income tax to the city with respect to any portion of
the total amount of compensation the payment of which is deferred pursuant to a
nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
            2.   If different tax rates applied for different taxable years,
then the “qualifying tax rate” is a weighted average of those different tax
rates. The weighted average shall be based upon the tax paid to the city each
year with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation plan.
         “Refundable credit.” Means the amount of the city income tax that was
paid on the non-distributed portion, if any, of a nonqualified deferred
compensation plan.
      (2)   If, in addition to the city, a taxpayer has paid tax to other
municipal corporations with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation
plan, the amount of the credit that a taxpayer may claim from each municipal
corporation shall be calculated on the basis of each municipal corporation’s
proportionate share of the total municipal corporation income tax paid by the
taxpayer to all municipal corporations with respect to the nonqualified
deferred compensation plan.
      (3)   In no case shall the amount of the credit allowed under this
section exceed the cumulative income tax that a taxpayer has paid to the city
for all taxable years with respect to the nonqualified deferred compensation
plan.
      (4)   The credit allowed under this division (D) is allowed only to the
extent the taxpayer’s qualifying loss is attributable to:
         (a)   The insolvency or bankruptcy of the employer who had established
the nonqualified deferred compensation plan; or
         (b)   The employee’s failure or inability to satisfy all of the
employer’s terms and conditions necessary to receive the nonqualified deferred
compensation.
   (E)   Domicile.
      (1)   (a)   An individual is presumed to be domiciled in the city for all
or part of a taxable year if the individual was domiciled in the city on the
last day of the immediately preceding taxable year or if the Tax Administrator
reasonably concludes that the individual is domiciled in the city for all or
part of the taxable year.
         (b)   An individual may rebut the presumption of domicile described in
division (E)(1)(a) of this section if the individual establishes by a
preponderance of the evidence that the individual was not domiciled in the city
for all or part of the taxable year.
      (2)   For the purpose of determining whether an individual is domiciled
in the city for all or part of a taxable year, factors that may be considered
include, but are not limited to, the following:
         (a)   The individual’s domicile in other taxable years;
         (b)   The location at which the individual is registered to vote;
         (c)   The address on the individual’s driver’s license;
         (d)   The location of real estate for which the individual claimed a
property tax exemption or reduction allowed on the basis of the individual’s
residence or domicile;
         (e)   The location and value of abodes owned or leased by the
individual;
         (f)   Declarations, written or oral, made by the individual regarding
the individual’s residency;
         (g)   The primary location at which the individual is employed;
         (h)   The location of educational institutions attended by the
individual’s dependents as defined in § 152 of the Internal Revenue Code, to
the extent that tuition paid to such educational institution is based on the
residency of the individual or the individual’s spouse in the municipal
corporation where the educational institution is located; and
         (i)   The number of contact periods the individual has with the city,
for the purposes of this division (E), an individual has one “contact period”
with the city if the individual is away overnight from the individual’s abode
located outside of the city and while away overnight from that abode spends at
least some portion, however minimal, of each of two consecutive days in the
city.
      (3)   All additional applicable factors are provided in the Rules and
Regulations.
   (F)   Businesses. This division (F) applies to any taxpayer engaged in a
business or profession in the city, unless the taxpayer is an individual who
resides in the city or the taxpayer is an electric company, combined company,
or telephone company that is subject to and required to file reports under Ohio
R.C. Chapter 5745.
      (1)   Except as otherwise provided in division (F)(2) of this section,
net profit from a business or profession conducted both within and without the
boundaries of the city shall be considered as having a taxable situs in the
city for purposes of municipal income taxation in the same proportion as the
average ratio of the following:
         (a)   1.   The average original cost of the real property and tangible
personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the business or profession
in the city during the taxable period to the average original cost of all of
the real and tangible personal property owned or used by the taxpayer in the
business or profession during the same period, wherever situated; and
            2.   As used in the preceding division (F)(1)(a)1., tangible
personal or real property shall include property rented or leased by the
taxpayer and the value of such property shall be determined by multiplying the
annual rental thereon by eight.
         (b)   Wages, salaries, and other compensation paid during the taxable
period to individuals employed in the business or profession for services
performed in the city to wages, salaries and other compensation paid during the
same period to individuals employed in the business or profession, wherever the
individual’s services are performed, excluding compensation from which taxes
are not required to be withheld under §
881.04(C); and
         (c)   Total gross receipts of the business or profession from sales
and rentals made and services performed during the taxable period in the city
to total gross receipts of the business or profession during the same period
from sales, rentals and services, wherever made or performed.
      (2)   (a)   If the apportionment factors described in division (F)(1) of
this section do not fairly represent the extent of a taxpayer’s business
activity in the city, the taxpayer may request, or the Tax Administrator of the
city may require, that the taxpayer use, with respect to all or any portion of
the income of the taxpayer, an alternative apportionment method involving one
or more of the following:
            1.   Separate accounting;
            2.   The exclusion of one or more of the factors;
            3.   The inclusion of one or more additional factors that would
provide for a more fair apportionment of the income of the taxpayer to the
municipal corporation; or
            4.   A modification of one or more of the factors.
         (b)   A taxpayer request to use an alternative apportionment method
shall be in writing and shall accompany a tax return, timely filed appeal of an
assessment, or timely filed amended tax return. The taxpayer may use the
requested alternative method unless the Tax Administrator denies the request in
an assessment issued within the period prescribed by §
881.12(A).
         (c)   The Tax Administrator may require a taxpayer to use an
alternative apportionment method as described in division (F)(2)(a) of this
section, but only by issuing an assessment to the taxpayer within the period
prescribed by §
881.12(A).
         (d)   Nothing in division (F)(2) of this section nullifies or
otherwise affects any alternative apportionment arrangement approved by the Tax
Administrator or otherwise agreed upon by both the Tax Administrator and
taxpayer before January 1, 2016.
      (3)   As used in division (F)(1)(b) of this section, “wages, salaries and
other compensation” includes only wages, salaries or other compensation paid to
an employee for services performed at any of the following locations:
         (a)   A location that is owned, controlled or used by, rented to or
under the possession of one of the following:
            1.   The employer;
            2.   A vendor, customer, client or patient of the employer, or a
related member of such a vendor, customer, client or patient; or
            3.   A vendor, customer, client or patient of a person described in
division (F)(3)(a)2. of this section, or a related member of such a vendor,
customer, client or patient.
         (b)   Any location at which a trial, appeal, hearing, investigation,
inquiry, review, court-martial or similar administrative, judicial or
legislative matter or proceeding is being conducted, provided that the
compensation is paid for services performed for, or on behalf of, the employer
or that the employee’s presence at the location directly or indirectly benefits
the employer;
         (c)   Any other location, if the Tax Administrator determines that the
employer directed the employee to perform the services at the other location in
lieu of a location described in division (F)(3)(a) or (b) of this section
solely in order to avoid or reduce the employer’s municipal income tax
liability. If the Tax Administrator makes such a determination, the employer
may dispute the determination by establishing, by a preponderance of the
evidence, that the Tax Administrator’s determination was unreasonable.
      (4)   For the purposes of division (F)(1)(c) of this section, receipts
from sales and rentals made and services performed shall be sitused to a
municipal corporation as follows.
         (a)   Gross receipts from the sale of tangible personal property shall
be sitused to the municipal corporation only if, regardless of where title
passes, the property meets either of the following criteria:
            1.   The property is shipped to or delivered within the city from a
stock of goods located within the city; or
            2.   The property is delivered within the city from a location
outside the city, provided the taxpayer is regularly engaged through its own
employees in the solicitation or promotion of sales within the city and the
sales result from such solicitation or promotion.
         (b)   Gross receipts from the sale of services shall be sitused to the
city to the extent that such services are performed in the city.
         (c)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from the sale
of real property located in the city shall be sitused to the city.
         (d)   To the extent included in income, gross receipts from rents and
royalties from real property located in the city shall be sitused to the city.
         (e)   Gross receipts from rents and royalties from tangible personal
property shall be sitused to the city based upon the extent to which the
tangible personal property is used in the city.
      (5)   The net profit received by an individual taxpayer from the rental
of real estate owned directly by the individual or by a disregarded entity
owned by the individual, shall be subject to the city’s tax only if the
property generating the net profit is located in the city or if the individual
taxpayer that receives the net profit is a resident of the city. The city shall
allow such taxpayers to elect to use separate accounting for the purpose of
calculating net profit sitused under this division (F)(5) to the municipal
corporation in which the property is located.
      (6)   (a)   Commissions received by a real estate agent or broker
relating to the sale, purchase or lease of real estate shall be sitused to the
municipal corporation in which the real estate is located. Net profit reported
by the real estate agent or broker shall be allocated to the city, if
applicable, based upon the ratio of the commissions the agent or broker
received from the sale, purchase or lease of real estate located in the city to
the commissions received from the sale, purchase or lease of real estate
everywhere in the taxable year.
         (b)   An individual who is a resident of the city shall report the
individual’s net profit from all real estate activity on the individual’s
annual tax return for the city. The individual may claim a credit for taxes the
individual paid on such net profit to another municipal corporation to the
extent that such a credit is allowed under the city’s income tax ordinance.
      (7)   When calculating the ratios described in division (F)(1) of this
section for the purposes of that division or division (F)(2) of this section,
the owner of a disregarded entity shall include in the owner’s ratios the
property, payroll and gross receipts of such disregarded entity.
(Ord. 22-15, passed 11-2-2015; Ord. 10-2018, passed 4-23-2018)
§ 881.04  COLLECTION AT SOURCE.
   (A)   Withholding Provisions. Each employer, agent of an employer or other
payer located or doing business in the city shall withhold an income tax from
the qualifying wages earned and/or received by each employee in the city.
Except for qualifying wages for which withholding is not required under §
881.03  or division (B)(4) or (B)(6) of this section, the tax shall be withheld
at the rate, specified in §
881.03  of this chapter, of 2%. An employer, agent of an employer, or other
payer shall deduct and withhold the tax from qualifying wages on the date that
the employer, agent or other payer directly, indirectly or constructively pays
the qualifying wages to, or credits the qualifying wages to the benefit of, the
employee.
   (B)   Tax Schedule.
      (1)   Except as provided in division (B)(2) of this section, an employer,
agent of an employer or other payer shall remit to the Tax Administrator of the
city the greater of the income taxes deducted and withheld or the income taxes
required to be deducted and withheld by the employer, agent or other payer
according to the following schedule.
         (a)   Taxes required to be deducted and withheld shall be remitted
monthly to the Tax Administrator if the total taxes deducted and withheld or
required to be deducted and withheld by the employer, agent or other payer on
behalf of the city in the preceding calendar year exceeded $2,399, or if the
total amount of taxes deducted and withheld or required to be deducted and
withheld on behalf of the city in any month of the preceding calendar quarter
exceeded $200. Payment under division (B)(1)(a) of this section shall be made
to the Tax Administrator not later than 15 days after the last day of each
month for which the tax was withheld.
         (b)   Any employer, agent of an employer or other payer not required
to make payments under division (B)(1)(a) of this section of taxes required to
be deducted and withheld shall make quarterly payments to the Tax Administrator
not later than the last day of the month following the last day of each
calendar quarter.
      (2)   If the employer, agent of an employer or other payer is required to
make payments electronically for the purpose of paying federal taxes withheld
on payments to employees under § 6302 of the Internal Revenue Code, 26 C.F.R. §
31.6302-1, or any other federal statute or regulation, the payment shall be
made by electronic funds transfer to the Tax Administrator of all taxes
deducted and withheld on behalf of the city. The payment of tax by electronic
funds transfer under this division does not affect an employer’s, agent’s or
other payer’s obligation to file any return as required under this section.
      (3)   An employer, agent of an employer or other payer shall make and
file a return showing the amount of tax withheld by the employer, agent or
other payer from the qualifying wages of each employee and remitted to the Tax
Administrator. A return filed by an employer, agent or other payer under this
division shall be accepted by Tax Administrator and the city as the return
required of a nonresident employee whose sole income subject to the tax under
this chapter is the qualifying wages reported by the employee’s employer, agent
of an employer or other payer.
      (4)   An employer, agent of an employer or other payer is not required to
withhold the city income tax with respect to an individual’s disqualifying
disposition of an incentive stock option if, at the time of the disqualifying
disposition, the individual is not an employee of either the corporation with
respect to whose stock the option has been issued or of such corporation’s
successor entity.
      (5)   (a)   An employee is not relieved from liability for a tax by the
failure of the employer, agent of an employer or other payer to withhold the
tax as required under this chapter or by the employer’s, agent’s or other
payer’s exemption from the requirement to withhold the tax.
         (b)   The failure of an employer, agent of an employer or other payer
to remit to the city the tax withheld relieves the employee from liability for
that tax unless the employee colluded with the employer, agent or other payer
in connection with the failure to remit the tax withheld.
      (6)   Compensation deferred before June 26, 2003, is not subject to city
income tax or income tax withholding requirement to the extent the deferred
compensation does not constitute qualifying wages at the time the deferred
compensation is paid or distributed.
      (7)   Each employer, agent of an employer or other payer required to
withhold taxes is liable for the payment of that amount required to be
withheld, whether or not such taxes have been withheld, and such amount shall
be deemed to be held in trust for the city until such time as the withheld
amount is remitted to the Tax Administrator.
      (8)   On or before the last day of February of each year, an employer
shall file a withholding reconciliation return with the Tax Administrator
listing:
         (a)   The names, addresses and Social Security numbers of all
employees from whose qualifying wages tax was withheld or should have been
withheld for the city during the preceding calendar year;
         (b)   The amount of tax withheld, if any, from each such employee, the
total amount of qualifying wages paid to such employee during the preceding
calendar year;
         (c)   The name of every other municipal corporation for which tax was
withheld or should have been withheld from such employee during the preceding
calendar year;
         (d)   Any other information required for federal income tax reporting
purposes on Internal Revenue Service Form W-2 or its equivalent form with
respect to such employee; and
         (e)   Other information as may be required by the Tax Administrator.
      (9)   The officer or the employee of the employer, agent of an employer
or other payer with control or direct supervision of or charged with the
responsibility for withholding the tax or filing the reports and making
payments as required by this section, shall be personally liable for a failure
to file a report or pay the tax due as required by this section. The
dissolution of an employer, agent of an employer, or other payer does not
discharge the officer’s or employee’s liability for a failure of the employer,
agent of an employer or other payer to file returns or pay any tax due.
      (10)   An employer is required to deduct and withhold city income tax on
tips and gratuities received by the employer’s employees and constituting
qualifying wages, but only to the extent that the tips and gratuities are under
the employer’s control. For the purposes of this division, a tip or gratuity is
under the employer’s control if the tip or gratuity is paid by the customer to
the employer for subsequent remittance to the employee, or if the customer pays
the tip or gratuity by credit card, debit card or other electronic means.
      (11)   The Tax Administrator shall consider any tax withheld by an
employer at the request of an employee, when such tax is not otherwise required
to be withheld by this chapter to be tax required to be withheld and remitted
for the purposes of this section.
   (C)   Occasional Entrant - Withholding.
      (1)   As used in this division (C).
         “Employer.” Includes a person that is a related member to or of an
employer.
         “Fixed location.” Means a permanent place of doing business in this
state, such as an office, warehouse, storefront, or similar location owned or
controlled by an employer.
         “Principal place of work.” Means the fixed location to which an
employee is required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary
basis. If the employee is not required to report for employment duties on a
regular and ordinary basis to a fixed location, “principal place of work” means
the worksite location in this state to which the employee is required to report
for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis. If the employee is not
required to report for employment duties on a regular and ordinary basis to a
fixed location or worksite location, “principal place of work” means the
location in this state at which the employee spends the greatest number of days
in a calendar year performing services for or on behalf of the employee’s
employer.
            1.   If there is not a single municipal corporation in which the
employee spent the “greatest number of days in a calendar year” performing
services for or on behalf of the employer, but instead there are two or more
municipal corporations in which the employee spent an identical number of days
that is greater than the number of days the employee spent in any other
municipal corporation, the employer shall allocate any of the employee’s
qualifying wages subject to division (C)(2)(a)1. of this section among those
two or more municipal corporations. The allocation shall be made using any fair
and reasonable method, including, but not limited to, an equal allocation among
such municipal corporations or an allocation based upon the time spent or sales
made by the employee in each such municipal corporation. A municipal
corporation to which qualifying wages are allocated under this division shall
be the employee’s “principal place of work” with respect to those qualifying
wages for the purposes of this section.
            2.   For the purposes of this division, the location at which an
employee spends a particular day shall be determined in accordance with
division (C)(2)(b) of this section, except that “location” shall be substituted
for “municipal corporation” wherever “municipal corporation” appears in that
division.
         “Professional athlete.” Means an athlete who performs services in a
professional athletic event for wages or other remuneration.
         “Professional entertainer.” Means a person who performs services in
the professional performing arts for wages or other remuneration on a per-event
basis.
         “Public figure.” Means a person of prominence who performs services at
discrete events, such as speeches, public appearances or similar events, for
wages or other remuneration on a per-event basis.
         “Worksite location.” Means a construction site or other temporary
worksite in this state at which the employer provides services for more than 20
days during the calendar year. “Worksite location” does not include the home of
an employee.
      (2)   (a)   Subject to divisions (C)(3), (C)(5), (C)(6) and (C)(7) of
this section, an employer is not required to withhold city income tax on
qualifying wages paid to an employee for the performance of personal services
in the city if the employee performed such services in the city on 20 or fewer
days in a calendar year, unless one of the following conditions applies:
            1.   The employee’s principal place of work is located in the city;
            2.   The employee performed services at one or more presumed
worksite locations in the city. For the purposes of this division, “presumed
worksite location” means a construction site or other temporary worksite in the
city at which the employer provides or provided services that can reasonably
be, or would have been, expected by the employer to last more than 20 days in a
calendar year. Services can “reasonably be expected by the employer to last
more than 20 days” if either of the following applies at the time the services
commence:
               a.   The nature of the services are such that it will require
more than 20 days of the services to complete the services; or
               b.   The agreement between the employer and its customer to
perform services at a location requires the employer to perform the services at
the location for more than 20 days.
            3.   The employee is a resident of the city and has requested that
the employer withhold tax from the employee’s qualifying wages as provided in
this section; or
            4.   The employee is a professional athlete, professional
entertainer or public figure, and the qualifying wages are paid for the
performance of services in the employee’s capacity as a professional athlete,
professional entertainer or public figure.
         (b)   For the purposes of division (C)(2)(a) of this section, an
employee shall be considered to have spent a day performing services in the
city only if the employee spent more time performing services for or on behalf
of the employer in the city than in any other municipal corporation on that
day. For the purposes of determining the amount of time an employee spent in a
particular location, the time spent performing one or more of the following
activities shall be considered to have been spent at the employee’s principal
place of work:
            1.   Traveling to the location at which the employee will first
perform services for the employer for the day;
            2.   Traveling from a location at which the employee was performing
services for the employer to any other location;
            3.   Traveling from any location to another location in order to
pick up or load, for the purpose of transportation or delivery, property that
has been purchased, sold, assembled, fabricated, repaired, refurbished,
processed, remanufactured or improved by the employee’s employer;
            4.   Transporting or delivering property described in division (C)
(2)(b)3. of this section, provided that, upon delivery of the property, the
employee does not temporarily or permanently affix the property to real estate
owned, used or controlled by a person other than the employee’s employer; and
            5.   Traveling from the location at which the employee makes the
employee’s final delivery or pick-up for the day to either the employee’s
principal place of work or a location at which the employee will not perform
services for the employer.
      (3)   If the principal place of work of an employee is located in another
Ohio municipal corporation that imposes an income tax, the exception from
withholding requirements described in division (C)(2)(a) of this section shall
apply only if, with respect to the employee’s qualifying wages described in
that division, the employer withholds and remits tax on such qualifying wages
to that municipal corporation.
      (4)   (a)   Except as provided in division (C)(4)(b) of this section, if,
during a calendar year, the number of days an employee spends performing
personal services in the city exceeds the 20-day threshold, the employer shall
withhold and remit tax to the city for any subsequent days in that calendar
year on which the employer pays qualifying wages to the employee for personal
services performed in the city.
         (b)   An employer required to begin withholding tax for the city under
division (C)(4)(a) of this section may elect to withhold tax for the city for
the first 20 days on which the employer paid qualifying wages to the employee
for personal services performed in the city.
      (5)   If an employer’s fixed location is Broadview Heights and the
employer qualifies as a small employer as defined in §
881.02, the employer shall withhold municipal income tax on all of the
employee’s qualifying wages for a taxable year and remit that tax only to the
city, regardless of the number of days which the employee worked outside the
corporate boundaries of the city. To determine whether an employer qualifies as
a small employer for a taxable year, a the employer will be required to provide
the Tax Administrator with the employer’s federal income tax return for the
preceding taxable year.
      (6)   Divisions (C)(2)(a) and (C)(4) of this section shall not apply to
the extent that a Tax Administrator and an employer enter into an agreement
regarding the manner in which the employer shall comply with the requirements
of this section.
(Ord. 22-15, passed 11-2-2015; Ord. 01-2018, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 881.05  ANNUAL RETURN; FILING.
   (A)   An annual city income tax return shall be completed and filed by every
individual taxpayer 18 years of age or older and any taxpayer that is not an
individual for each taxable year for which the taxpayer is subject to the tax,
whether or not a tax is due thereon.
      (1)   The Tax Administrator may accept on behalf of all nonresident
individual taxpayers a return filed by an employer, agent of an employer or
other payer under §
881.04 of this chapter when the nonresident individual taxpayer’s sole income
subject to the tax is the qualifying wages reported by the employer, agent of
an employer or other payer, and no additional tax is due the city.
      (2)   Retirees having no municipal taxable income for the city income tax
purposes may file with the Tax Administrator a written exemption from these
filing requirements on a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator. The written
exemption shall indicate the date of retirement and the entity from which
retired. The exemption shall be in effect until such time as the retiree
receives municipal taxable income taxable to the city, at which time the
retiree shall be required to comply with all applicable provisions of this
chapter.
   (B)   If an individual is deceased, any return or notice required of that
individual shall be completed and filed by that decedent’s executor,
administrator or other person charged with the property of that decedent.
   (C)   If an individual is unable to complete and file a return or notice
required by the city, the return or notice required of that individual shall be
completed and filed by the individual’s duly authorized agent, guardian,
conservator, fiduciary or other person charged with the care of the person or
property of that individual.
   (D)   Returns or notices required of an estate or a trust shall be completed
and filed by the fiduciary of the estate or trust.
   (E)   The city shall permit spouses to file a joint return.
   (F)   (1)   Each return required to be filed under this division (F) shall
contain the signature of the taxpayer or the taxpayer’s duly authorized agent
and of the person who prepared the return for the taxpayer. The return shall
include the taxpayer’s Social Security number or taxpayer identification
number. Each return shall be verified by a declaration under penalty of
perjury.
      (2)   The Tax Administrator shall require a taxpayer who is an individual
to include, with each annual return and amended return, copies of the following
documents: all of the taxpayer’s Internal Revenue Service Form W-2, “Wage and
Tax Statements,” including all information reported on the taxpayer’s federal
W-2, as well as taxable wages reported or withheld for any municipal
corporation; the taxpayer’s Internal Revenue Service Form 1040 or, in the case
of a return or request by a qualified municipal corporation, Ohio form IT-1040;
and, with respect to an amended tax return, any other documentation necessary
to support the adjustments made in the amended return. An individual taxpayer
who files the annual return required by this section electronically is not
required to provide paper copies of any of the foregoing to the Tax
Administrator unless the Tax Administrator requests such copies after the
return has been filed.
      (3)   (a)   The Tax Administrator may require a taxpayer that is not an
individual to include, with each annual net profit return, amended net profit
return, or request for refund required under this section, copies of only the
following documents: the taxpayer’s Internal Revenue Service Form 1041, Form
1065, Form 1120, Form 1120-REIT, Form 1120F, or Form 1120S, and, with respect
to an amended tax return or refund request, any other documentation necessary
to support the refund request or the adjustments made in the amended return.
         (b)   A taxpayer that is not an individual and that files an annual
net profit return electronically through the Ohio Business Gateway or in some
other manner shall either mail the documents required under this division (F)
to the Tax Administrator at the time of filing or, if electronic submission is
available, submit the documents electronically through the Ohio Business
Gateway.
      (4)   After a taxpayer files a tax return, the Tax Administrator may
request, and the taxpayer shall provide, any information, statements or
documents required by the city to determine and verify the taxpayer’s municipal
income tax liability. The requirements imposed under this division (F) of this
section apply regardless of whether the taxpayer files on a generic form or on
a form prescribed by the Tax Administrator.
   (G)   (1)   (a)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each
individual income tax return required to be filed under this section shall be
completed and filed as required by the Tax Administrator on or before the date
prescribed for the filing of state individual income tax returns under Ohio
R.C. 5747.08(G). The taxpayer shall complete and file the return or notice on
forms prescribed by the Tax Administrator or on generic forms, together with
remittance made payable to the city. No remittance is required if the net
amount due is $10 or less.
         (b)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, each annual net
profit return required to be filed under this section by a taxpayer that is not
an individual shall be completed and filed as required by the Tax Administrator
on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the end of the
taxpayer’s taxable year. The taxpayer shall complete and file the return or
notice on forms prescribed by the Tax Administrator or on generic forms,
together with remittance made payable to the city. No remittance is required if
the net amount due is $10 or less.
      (2)   Any taxpayer that has duly requested an automatic six-month
extension for filing the taxpayer’s federal income tax return shall
automatically receive an extension for the filing of the city’s income tax
return. The extended due date of the city’s income tax return shall be the
fifteenth day of the tenth month after the last day of the taxable year to
which the return relates. An extension of time to file under this division (G)
is not an extension of the time to pay any tax due unless the Tax Administrator
grants an extension of that date.
         (a)   A copy of the federal extension request shall be included with
the filing of the city’s income tax return.
         (b)   A taxpayer that has not requested or received a six-month
extension for filing the taxpayer’s federal income tax return may submit a
written request that the Tax Administrator grant the taxpayer a six-month
extension of the date for filing the taxpayer’s city income tax return. If the
request is received by the Tax Administrator on or before the date the city
income tax return is due, the Tax Administrator shall grant the taxpayer’s
requested extension.
      (3)   If the Tax Commissioner extends for all taxpayers the date for
filing state income tax returns under Ohio R.C. 5747.08(G), a taxpayer shall
automatically receive an extension for the filing of the city’s income tax
return. The extended due date of the city’s income tax return shall be the same
as the extended due date of the state income tax return.
      (4)   If the Tax Administrator considers it necessary in order to ensure
the payment of the tax imposed by the city, the Tax Administrator may require
taxpayers to file returns and make payments otherwise than as provided in this
division (G), including taxpayers not otherwise required to file annual
returns.
      (5)   To the extent that any provision in this division (G) of this
section conflicts with any provision in divisions (N), (O), (P) or (Q) of this
section, the provisions in divisions (N), (O), (P) or (Q) prevail.
   (H)   (1)   For taxable years beginning after 2015, the city shall not
require a taxpayer to remit tax with respect to net profits if the net amount
due is $10 or less.
      (2)   Any taxpayer not required to remit tax to the city for a taxable
year pursuant to division (H)(1) of this section shall file with the city an
annual net profit return under division (F)(3) of this section, unless the
provisions of (H)(3) apply.
      (3)   (a)   A person may notify the Tax Administrator that the person
does not expect to be a taxpayer subject to city income tax ordinance for a
taxable year if both the following apply:
            (1)   The person was required to file a tax return with the city
for the immediately preceding taxable year because the person performed
services at a worksite location (as defined within § 881.04(C)(1) within the
city; and
            (2)   The person no longer provides services in the city and does
not expect to be subject to city income tax for the taxable year.
         (b)   The person shall provide the notice in a signed affidavit that
briefly explains the person’s circumstances, including the location of the
previous worksite location and the last date on which the person performed
services or made any sales within the city. The affidavit shall also include
the following statement: “The affiant has no plans to perform any services
within the city, make any sales in the city, or otherwise become subject to the
tax levied by the city during the taxable year, if the affiant does become
subject to the tax levied by the city for the taxable year, the affiant agrees
to be considered a taxpayer and to properly comply as a taxpayer with the city
income tax ordinance and rules and regulations.” The person shall sign the
affidavit under penalty of perjury.
         (c)   If a person submits an affidavit described in division (H)(3)(b)
above, the Tax Administrator shall not require the person to file a tax return
for the taxable year unless the Tax Administrator possesses information that
conflicts with the affidavit or if the circumstances described in the affidavit
change.
         (d)   Nothing in this division (H)(3) prohibits the Tax Administrator
from performing an audit of the person.
   (I)   If a payment under this chapter is made by electronic funds transfer,
the payment shall be considered to be made on the date of the timestamp
assigned by the first electronic system receiving that payment.
   (J)   Taxes withheld for the city by an employer, the agent of an employer
or other payer as described in §
881.04 shall be allowed to the taxpayer as credits against payment of the tax
imposed on the taxpayer by the city, unless the amounts withheld were not
remitted to the city and the recipient colluded with the employer, agent or
other payer in connection with the failure to remit the amounts withheld.
   (K)   Each return required by the city to be filed in accordance with this
division (K) shall include a box that the taxpayer may check to authorize
another person, including a tax return preparer who prepared the return, to
communicate with the Tax Administrator about matters pertaining to the return.
   (L)   The Tax Administrator shall accept for filing a generic form of any
income tax return, report or document required by the city, provided that the
generic form, once completed and filed, contains all of the information
required by ordinance, resolution or rules and regulations adopted by the city
or the Tax Administrator, and provided that the taxpayer or tax return preparer
filing the generic form otherwise complies with the provisions of this chapter
and of the city’s ordinance, resolution or rules and regulations governing the
filing of returns, reports or documents.
   (M)   (1)   Any taxpayer subject to municipal income taxation with respect
to the taxpayer’s net profit from a business or profession may file the city’s
income tax return, estimated municipal income tax return or extension for
filing a municipal income tax return, and may make payment of amounts shown to
be due on such returns, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.
      (2)   Any employer, agent of an employer or other payer may report the
amount of municipal income tax withheld from qualifying wages, and may make
remittance of such amounts, by using the Ohio Business Gateway.
      (3)   Nothing in this section affects the due dates for filing employer
withholding tax returns.
   (N)   Each member of the National Guard of any state and each member of a
reserve component of the armed forces of the United States called to active
duty pursuant to an executive order issued by the President of the United
States or an act of the Congress of the United States, and each civilian
serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency operation in
support of the armed forces, may apply to the Tax Administrator of the city for
both an extension of time for filing of the return and an extension of time for
payment of taxes required by the city during the period of the member’s or
civilian’s duty service, and for 180 days thereafter. The application shall be
filed on or before the one hundred eightieth day after the member’s or
civilian’s duty terminates. An applicant shall provide such evidence as the Tax
Administrator considers necessary to demonstrate eligibility for the extension.
   (O)   (1)   If the Tax Administrator ascertains that an applicant is
qualified for an extension under this section, the Tax Administrator shall
enter into a contract with the applicant for the payment of the tax in
installments that begin on the one hundred eighty-first day after the
applicant’s active duty or service terminates. The Tax Administrator may
prescribe such contract terms as the Tax Administrator considers appropriate.
However, taxes pursuant to a contract entered into under this division (O) are
not delinquent, and the Tax Administrator shall not require any payments of
penalties or interest in connection with those taxes for the extension period.
      (2)   If the Tax Administrator determines that an applicant is qualified
for an extension under this section, the applicant shall neither be required to
file any return, report or other tax document nor be required to pay any tax
otherwise due to the municipal corporation before the one hundred eighty-first
day after the applicant’s active duty or service terminates.
      (3)   Taxes paid pursuant to a contract entered into under division (O)
(1) of this section are not delinquent. The Tax Administrator shall not require
any payments of penalties or interest in connection with those taxes for the
extension period.
   (P)   (1)   Nothing in this division (P) denies to any person described in
this division the application of divisions (N) and (O) of this section.
      (2)   (a)   A qualifying taxpayer who is eligible for an extension under
the Internal Revenue Code shall receive both an extension of time in which to
file any return, report or other tax document and an extension of time in which
to make any payment of taxes required by a municipal corporation in accordance
with this chapter. The length of any extension granted under this division (P)
(2)(a) shall be equal to the length of the corresponding extension that the
taxpayer receives under the Internal Revenue Code. As used in this division,
“qualifying taxpayer” means a member of the National Guard or a member of a
reserve component of the armed forces of the United States called to active
duty pursuant to either an executive order issued by the President of the
United States or an act of the Congress of the United States, or a civilian
serving as support personnel in a combat zone or contingency operation in
support of the armed forces.
         (b)   Taxes whose payment is extended in accordance with division (P)
(2)(a) of this section are not delinquent during the extension period. Such
taxes become delinquent on the first day after the expiration of the extension
period if the taxes are not paid prior to that date. The Tax Administrator
shall not require any payment of penalties or interest in connection with those
taxes for the extension period. The Tax Administrator shall not include any
period of extension granted under division (C)(2)(a) of this section in
calculating the penalty or interest due on any unpaid tax.
   (Q)   For each taxable year to which division (N), (O) or (P) of this
section applies to a taxpayer, the provisions of divisions (O)(2) and (O)(3) of
this section, as applicable, apply to the spouse of that taxpayer if the filing
status of the spouse and the taxpayer is married filing jointly for that year.
   (R)   As used in divisions (R) through (Y) of this section:
      (1)   “Affiliated group of corporations.” Means an affiliated group as
defined in § 1504 of the Internal Revenue Code, except that, if such a group
includes at least one incumbent local exchange carrier that is primarily
engaged in the business of providing local exchange telephone service in this
state, the affiliated group shall not include any incumbent local exchange
carrier that would otherwise be included in the group.
      (2)   “Consolidated federal income tax return.” Means a consolidated
return filed for federal income tax purposes pursuant to § 1501 of the Internal
Revenue Code.
      (3)   “Consolidated federal taxable income.” Means the consolidated
taxable income of an affiliated group of corporations, as computed for the
purposes of filing a consolidated federal income tax return, before
consideration of net operating losses or special deductions. “Consolidated
federal taxable income” does not include income or loss of an incumbent local
exchange carrier that is excluded from the affiliated group under division (R)
(1) of this section.
      (4)   “Incumbent local exchange carrier.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 4927.01.
      (5)   “Local exchange telephone service.” Has the same meaning as in Ohio
R.C. 5727.01.
   (S)   (1)   For taxable years beginning on or after January 1, 2016, a
taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations may elect to
file a consolidated municipal income tax return for a taxable year if at least
one member of the affiliated group of corporations is subject to the city’s
income tax in that taxable year, and if the affiliated group of corporations
filed a consolidated federal income tax return with respect to that taxable
year. The election is binding for a five-year period beginning with the first
taxable year of the initial election unless a change in the reporting method is
required under federal law. The election continues to be binding for each
subsequent five-year period unless the taxpayer elects to discontinue filing
consolidated municipal income tax returns under division (S)(2) of this section
or a taxpayer receives permission from the Tax Administrator. The Tax
Administrator shall approve such a request for good cause shown.
      (2)   An election to discontinue filing consolidated municipal income tax
returns under this section must be made in the first year following the last
year of a five-year consolidated municipal income tax return election period in
effect under division (S)(1) of this section. The election to discontinue
filing a consolidated municipal income tax return is binding for a five-year
period beginning with the first taxable year of the election.
      (3)   An election made under division (S)(1) or (S)(2) of this section is
binding on all members of the affiliated group of corporations subject to a
municipal income tax.
      (4)   When a taxpayer makes the election allowed under R.C. § 718.80, a
valid election made by a taxpayer under division (S)(1) or (2) of this section
is binding upon the Tax Administrator for the remainder of the five-year
period.
      (5)   When an election is made under R.C. § 718.80 is terminated, a valid
election made under R.C. § 718.86 is binding upon the Tax Administrator for the
remainder of the five-year period.
   (T)   A taxpayer that is a member of an affiliated group of corporations
that filed a consolidated federal income tax return for a taxable year shall
file a consolidated city income tax return for that taxable year if the Tax
Administrator determines, by a preponderance of the evidence, that intercompany
transactions have not been conducted at arm’s length and that there has been a
distortive shifting of income or expenses with regard to allocation of net
profits to the city. A taxpayer that is required to file a consolidated city
income tax return for a taxable year shall file a consolidated city income tax
return for all subsequent taxable years, unless the taxpayer requests and
receives written permission from the Tax Administrator to file a separate
return or a taxpayer has experienced a change in circumstances.
   (U)   A taxpayer shall prepare a consolidated city income tax return in the
same manner as is required under the United States Department of Treasury
regulations that prescribe procedures for the preparation of the consolidated
federal income tax return required to be filed by the common parent of the
affiliated group of which the taxpayer is a member.
   (V)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in divisions (V)(2), (V)(3) and (V)
(4) of this section, corporations that file a consolidated municipal income tax
return shall compute adjusted federal taxable income, as defined in §
881.02, by substituting “consolidated federal taxable income” for “federal
taxable income” wherever “federal taxable income” appears in that division and
by substituting “an affiliated group of corporation’s” for “a C corporation’s”
wherever “a C corporation’s” appears in that division.
      (2)   No corporation filing a consolidated city income tax return shall
make any adjustment otherwise required under §
881.02(C)(1) to the extent that the item of income or deduction otherwise
subject to the adjustment has been eliminated or consolidated in the
computation of consolidated federal taxable income.
      (3)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having at least
80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly or
indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that
affiliated group’s consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, the
corporation filing a consolidated city income tax return shall do one of the
following with respect to that pass-through entity’s net profit or loss for
that taxable year:
         (a)   Exclude the pass-through entity’s net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in divisions (R) through (Y) of
this section, exclude the property, payroll and gross receipts of the pass-
through entity in the computation of the affiliated group’s net profit sitused
to the city. If the entity’s net profit or loss is so excluded, the entity
shall be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the
entity’s net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated
federal taxable income of the affiliated group; and
         (b)   Include the pass-through entity’s net profit or loss in the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purpose of making the computations required in divisions (R) through (Y) of
this section, include the property, payroll and gross receipts of the pass-
through entity in the computation of the affiliated group’s net profit sitused
to the city. If the entity’s net profit or loss is so included, the entity
shall not be subject to taxation as a separate taxpayer on the basis of the
entity’s net profits that are included in the consolidated federal taxable
income of the affiliated group.
      (4)   If the net profit or loss of a pass-through entity having less than
80% of the value of its ownership interest owned or controlled, directly or
indirectly, by an affiliated group of corporations is included in that
affiliated group’s consolidated federal taxable income for a taxable year, all
of the following shall apply:
         (a)   The corporation filing the consolidated municipal income tax
return shall exclude the pass-through entity’s net profit or loss from the
consolidated federal taxable income of the affiliated group and, for the
purposes of making the computations required in divisions (R) through (Y) of
this section, exclude the property, payroll and gross receipts of the pass-
through entity in the computation of the affiliated group’s net profit sitused
to the city; and
         (b)   The pass-through entity shall be subject to city income taxation
as a separate taxpayer in accordance with this chapter on the basis of the
entity’s net profits that would otherwise be included in the consolidated
federal taxable income of the affiliated group.
   (W)   Corporations filing a consolidated city income tax return shall make
the computations required under divisions (R) through (Y) of this section by
substituting “consolidated federal taxable income attributable to” for “net
profit from” wherever “net profit from” appears in that section and by
substituting “affiliated group of corporations” for “taxpayer” wherever
“taxpayer” appears in that section.
   (X)   Each corporation filing a consolidated city income tax return is
jointly and severally liable for any tax, interest, penalties, fines, charges
or other amounts imposed by the city in accordance with this chapter on the
corporation, an affiliated group of which the corporation is a member for any
portion of the taxable year, or any one or more members of such an affiliated
group.
   (Y)   Corporations and their affiliates that made an election or entered
into an agreement with the city before January 1, 2016, to file a consolidated
or combined tax return with the city may continue to file consolidated or
combined tax returns in accordance with such election or agreement for taxable
years beginning on and after January 1, 2016.
(Ord. 22-15, passed 11-2-2015; Ord. 01-2018, passed 2-5-2018; Ord. 10-2018,
passed 4-23-2018)
§ 881.06  CREDIT FOR TAX PAID TO OTHER MUNICIPALITIES.
   (A)   Every individual taxpayer domiciled in the city who is required to and
does pay, or has acknowledged liability for, a municipal tax to another
municipality on or measured by the same income, qualifying wages, commissions,
net profits or other compensation taxable under this chapter may claim a
nonrefundable credit upon satisfactory evidence of the tax paid to the other
municipality. Subject to division (C) of this section, the credit shall not
exceed 75% of the amount obtained by multiplying the income, qualifying wages,
commissions, net profits or other compensation subject to tax in the other
municipality by the lower of the tax rate in such other municipality or the tax
rate in the city.
   (B)   The city shall grant a credit against its tax on income to a resident
of the city who works in a joint economic development zone created under Ohio
R.C. 715.691 or a joint economic development district created under Ohio R.C.
715.70, 715.71 or 715.72 to the same extent that it grants a credit against its
tax on income to its residents who are employed in another municipal
corporation.
   (C)   If the amount of tax withheld or paid to the other municipality is
less than the amount of tax required to be withheld or paid to the other
municipality, then for purposes of division (A) of this section, “the income,
qualifying wages, commissions, net profits or other compensation” subject to
tax in the other municipality shall be limited to the amount computed by
dividing the tax withheld or paid to the other municipality by the tax rate for
that municipality.
(Ord. 22-15, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 881.07  ESTIMATED TAXES.
   (A)   As used in this section.
      “Estimated taxes.” Means the amount that the taxpayer reasonably
estimates to be the taxpayer’s tax liability for the city’s income tax for the
current taxable year.
      “Tax liability.” Means the total taxes due to the city for the taxable
year, after allowing any credit to which the taxpayer is entitled, and after
applying any estimated tax payment, withholding payment, or credit from another
taxable year.
   (B)   (1)   Every taxpayer shall make a declaration of estimated taxes for
the current taxable year, on the form prescribed by the Tax Administrator, if
the amount payable as estimated taxes is at least $200. For the purposes of
this section:
         (a)   Taxes withheld for the city from qualifying wages shall be
considered as paid to the city in equal amounts on each payment date unless the
taxpayer establishes the dates on which all amounts were actually withheld, in
which case they shall be considered as paid on the dates on which the amounts
were actually withheld; and
         (b)   An overpayment of tax applied as a credit to a subsequent
taxable year is deemed to be paid on the date of the postmark stamped on the
cover in which the payment is mailed or, if the payment is made by electronic
funds transfer, the date the payment is submitted. As used in this division,
“date of the postmark” means, in the event there is more than one date on the
cover, the earliest date imprinted on the cover by the postal service.
      (2)   Taxpayers filing joint returns shall file joint declarations of
estimated taxes. A taxpayer may amend a declaration under rules prescribed by
the Tax Administrator. A taxpayer having a taxable year of less than 12 months
shall make a declaration under rules prescribed by the Tax Administrator.
      (3)   The declaration of estimated taxes shall be filed on or before the
date prescribed for the filing of municipal income tax returns under §
881.05(G) or on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the
taxpayer becomes subject to tax for the first time.
      (4)   Taxpayers reporting on a fiscal year basis shall file a declaration
on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the beginning of each
fiscal year or period.
      (5)   The original declaration or any subsequent amendment may be
increased or decreased on or before any subsequent quarterly payment day as
provided in this section.
   (C)   (1)   The required portion of the tax liability for the taxable year
that shall be paid through estimated taxes made payable to the city, including
the application of tax refunds to estimated taxes and withholding on or before
the applicable payment date, shall be as follows:
         (a)   On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 22.5% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         (b)   On or before the fifteenth day of the sixth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 45% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
         (c)   On or before the fifteenth day of the ninth month after the
beginning of the taxable year, 67.5% of the tax liability for the taxable year;
and
         (d)   For an individual, on or before the fifteenth day of the first
month of the following taxable year, 90% of the tax liability for the taxable
year. For a person other than an individual, on or before the fifteenth day of
the twelfth month of the taxable year, 90% of the tax liability for the taxable
year.
      (2)   When an amended declaration has been filed, the unpaid balance
shown due on the amended declaration shall be paid in equal installments on or
before the remaining payment dates.
      (3)   On or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month of the year
following that for which the declaration or amended declaration was filed, an
annual return shall be filed and any balance which may be due shall be paid
with the return in accordance with §
881.05.
   (D)   (1)   In the case of any underpayment of any portion of a tax
liability, penalty and interest may be imposed pursuant to §
881.18 upon the amount of underpayment for the period of underpayment, unless
the underpayment is due to reasonable cause as described in division (E) of
this section. The amount of the underpayment shall be determined as follows:
         (a)   For the first payment of estimated taxes each year, 22.5% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment;
         (b)   For the second payment of estimated taxes each year, 45% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment;
         (c)   For the third payment of estimated taxes each year, 67.5% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment; and
         (d)   For the fourth payment of estimated taxes each year, 90% of the
tax liability, less the amount of taxes paid by the date prescribed for that
payment.
      (2)   The period of the underpayment shall run from the day the estimated
payment was required to be made to the date on which the payment is made. For
purposes of this section, a payment of estimated taxes on or before any payment
date shall be considered a payment of any previous underpayment only to the
extent the payment of estimated taxes exceeds the amount of the payment
presently required to be paid to avoid any penalty.
   (E)   An underpayment of any portion of tax liability determined under
division (D) of this section shall be due to reasonable cause and the penalty
imposed by this section shall not be added to the taxes for the taxable year if
any of the following apply:
      (1)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 90% of
the tax liability for the current taxable year, determined by annualizing the
income received during the year up to the end of the month immediately
preceding the month in which the payment is due;
      (2)   The amount of estimated taxes that were paid equals at least 100%
of the tax liability shown on the return of the taxpayer for the preceding
taxable year, provided that the immediately preceding taxable year reflected a
period of 12 months and the taxpayer filed a return with the city under §
881.05 for that year; or
      (3)   The taxpayer is an individual who resides in the city but was not
domiciled there on the first day of January of the calendar year that includes
the first day of the taxable year.
(Ord. 22-15, passed 11-2-2015; Ord. 01-2018, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 881.08  ROUNDING OF AMOUNTS.
   A person may round to the nearest whole dollar all amounts the person is
required to enter on any return, report, voucher or other document required
under this chapter. Any fractional part of a dollar that equals or exceeds
$0.50 shall be rounded to the next whole dollar, and any fractional part of a
dollar that is less than $0.50 shall be dropped. If a person chooses to round
amounts entered on a document, the person shall round all amounts entered on
the document.
(Ord. 22-15, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 881.09  REQUESTS FOR REFUNDS.
   (A)   As used in this section, “withholding tax” has the same meaning as in
§
881.18.
   (B)   Upon receipt of a request for a refund, the Tax Administrator, in
accordance with this section, shall refund to employers, agents of employers,
other payers or taxpayers, with respect to any income or withholding tax levied
by the municipal corporation:
      (1)   Overpayments of $10 or more; and
      (2)   Amounts paid erroneously if the refund requested is $10 or more.
   (C)   (1)   Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, requests for
refund shall be filed with the Tax Administrator, on the form prescribed by the
Tax Administrator within three years after the tax was due or paid, whichever
is later. The Tax Administrator may require the requestor to file with the
request any documentation that substantiates the requestor’s claim for a
refund.
      (2)   On filing of the refund request, the Tax Administrator shall
determine the amount of refund due and certify such amount to the appropriate
municipal corporation official for payment. Except as provided in division (C)
(3) of this section, the Tax Administrator shall issue an assessment to any
taxpayer whose request for refund is fully or partially denied. The assessment
shall state the amount of the refund that was denied, the reasons for the
denial, and instructions for appealing the assessment.
      (3)   If a Tax Administrator denies in whole or in part a refund request
included within the taxpayer’s originally filed annual income tax return, the
Tax Administrator shall notify the taxpayer, in writing, of the amount of the
refund that was denied, the reasons for the denial, and instructions for
requesting an assessment that may be appealed under §
881.21.
   (D)   A request for a refund that is received after the last day for filing
specified in division (C) of this section shall be considered to have been
filed in a timely manner if any of the following situations exist:
      (1)   The request is delivered by the postal service, and the earliest
postal service postmark on the cover in which the request is enclosed is not
later than the last day for filing the request;
      (2)   The request is delivered by the postal service, the only postmark
on the cover in which the request is enclosed was affixed by a private postal
meter, the date of that postmark is not later than the last day for filing the
request, and the request is received within seven days of such last day; or
      (3)   The request is delivered by the postal service, no postmark date
was affixed to the cover in which the request is enclosed or the date of the
postmark so affixed is not legible, and the request is received within seven
days of the last day for making the request.
   (E)   (1)   Interest shall be allowed and paid on any overpayment by a
taxpayer of any municipal income tax obligation from the date of the
overpayment until the date of the refund of the overpayment, except that if any
overpayment is refunded within 90 days after the final filing date of the
annual return or 90 days after the completed return is filed, whichever is
later, no interest shall be allowed on the refund.
      (2)   For the purpose of computing the payment of interest on amounts
overpaid, no amount of tax for any taxable year shall be considered to have
been paid before the date on which the return on which the tax is reported is
due, without regard to any extension of time for filing that return. Interest
shall be paid at the interest rate described in §
881.18(A).
(Ord. 22-15, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 881.10  SECOND MUNICIPALITY IMPOSING TAX AFTER TIME PERIOD ALLOWED FOR
REFUND.
   (A)   Income tax that has been deposited with the city, but should have been
deposited with another municipality, is allowable by the city as a refund but
is subject to the three-year limitation on refunds.
   (B)   Income tax that was deposited with another municipality but should
have been deposited with the city is subject to recovery by the city. If the
city’s tax on that income is imposed after the time period allowed for a refund
of the tax or withholding paid to the other municipality, the city shall allow
a nonrefundable credit against the tax or withholding the city claims is due
with respect to such income or wages, equal to the tax or withholding paid to
the first municipality with respect to such income or wages.
   (C)   If the city’s tax rate is less than the tax rate in the other
municipality, then the nonrefundable credit shall be calculated using the
city’s tax rate. However, if the city’s tax rate is greater than the tax rate
in the other municipality, the tax due in excess of the nonrefundable credit is
to be paid to the city, along with any penalty and interest that accrued during
the period of nonpayment.
   (D)   Nothing in this section permits any credit carryforward.
(Ord. 22-15, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 881.11  AMENDED RETURNS.
   (A)   (1)   If a taxpayer’s tax liability shown on the annual tax return for
the city changes as a result of an adjustment to the taxpayer’s federal or
state income tax return, the taxpayer shall file an amended return with the
city. The amended return shall be filed on a form required by the Tax
Administrator.
      (2)   If a taxpayer intends to file an amended consolidated municipal
income tax return, or to amend its type of return from a separate return to a
consolidated return, based on the taxpayer’s consolidated federal income tax
return, the taxpayer shall notify the Tax Administrator before filing the
amended return.
   (B)   (1)   In the case of an underpayment, the amended return shall be
accompanied by payment of any combined additional tax due, together with any
penalty and interest thereon. If the combined tax shown to be due is $10 or
less, no payment need be made. The amended return shall reopen those facts,
figures, computations or attachments from a previously filed return that are
not affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the
taxpayer’s federal or state income tax return only:
         (a)   To determine the amount of tax that would be due if all facts,
figures, computations and attachments were reopened; or
         (b)   If the applicable statute of limitations for civil actions or
prosecutions under §
881.12 has not expired for a previously filed return.
      (2)   The additional tax to be paid shall not exceed the amount of tax
that would be due if all facts, figures, computations and attachments were
reopened; i.e., the payment shall be the lesser of the two amounts.
   (C)   (1)   In the case of an overpayment, a request for refund may be filed
under this division (C) within the period prescribed by division (D) of this
section for filing the amended return, even if it is filed beyond the period
prescribed in that division if it otherwise conforms to the requirements of
that division. If the amount of the refund is less than $10, no refund need be
paid by the city. A request filed under this division (C) shall claim refund of
overpayments resulting from alterations only to those facts, figures,
computations or attachments required in the taxpayer’s annual return that are
affected, either directly or indirectly, by the adjustment to the taxpayer’s
federal or state income tax return, unless it is also filed within the time
prescribed in §
881.09.
      (2)   The amount to be refunded shall not exceed the amount of refund
that would be due if all facts, figures, computations and attachments were
reopened. All facts, figures, computations and attachments may be reopened to
determine the refund amount due by inclusion of all facts, figures,
computations and attachments.
   (D)   Within 60 days after the final determination of any federal or state
tax liability affecting the taxpayer’s city’s tax liability, that taxpayer
shall make and file an amended city return showing income subject to the city
income tax based upon such final determination of federal or state tax
liability. The taxpayer shall pay any additional city income tax shown due
thereon or make a claim for refund of any overpayment, unless the tax or
overpayment is less than $10.
(Ord. 22-15, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 881.12  LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   (a)   Civil actions to recover municipal income taxes and
penalties and interest on municipal income taxes shall be brought within the
later of:
            1.   Three years after the tax was due or the return was filed,
whichever is later; or
            2.   One year after the conclusion of the qualifying deferral
period, if any.
         (b)   The time limit described in division (A)(1)(a) of this section
may be extended at any time if both the Tax Administrator and the employer,
agent of the employer, other payer or taxpayer consent in writing to the
extension. Any extension shall also extend for the same period of time the time
limit described in division (C) of this section.
      (2)   As used in this section, “qualifying deferral period” means a
period of time beginning and ending as follows:
         (a)   Beginning on the date a person who is aggrieved by an assessment
files with the Board of Tax Review the request described in §
881.21. That date shall not be affected by any subsequent decision, finding or
holding by any administrative body or court that the Board of Tax Review did
not have jurisdiction to affirm, reverse or modify the assessment or any part
of that assessment.
         (b)   Ending the later of the sixtieth day after the date on which the
final determination of the Board of Tax Review becomes final or, if any party
appeals from the determination of the Board of Tax Review, the sixtieth day
after the date on which the final determination of the Board of Tax Review is
either ultimately affirmed in whole or in part or ultimately reversed and no
further appeal of either that affirmation, in whole or in part, or that
reversal is available or taken.
   (B)   Prosecutions for an offense made punishable under a resolution or
ordinance imposing an income tax shall be commenced within three years after
the commission of the offense, provided that in the case of fraud, failure to
file a return or the omission of 25% or more of income required to be reported,
prosecutions may be commenced within six years after the commission of the
offense.
   (C)   A claim for a refund of municipal income taxes shall be brought within
the time limitation provided in §
881.09.
   (D)   (1)   Notwithstanding the fact that an appeal is pending, the
petitioner may pay all or a portion of the assessment that is the subject of
the appeal. The acceptance of a payment by the city does not prejudice any
claim for refund upon final determination of the appeal.
      (2)   If upon final determination of the appeal an error in the
assessment is corrected by the Tax Administrator, upon an appeal so filed or
pursuant to a final determination of the Board of Tax Review, of the Ohio Board
of Tax Appeals, or any court to which the decision of the Ohio Board of Tax
Appeals has been appealed, so that the resultant amount due is less than the
amount paid, a refund will be paid in the amount of the overpayment as provided
by §
881.09, with interest on that amount as provided by §
881.09(E).
   (E)   No civil action to recover city income tax or related penalties or
interest shall be brought during either of the following time periods:
      (1)   The period during which a taxpayer has a right to appeal the
imposition of that tax or interest or those penalties; or
      (2)   The period during which an appeal related to the imposition of that
tax or interest or those penalties is pending.
(Ord. 22-15, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 881.13  AUDITS.
   (A)   At or before the commencement of an audit, the Tax Administrator shall
provide to the taxpayer a written description of the roles of the Tax
Administrator and of the taxpayer during the audit and a statement of the
taxpayer’s rights, including any right to obtain a refund of an overpayment of
a tax. At or before the commencement of an audit, the Tax Administrator shall
inform the taxpayer when the audit is considered to have commenced.
   (B)   Except in cases involving suspected criminal activity, the Tax
Administrator shall conduct an audit of a taxpayer during regular business
hours and after providing reasonable notice to the taxpayer. A taxpayer who is
unable to comply with a proposed time for an audit on the grounds that the
proposed time would cause inconvenience or hardship must offer reasonable
alternative dates for the audit.
   (C)   At all stages of an audit by the Tax Administrator, a taxpayer is
entitled to be assisted or represented by an attorney, accountant, bookkeeper
or other tax practitioner. The Tax Administrator shall prescribe a form by
which a taxpayer may designate such a person to assist or represent the
taxpayer in the conduct of any proceedings resulting from actions by the Tax
Administrator. If a taxpayer has not submitted such a form, the Tax
Administrator may accept other evidence, as the Tax Administrator considers
appropriate, that a person is the authorized representative of a taxpayer.
      (1)   A taxpayer may refuse to answer any questions asked by the person
conducting an audit until the taxpayer has an opportunity to consult with the
taxpayer’s attorney, accountant, bookkeeper or other tax practitioner.
      (2)   This division (C) does not authorize the practice of law by a
person who is not an attorney.
   (D)   A taxpayer may record, electronically or otherwise, the audit
examination.
   (E)   The failure of the Tax Administrator to comply with a provision of
this section shall neither excuse a taxpayer from payment of any taxes owed by
the taxpayer nor cure any procedural defect in a taxpayer’s case.
   (F)   If the Tax Administrator fails to substantially comply with the
provisions of this section, the Tax Administrator, upon application by the
taxpayer, shall excuse the taxpayer from penalties and interest.
(Ord. 22-15, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 881.14  SERVICE OF ASSESSMENT.
   (A)   As used in this section.
      “Last known address.” Means the address the Tax Administrator has at the
time a document is originally sent by certified mail, or any address the Tax
Administrator can ascertain using reasonable means such as the use of a change
of address service offered by the postal service or an authorized delivery
service under Ohio R.C. 5703.056.
      “Undeliverable address.” Means an address to which the postal service or
an authorized delivery service under Ohio R.C. 5703.056 is not able to deliver
an assessment of the Tax Administrator, except when the reason for non-delivery
is because the addressee fails to acknowledge or accept the assessment.
   (B)   Subject to division (C) of this section, a copy of each assessment
shall be served upon the person affected thereby either by personal service, by
certified mail, or by a delivery service authorized under Ohio R.C. 5703.056.
With the permission of the person affected by an assessment, the Tax
Administrator may deliver the assessment through alternative means as provided
in this section, including, but not limited to, delivery by secure electronic
mail.
   (C)   (1)   (a)   If certified mail is returned because of an undeliverable
address, a Tax Administrator shall utilize reasonable means to ascertain a new
last known address, including the use of a change of address service offered by
the postal service or an authorized delivery service under Ohio R.C. 5703.056.
If the Tax Administrator is unable to ascertain a new last known address, the
assessment shall be sent by ordinary mail and considered served. If the
ordinary mail is subsequently returned because of an undeliverable address, the
assessment remains appealable within 60 days after the assessment’s postmark.
         (b)   Once the Tax Administrator or other city official, or the
designee of either, serves an assessment on the person to whom the assessment
is directed, the person may protest the ruling of that assessment by filing an
appeal with the local Board of Tax Review within 60 days after the receipt of
service. The delivery of an assessment of the Tax Administrator under division
(C)(1)(a) of this section is prima facie evidence that delivery is complete and
that the assessment is served.
      (2)   (a)   If mailing of an assessment by a Tax Administrator by
certified mail is returned for some cause other than an undeliverable address,
the Tax Administrator shall resend the assessment by ordinary mail. The
assessment shall show the date the Tax Administrator sends the assessment and
include the following statement:
      “This assessment is deemed to be served on the addressee under applicable
law ten days from the date this assessment was mailed by the Tax Administrator
as shown on the assessment, and all periods within which an appeal may be filed
apply from and after that date.”
         (b)   Unless the mailing is returned because of an undeliverable
address, the mailing of that information is prima facie evidence that delivery
of the assessment was completed ten days after the Tax Administrator sent the
assessment by ordinary mail and that the assessment was served.
         (c)   If the ordinary mail is subsequently returned because of an
undeliverable address, the Tax Administrator shall proceed under division (C)
(1)(a) of this section. A person may challenge the presumption of delivery and
service under this division (C) in accordance with division (D) of this
section.
   (D)   (1)   A person disputing the presumption of delivery and service under
division (C) of this section bears the burden of proving by a preponderance of
the evidence that the address to which the assessment was sent by certified
mail was not an address with which the person was associated at the time the
Tax Administrator originally mailed the assessment. For the purposes of this
section, a person is associated with an address at the time the Tax
Administrator originally mailed the assessment if, at that time, the person was
residing, receiving legal documents or conducting business at the address; or
if, before that time, the person had conducted business at the address and,
when the assessment was mailed, the person’s agent or the person’s affiliate
was conducting business at the address. For the purposes of this section, a
“person’s affiliate” is any other person that, at the time the assessment was
mailed, owned or controlled at least 20%, as determined by voting rights, of
the addressee’s business.
      (2)   If a person elects to appeal an assessment on the basis described
in division (D)(1) of this section, and if that assessment is subject to
collection and is not otherwise appealable, the person must do so within 60
days after the initial contact by the Tax Administrator or other city official,
or the designee of either, with the person. Nothing in this division (D)
prevents the Tax Administrator or other official from entering into a
compromise with the person if the person does not actually file such an appeal
with the local board of tax review.
   (E)   Nothing in this section prohibits the Tax Administrator or the Tax
Administrator’s designee from delivering an assessment by personal service.
   (F)   Collection actions taken upon any assessment being appealed under
division (C)(1)(b) of this section, including those on which a claim has been
delivered for collection, shall be stayed upon the pendency of an appeal under
this section.
   (G)   Additional regulations as detailed in the Rules and Regulations shall
apply.
(Ord. 22-15, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 881.15  ADMINISTRATION OF CLAIMS.
   (A)   As used in this section, “claim” means a claim for an amount payable
to the city that arises pursuant to the city’s income tax imposed in accordance
with this chapter.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits a Tax Administrator from doing
either of the following if such action is in the best interests of the
municipal corporation:
      (1)   Compromise a claim; or
      (2)   Extend for a reasonable period the time for payment of a claim by
agreeing to accept monthly or other periodic payments.
   (C)   The Tax Administrator’s rejection of a compromise or payment-over-time
agreement proposed by a person with respect to a claim shall not be appealable.
   (D)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a claim
shall be binding upon and shall be to the benefit of only the parties to the
compromise or agreement, and shall not eliminate or otherwise affect the
liability of any other person.
   (E)   A compromise or payment-over-time agreement with respect to a claim
shall be void if the taxpayer defaults under the compromise or agreement or if
the compromise or agreement was obtained by fraud or by misrepresentation of a
material fact. Any amount that was due before the compromise or agreement and
that is unpaid shall remain due, and any penalties or interest that would have
accrued in the absence of the compromise or agreement shall continue to accrue
and be due.
(Ord. 22-15, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 881.16  TAX INFORMATION CONFIDENTIAL.
   (A)   Any information gained as a result of returns, investigations,
hearings or verifications required or authorized by this chapter is
confidential, and no person shall access or disclose such information except in
accordance with a proper judicial order or in connection with the performance
of that person’s official duties or the official business of the city as
authorized by this chapter. The Tax Administrator or a designee thereof may
furnish copies of returns filed or otherwise received under this chapter and
other related tax information to the Internal Revenue Service, the tax
commissioner and tax administrators of other municipal corporations.
   (B)   This section does not prohibit the city from publishing or disclosing
statistics in a form that does not disclose information with respect to
particular taxpayers.
(Ord. 22-15, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 881.17  FRAUD.
   No person shall knowingly make, present, aid or assist in the preparation or
presentation of a false or fraudulent report, return, schedule, statement,
claim or document authorized or required by city ordinance or state law to be
filed with the Tax Administrator, or knowingly procure, counsel or advise the
preparation or presentation of such report, return, schedule, statement, claim
or document, or knowingly change, alter or amend, or knowingly procure, counsel
or advise such change, alteration or amendment of the records upon which such
report, return, schedule, statement, claim or document is based with intent to
defraud the city or the Tax Administrator.
(Ord. 22-15, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 881.18  INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   As used in this section.
      “Applicable law.” Means this chapter, the resolutions, ordinances, codes,
directives, instructions and rules adopted by the city provided they impose or
directly or indirectly address the levy, payment, remittance or filing
requirements of the city.
      “Federal short-term rate.” Means the rate of the average market yield on
outstanding marketable obligations of the United States with remaining periods
to maturity of three years or less, as determined under § 1274 of the Internal
Revenue Code, for July of the current year.
      “Income tax”, “estimated income tax”, and “withholding tax.” Means any
income tax, estimated income tax and withholding tax imposed by the city
pursuant to applicable law, including at any time before January 1, 2016.
      “Interest rate as described in division (A) of this section.” Means the
federal short-term rate, rounded to the nearest whole number percent, plus 5%.
The rate shall apply for the calendar year next following the July of the year
in which the federal short-term rate is determined in accordance with the
definition of “federal short-term rate” above.
      “Return.” Includes any tax return, report, reconciliation, schedule and
other document required to be filed with the Tax Administrator or the city by a
taxpayer, employer, any agent of the employer or any other payer pursuant to
applicable law, including at any time before January 1, 2016.
      “Unpaid estimated income tax.” Means estimated income tax due but not
paid by the date the tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      “Unpaid income tax.” Means income tax due but not paid by the date the
income tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      “Unpaid withholding tax.” Means withholding tax due but not paid by the
date the withholding tax is required to be paid under applicable law.
      “Withholding tax.” Includes amounts an employer, any agent of an
employer, or any other payer did not withhold in whole or in part from an
employee’s qualifying wages, but that, under applicable law, the employer,
agent or other payer is required to withhold from an employee’s qualifying
wages.
   (B)   (1)   This section applies to the following:
         (a)   Any return required to be filed under applicable law for taxable
years beginning on or after January 1, 2016; and
         (b)   Income tax, estimated income tax and withholding tax required to
be paid or remitted to the city on or after January 1, 2016.
      (2)   This section does not apply to returns required to be filed or
payments required to be made before January 1, 2016, regardless of the filing
or payment date. Returns required to be filed or payments required to be made
before January 1, 2016, but filed or paid after that date shall be subject to
the ordinances or rules and regulations, as adopted before January 1, 2016, of
the city to which the return is to be filed or the payment is to be made.
   (C)   Should any taxpayer, employer, agent of the employer or other payer
for any reason fail, in whole or in part, to make timely and full payment or
remittance of income tax, estimated income tax or withholding tax or to file
timely with the city any return required to be filed, the following penalties
and interest shall apply.
      (1)   Interest shall be imposed at the rate described in division (A) of
this section, per annum, on all unpaid income tax, unpaid estimated income tax
and unpaid withholding tax.
      (2)   (a)   With respect to unpaid income tax and unpaid estimated income
tax, the city may impose a penalty equal to 15% of the amount not timely paid.
         (b)   With respect to any unpaid withholding tax, the city may impose
a penalty not exceeding 50% of the amount not timely paid.
      (3)   With respect to returns other than estimated income tax returns,
the city may impose a penalty of $25 for each failure to timely file each
return, regardless of the liability shown thereon for each month, or any
fraction thereof, during which the return remains unfiled regardless of the
liability shown thereon. The penalty shall not exceed $150 for each failure.
   (D)   Nothing in this section requires the city to refund or credit any
penalty, amount of interest, charges or additional fees that the city has
properly imposed or collected before January 1, 2016.
   (E)   Nothing in this section limits the authority of the city to abate or
partially abate penalties or interest imposed under this section when the Tax
Administrator determines, in the Tax Administrator’s sole discretion, that such
abatement is appropriate.
   (F)   By October 31 of each year, the city shall publish the rate described
in division (A) of this section applicable to the next succeeding calendar
year.
   (G)   The city may impose on the taxpayer, employer, any agent of the
employer or any other payer the city’s post-judgment collection costs and fees,
including attorney’s fees.
(Ord. 22-15, passed 11-2-2015; Ord. 01-2018, passed 2-5-2018)
§ 881.19  AUTHORITY OF TAX ADMINISTRATOR; VERIFICATION OF INFORMATION.
   (A)   Authority. Nothing in this chapter shall limit the authority of the
Tax Administrator to perform any of the following duties or functions, unless
the performance of such duties or functions is expressly limited by a provision
of the Ohio R.C.:
      (1)   (a)   Exercise all powers whatsoever of a query nature as provided
by law, including the right to inspect books, accounts, records, memorandums
and federal and state income tax returns, to examine persons under oath, to
issue orders or subpoenas for the production of books, accounts, papers,
records, documents and testimony, to take depositions, to apply to a court for
attachment proceedings as for contempt, to approve vouchers for the fees of
officers and witnesses and to administer oaths; and
         (b)   The powers referred to in this division of this section shall be
exercised by the Tax Administrator only in connection with the performance of
the duties respectively assigned to the Tax Administrator under the city’s
income tax ordinance.
      (2)   Appoint agents and prescribe their powers and duties;
      (3)   Confer and meet with officers of other municipal corporations and
states and officers of the United States on any matters pertaining to their
respective official duties as provided by law;
      (4)   Exercise the authority provided by law, including orders from
bankruptcy courts, relative to remitting or refunding taxes, including
penalties and interest thereon, for any reason overpaid. In addition, the Tax
Administrator may investigate any claim of overpayment and, if the Tax
Administrator finds that there has been an overpayment, make a written
statement of the Tax Administrator’s findings, and approve and issue a refund
payable to the taxpayer, the taxpayer’s assigns or legal representative as
provided in this chapter;
      (5)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to consenting to
the compromise and settlement of tax claims;
      (6)   Exercise the authority provided by law relative to the use of
alternative apportionment methods by taxpayers in accordance with §
881.03;
      (7)   (a)   Make all tax findings, determinations, computations and
orders the Tax Administrator is by law authorized and required to make and,
pursuant to time limitations provided by law, on the Tax Administrator’s own
motion, review, re-determine or correct any tax findings, determinations,
computations or orders the Tax Administrator has made.
         (b)   If an appeal has been filed with the Board of Tax Review or
other appropriate tribunal, the Tax Administrator shall not review, re-
determine or correct any tax finding, determination, computation or order which
the Tax Administrator has made, unless such appeal or application is withdrawn
by the appellant or applicant, is dismissed or is otherwise final;
      (8)   Destroy any or all returns or other tax documents in the manner
authorized by law; and
      (9)   Enter into an agreement with a taxpayer to simplify the withholding
obligations described in §
881.04.
   (B)   Verification of Accuracy of Returns and Determination of Liability.
      (1)   A Tax Administrator, or any authorized agent or employee thereof
may examine the books, papers, records and federal and state income tax returns
of any employer, taxpayer or other person that is subject to, or that the Tax
Administrator believes is subject to, the provisions of this chapter for the
purpose of verifying the accuracy of any return made or, if no return was
filed, to ascertain the tax due under this chapter. Upon written request by the
Tax Administrator or a duly authorized agent or employee thereof, every
employer, taxpayer or other person subject to this section is required to
furnish the opportunity for the Tax Administrator, authorized agent or employee
to investigate and examine such books, papers, records and federal and state
income tax returns at a reasonable time and place designated in the request.
      (2)   The records and other documents of any taxpayer, employer or other
person that is subject to, or that a Tax Administrator believes is subject to,
the provisions of this chapter shall be open to the Tax Administrator’s
inspection during business hours and shall be preserved for a period of six
years following the end of the taxable year to which the records or documents
relate, unless the Tax Administrator, in writing, consents to their destruction
within that period, or by order requires that they be kept longer. The Tax
Administrator may require any person, by notice served on that person, to keep
such records as the Tax Administrator determines necessary to show whether or
not that person is liable, and the extent of such liability, for the income tax
levied by the city or for the withholding of such tax.
      (3)   The Tax Administrator may examine under oath any person that the
Tax Administrator reasonably believes has knowledge concerning any income that
was or would have been returned for taxation or any transaction tending to
affect such income. The Tax Administrator may, for this purpose, compel any
such person to attend a hearing or examination and to produce any books,
papers, records and federal and state income tax returns in such person’s
possession or control. The person may be assisted or represented by an
attorney, accountant, bookkeeper or other tax practitioner at any such hearing
or examination. This division does not authorize the practice of law by a
person who is not an attorney.
      (4)   No person issued written notice by the Tax Administrator compelling
attendance at a hearing or examination or the production of books, papers,
records or federal or state income tax returns under this section shall fail to
comply.
   (C)   Identification Information.
      (1)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax Administrator from
requiring any person filing a tax document with the Tax Administrator to
provide identifying information, which may include the person’s Social Security
number, federal employer identification number or other identification number
requested by the Tax Administrator. A person required by the Tax Administrator
to provide identifying information that has experienced any change with respect
to that information shall notify the Tax Administrator of the change before, or
upon, filing the next tax document requiring the identifying information.
      (2)   (a)   If the Tax Administrator makes a request for identifying
information and the Tax Administrator does not receive valid identifying
information within 30 days of making the request, nothing in this chapter
prohibits the Tax Administrator from imposing a penalty upon the person to whom
the request was directed pursuant to §
881.18, in addition to any applicable penalty described in §
881.99.
         (b)   If a person required by the Tax Administrator to provide
identifying information does not notify the Tax Administrator of a change with
respect to that information as required under division (C) of this section
within 30 days after filing the next tax document requiring such identifying
information, nothing in this chapter prohibits the Tax Administrator from
imposing a penalty pursuant to §
881.18.
         (c)   The penalties provided for under divisions (C)(2)(a) and (b) of
this section may be billed and imposed in the same manner as the tax or fee
with respect to which the identifying information is sought and are in addition
to any applicable criminal penalties described in §
881.99 for a violation of §
881.17 and any other penalties that may be imposed by the Tax Administrator by
law.
(Ord. 22-15, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 881.20  REQUEST FOR OPINION OF THE TAX ADMINISTRATOR.
   (A)   An “opinion of the Tax Administrator” means an opinion issued under
this section with respect to prospective municipal income tax liability. It
does not include ordinary correspondence of the Tax Administrator.
   (B)   A taxpayer may submit a written request for an opinion of the Tax
Administrator in accordance with the Rules and Regulations.
   (C)   A taxpayer is not relieved of tax liability for any activity or
transaction related to a request for an opinion that contained any
misrepresentation or omission of one or more material facts.
   (D)   A Tax Administrator may refuse to offer an opinion on any request
received under this section. Such refusal is not subject to appeal.
   (E)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator binds the Tax Administrator only
with respect to the taxpayer for whom the opinion was prepared and does not
bind the Tax Administrator of any other municipal corporation.
   (F)   An opinion of the Tax Administrator issued under this section is not
subject to appeal.
(Ord. 22-15, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 881.21  BOARD OF TAX REVIEW.
   (A)   (1)   The Board of Tax Review shall consist of three members. Two
members shall be appointed by the legislative authority of the city, but such
appointees may not be employees, elected officials or contractors with the city
at any time during their term or in the five years immediately preceding the
date of appointment. One member shall be appointed by the Mayor of the city.
This member may be an employee of the city, but may not be the Director of
Finance or equivalent officer, or the Tax Administrator or other similar
official or an employee directly involved in municipal tax matters, or any
direct subordinate thereof.
      (2)   The term for members of the Board of Tax Review of the city shall
be two years. There is no limit on the number of terms that a member may serve
if the member is reappointed by the legislative authority. The Board member
appointed by the Mayor of the city shall serve at the discretion of the
administrative official.
      (3)   Members of the Board of Tax Review appointed by the legislative
authority may be removed by the legislative authority by majority vote for
malfeasance, misfeasance or nonfeasance in office. To remove such a member, the
legislative authority must give the member a copy of the charges against the
member and afford the member an opportunity to be publicly heard in person or
by counsel in the member’s own defense upon not less than ten days’ notice. The
decision by the legislative authority on the charges is final and not
appealable.
      (4)   A member of the Board of Tax Review who, for any reason, ceases to
meet the qualifications for the position prescribed by this section shall
resign immediately by operation of law.
      (5)   A vacancy in an unexpired term shall be filled in the same manner
as the original appointment within 60 days of when the vacancy was created. Any
member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the expiration of the
term for which the member’s predecessor was appointed shall hold office for the
remainder of such term. No vacancy on the Board of Tax Review shall impair the
power and authority of the remaining members to exercise all the powers of the
Board of Tax Review.
      (6)   If a member is temporarily unable to serve on the Board of Tax
Review due to a conflict of interest, illness, absence or similar reason, the
legislative authority or top administrative official that appointed the member
shall appoint another individual to temporarily serve on the Board of Tax
Review in the member’s place. The appointment of such an individual shall be
subject to the same requirements and limitations as are applicable to the
appointment of the member temporarily unable to serve.
   (B)   Whenever a Tax Administrator issues an assessment, the Tax
Administrator shall notify the taxpayer in writing at the same time of the
taxpayer’s right to appeal the assessment, the manner in which the taxpayer may
appeal the assessment, and the address to which the appeal should be directed.
   (C)   Any person who has been issued an assessment may appeal the assessment
to the Board of Tax Review by filing a request with the Board of Tax Review.
The request shall be in writing, shall specify the reason or reasons why the
assessment should be deemed incorrect or unlawful, and shall be filed within 60
days after the taxpayer receives the assessment.
   (D)   The Board of Tax Review shall schedule a hearing to be held within 60
days after receiving an appeal of an assessment under division (C) of this
section, unless the taxpayer requests additional time to prepare or waives a
hearing. If the taxpayer does not waive the hearing, the taxpayer may appear
before the Board of Tax Review and may be represented by an attorney at law,
certified public accountant, or other representative. The Board of Tax Review
may allow a hearing to be continued as jointly agreed to by the parties. In
such a case, the hearing must be completed within 120 days after the first day
of the hearing unless the parties agree otherwise.
   (E)   The Board of Tax Review may affirm, reverse or modify the Tax
Administrator’s assessment or any part of that assessment. The Board of Tax
Review shall issue a final determination on the appeal within 90 days after the
Board of Tax Review’s final hearing on the appeal, and send a copy of its final
determination by ordinary mail to all of the parties to the appeal within 15
days after issuing the final determination. The taxpayer or the Tax
Administrator may appeal the Board of Tax Review’s final determination as
provided in Ohio R.C. 5717.011.
   (F)   The Board of Tax Review created pursuant to this section shall adopt
rules governing its procedures and shall keep a record of its transactions.
Such records are not public records available for inspection under Ohio R.C.
149.43. Hearings requested by a taxpayer before a Board of Tax Review created
pursuant to this section are not meetings of a public body subject to Ohio R.C.
121.22.
(Ord. 22-15, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 881.22  AUTHORITY TO CREATE RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Nothing in this chapter prohibits the legislative authority of the
city, or a Tax Administrator pursuant to authority granted to the Administrator
by resolution or ordinance, to adopt rules to administer an income tax imposed
by the city in accordance with this chapter. Such rules shall not conflict with
or be inconsistent with any provision of this chapter. Taxpayers are hereby
required to comply not only with the requirements of this chapter, but also to
comply with the Rules and Regulations.
   (B)   All rules adopted under this section shall be published and posted on
the internet.
(Ord. 22-15, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 881.23  RENTAL AND LEASED PROPERTY.
   (A)   All property owners of real property located in the city, who rent or
otherwise lease the same, or any part thereof, to any person for residential
dwelling purposes, including apartments, rooms and other rental accommodations,
during any calendar year, or part thereof, commencing with the effective date
of this section, shall file with the Tax Administrator on or before the January
31 first following such calendar year a written report disclosing the name,
address and also telephone number, if available, of each tenant known to have
occupied on December 31 during such calendar year such apartment, room or other
residential dwelling rental property.
   (B)   The Tax Administrator may order the appearance before him or her, or
his or her duly authorized agent, of any person whom he or she believes to have
any knowledge of the name, address and telephone number of any tenant of
residential rental real property in the city. The Tax Administrator, or his or
her duly authorized agent, is authorized to examine any person, under oath,
concerning the name, address and telephone number of any tenant of residential
real property located in the city. The Tax Administrator, or his or her duly
authorized agent, may compel the production of papers and records and the
attendance of all persons before him or her, whether as parties or witnesses,
whenever he or she believes such person has knowledge of the name, address and
telephone number of any tenant of residential real property in the city.
   (C)   Any property owner or person that violates one or more of the
following shall be subject to §
881.99 of this chapter:
      (1)   Fails, refuses or neglects to timely file a written report required
by division (A) hereof;
      (2)   Makes an incomplete or intentionally false written report required
by division (A) hereof;
      (3)   Fails to appear before the Tax Administrator or any duly authorized
agent and to produce and disclose any tenant information pursuant to any order
or subpoena of the Tax Administrator as authorized in this section; or
      (4)   Fails to comply with the provisions of this section or any order or
subpoena of the Tax Administrator.
(Ord. 22-15, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 881.24  SAVINGS CLAUSE.
   This chapter shall not apply to any person, firm or corporation, or to any
property as to whom or which it is beyond the power of Council to impose the
tax herein provided for. Any sentence, clause, section or part of this chapter
or any tax against or exception granted any individual or any of the several
groups of persons, or forms of income specified herein if found to be
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid, such unconstitutionality, illegality or
invalidity shall affect only such clause, sentence, section or part of this
chapter and shall not affect or impair any of the remaining provisions,
sentences, clauses, sections or other parts of this chapter. It is hereby
declared to be the intention of Council that this chapter would have been
adopted had such unconstitutional, illegal or invalid sentence, or part hereof,
not been included therein.
(Ord. 22-15, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 881.25  COLLECTION OF TAX AFTER TERMINATION OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   This chapter shall continue effective insofar as the levy of taxes is
concerned until repealed, and insofar as the collection of taxes levied
hereunder and actions or proceedings for collecting any tax so levied or
enforcing any provisions of this chapter are concerned, it shall continue
effective until all of said taxes levied hereunder in the aforesaid periods are
fully paid and any and all suits and prosecutions for the collection of said
taxes or for the punishment of violations of this chapter shall have been fully
terminated, subject to the limitations contained in §§
881.12 and
881.99 hereof.
   (B)   Annual returns due for all or any part of the last effective year of
this chapter shall be due on the date provided in §§
881.04 and
881.05 of this chapter as though the same were continuing.
(Ord. 22-15, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 881.26  ADOPTION OF RITA RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The city hereby adopts the Regional Income Tax Agency (RITA) Rules and
Regulations, including amendments that may be made from time to time, for use
as the city’s Income Tax Rules and Regulations. In the event of a conflict with
any provision(s) of the city income tax ordinance and the RITA Rules and
Regulations, the ordinance will supersede. Until and if the contractual
relationship between the city and RITA ceases, this section will supersede all
other provisions within this chapter regarding promulgation of rules and
regulations by the Tax Administrator.
(Ord. 22-15, passed 11-2-2015)
§ 881.27  ELECTION TO BE SUBJECT TO R.C. §§ 718.80 TO 718.95.
   (A)   The city hereby adopts and incorporates herein by reference R.C. §§
718.80 to 718.95 for tax years beginning on or after January 1, 2018.
   (B)   A taxpayer, as defined in division (C) of this section, may elect to
be subject to R.C. §§ 718.80 to 718.95 in lieu of the provisions of this
chapter.
   (C)   “Taxpayer” has the same meaning as in R.C. § 718.01, except that
“taxpayer” does not include natural persons or entities subject to the tax
imposed under R.C. Chapter 5745. “Taxpayer” may include receivers, assigners or
trustees in bankruptcy when such persons are required to assume the role of a
taxpayer.
(Ord. 10-2018, passed 4-23-2018)
§ 881.99  VIOLATIONS; PENALTIES.
   (A)   Whoever violates §§
881.04,
881.16(A) or
881.17 by failing to remit city income taxes deducted and withheld from an
employee, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be
subject to a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a term of up to
six months, or both. If the individual that commits the violation is an
employee or official of the city, the individual is subject to discharge from
employment or dismissal from office.
   (B)   Any person who discloses information received from the Internal
Revenue Service in violation of §
881.16(A) shall be guilty of a felony of the fifth degree and shall be subject
to a fine of not more than $5,000 plus the costs of prosecution, or
imprisonment for a term not exceeding five years, or both. If the individual
that commits the violation is an employee or official of the city, the
individual is subject to discharge from employment or dismissal from office.
   (C)   Each instance of access or disclosure in violation of §
881.16(A) constitutes a separate offense.
   (D)   If not otherwise specified herein, no person shall:
      (1)   Fail, neglect or refuse to make any return or declaration required
by this chapter;
      (2)   File any incomplete or false return;
      (3)   Fail, neglect or refuse to pay the tax, penalties or interest
imposed by this chapter;
      (4)   Refuse to permit the Tax Administrator or any duly authorized agent
or employee to examine his or her books, records, papers and federal and state
income tax returns relating to the income or net profits of a taxpayer;
      (5)   Fail to appear before the Tax Administrator and to produce his or
her books, records, papers or federal and state income tax returns relating to
the income or net profits of a taxpayer upon order or subpoena of the Tax
Administrator;
      (6)   Refuse to disclose to the Tax Administrator any information with
respect to the income or net profits of a taxpayer;
      (7)   Fail to comply with the provisions of this chapter or any order or
subpoena of the Tax Administrator authorized hereby;
      (8)   Give to an employer false information as to his or her true name,
correct Social Security number and residence address, or fail to promptly
notify an employer of any change in residence address and date thereof; and/or
      (9)   Attempt to do anything whatsoever to avoid the payment of the whole
or any part of the tax, penalties or interest imposed by this chapter.
   (E)   Any person who violates any of the provisions in division (D) of this
section shall be subject to the penalties provided for in division (A) of this
section.
(Ord. 22-15, passed 11-2-2015)
CHAPTER 884:  HOTEL TAX
Section
884.01   Definitions
884.02   Levy of tax
884.03   Collection of tax; examination and audit; interest on unpaid taxes
884.04   Rules and regulations
884.05   Appeals
884.06   Confidentiality of returns
884.07   Violations
884.99   Penalty
Statutory reference:
   Excise tax on hotel lodging transactions, see Ohio R.C. 505.56, 5739.01(B),
5739.02(C)
   Hotels, see Ohio R.C. Chapter 3731
   Innkeepers, see Ohio R.C. Chapter 4721
§ 884.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter.
   “Excise tax.” The tax levied by the city on a transaction by which lodging
by a hotel is or is to be furnished to a transient guest.
   “Hotel.” Every establishment kept, used, maintained, advertised or held out
to the public to be a place where sleeping accommodations are offered to guests
and in which five or more rooms are used for the accommodation of such guests,
whether such rooms are in one or several structures.
   “Person.” Includes individuals, receivers, assignees, trustees in
bankruptcy, estates, firms, partnerships, associations, joint stock companies,
joint ventures, clubs, societies, corporations, the state and its political
subdivisions, and combinations of individuals of any form.
   “Transient guest.” A person occupying a room or rooms for sleeping
accommodations for less than 30 consecutive days.
(Ord. 54-73, passed 9-4-1973)
§ 884.02  LEVY OF TAX.
   There is hereby levied upon every person who is a transient guest in a hotel
and pays a charge for such lodging a tax of 7% on the amount paid for the
lodging in such hotel, irrespective of whether such lodging  is paid by cash or
credit card. The tax shall apply to every hotel within the city for which a
charge is made, notwithstanding that the reservation of the lodging is made
outside the city.
(Ord. 28-82, passed 5-17-1982)
§ 884.03  COLLECTION OF TAX; EXAMINATION AND AUDIT; INTEREST ON UNPAID TAXES.
   (A)   Every person receiving any payment upon which a tax is levied under
this chapter shall collect the amount of the tax imposed from the person making
the lodging payment. The tax required to be collected under this chapter shall
be deemed to be held in trust by the person required to collect the same until
paid to the Director of Finance as herein provided.
   (B)   Any person required to collect the tax imposed under this chapter who
fails to collect the same, or having collected the same, fails to remit the
same to the Director of Finance in the manner prescribed by this chapter,
whether such failure is the result of his or her own act or the result of acts
or conditions beyond his or her control, shall nevertheless be personally
liable to the city for the amount of such tax, and shall, unless the remittance
is made as herein required, be guilty of a violation of this chapter. The tax
imposed hereunder shall be collected at the time the lodging charge is paid by
the transient guest seeking lodging in a hotel and shall be reported and
remitted by the person receiving the tax to the Director of Finance in monthly
installments and remittances therefor on or before the thirtieth day of the
month next succeeding the end of the monthly period in which the tax is
collected or received. Payment or remittance of the tax collected may be made
by check, unless payment or remittance is otherwise required by the Director of
Finance, but payment by check shall not relieve the person collecting the tax
from liability for payment and remittance of the tax to the Director of Finance
unless the check is honored and is in the full and correct amount.
   (C)   The person receiving any payment for lodgings from a transient guest
shall make out a return upon such forms and setting forth such information as
the Director of Finance may require, showing the amount of the tax upon
lodgings for which he or she is liable for the preceding monthly period, and
shall sign and transmit the same to the Director of Finance with a remittance
for such amount. However, the Director of Finance may, at his or her
discretion, require verified annual returns from any person receiving lodging
payments setting forth such additional information as he or she may deem
necessary to determine correctly the amount of tax collected and payable. No
person shall fail to comply with any requirement of the Director as to report
and remittance of the tax as required. The books, records and accounts of any
person collecting a tax herein levied shall, as to lodging and tax collections,
be at all reasonable times subject to examination and audit by the Director of
Finance. If the tax imposed by this chapter is not paid when due, there shall
be added, as part of the tax, interest at the rate of 1% per month from the
time the tax became due until paid.
(Ord. 54-73, passed 9-4-1973)
§ 884.04  RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The Director of Finance shall have the power to adopt rules and
regulations, not inconsistent with the provisions of this chapter, for carrying
out and enforcing the payment, collection and remittance of the tax herein
levied. A copy of such rules and regulations shall be published in the city
record at least once before they become effective and copies shall be printed
and made available in the office of the Director. Failure or refusal to comply
with any such rule or regulation shall be deemed a violation of this chapter.
   (B)   Until such time as rules and regulations are promulgated under this
section, the rules and regulations of the state’s Department of Taxation
relating to excise taxes in effect on December 20, 1971, except as the same may
conflict with provisions of this chapter, shall be deemed to be the rules and
regulations hereunder.
(Ord. 54-73, passed 9-4-1973)
§ 884.05  APPEALS.
   Appeals from any ruling of the Director of Finance under this chapter shall
be made to Council in the same manner as other appeals to Council. Council
shall have authority to annul, modify or affirm any such ruling appealed from
in conformity with the intent and purpose of this chapter.
(Ord. 54-73, passed 9-4-1973)
§ 884.06  CONFIDENTIALITY OF RETURNS.
   All returns and information relating to the business of any person required
to collect the tax imposed by this chapter that comes into the possession of
the Director of Finance, his or her agents and employees shall be held
confidential. No disclosures thereof shall be made unless ordered by a court of
competent jurisdiction. However, the Director may furnish the Bureau of
Internal Revenue, Treasury Department of the United States, with copies of
returns filed.
(Ord. 54-73, passed 9-4-1973)
§ 884.07  VIOLATIONS.
   No person charged by this chapter with the duty of collecting or paying the
taxes imposed by this chapter shall purposely or knowingly fail or refuse to
charge and collect or to pay such taxes, or to make return to the Director of
Finance as required by this chapter, or to permit the Director of Finance, or
his or her duly authorized agent, to examine his or her books and other
records, in or upon any premises where the same are kept, to the extent
necessary to verify any return made or to ascertain and assess the tax imposed
by this chapter if no return was made, or to maintain and keep such books and
records for three years or such lesser or greater time as may be permitted or
required by the Director of Finance.
(Ord. 54-73, passed 9-4-1973)
§ 884.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided. Ordinance
28-82, passed May 17, 1982, amended this section to provide that violations of
any of the provisions of this chapter are misdemeanors of the first degree,
which penalty is identical to the general Code penalty. Ordinance 28-82,
therefore, repealed, by omission, former §
884.99 which provided that persons violating §
884.07 were to be disqualified from acting in an official capacity in
connection with the assessment or collection of taxes under this chapter.
CHAPTER 886:  MOTOR VEHICLE EXCISE TAX
Section
886.01   Purposes; levy; rate.
Cross-reference:
   Display of license plates; registration; obstructions, see §
436.09
   Use of illegal license plates, see §
436.10
Statutory reference:
   Licensing of motor vehicles, see Ohio R.C. Chapter 4503
   Local motor vehicle license tax, see Ohio R.C. Chapter 4504
   Municipal levy, see Ohio R.C. 4504.06 et seq.
§ 886.01  PURPOSES; LEVY; RATE.
   (A)   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4504.172, and for the purposes of paying the
costs and expenses of enforcing and administering the tax levied by this
chapter; to supplement revenue already available and that may become available
to the city under Ohio R.C. 4504.04, 4504.17 or 4507.171; and to provide
additional revenue for the purposes set forth in those sections; and without
regard to any tax being levied pursuant to Ohio R.C. 4504.06, or received
pursuant to 4504.04; and in addition to the tax levied pursuant to Ohio R.C.
4503.02, 4503.07 and 4503.18, there is hereby levied a tax upon the operation
of motor vehicles on the public roads or highways of the city on all motor
vehicles, the district of registration of which, as defined in Ohio R.C.
4503.10, is in the city. The tax shall be at the rate of $5 per motor vehicle
for each year while the tax is in effect shall be in addition to the taxes at
the rates specified in Ohio R.C. 4503.04 and 4503.16, shall be applicable to
motor vehicle registrations for the registration year beginning January 1,
1990, and shall continue in effect until repealed.
   (B)   The Clerk of Courts is hereby authorized and directed to certify and
deliver a copy of this section to the State Registrar of Motor Vehicles not
later than July 1, 1989.
(Ord. 88-155, passed 10-17-1988)
CHAPTER 888:  COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT AREAS
Section
888.01   Findings
888.02   Establishment
888.03   Eligibility
888.04   Exemptions
888.05   Percentage of exemption
888.06   Application fees
888.07   Housing Officer
888.08   Community Reinvestment Area Housing Council
888.09   Tax Incentive Review Council
888.10   Right of Council to review designation
Cross-reference:
   Community Improvement Corporation, see
Chapter 260
Statutory reference:
   Assessing real estate, see Ohio R.C. Chapter 5713
   Community reinvestment areas, see Ohio R.C. 3735.65 et seq.
   Tax levy law, see Ohio R.C. Chapter 5705
   Taxable property; exemptions, see Ohio R.C. Chapter 5709, 5713.07 to
5713.082
§ 888.01  FINDINGS.
   Council hereby finds and determines that the area to be designated as the
Community Reinvestment Area constitutes an area in which housing facilities or
structures of historical significance are located, and in which new
construction or repair of existing facilities has been discouraged.
(Ord. 58-96, passed 7-22-1996)
§ 888.02  ESTABLISHMENT.
   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3735.66, a Community Reinvestment Area is hereby
established as that area described and depicted in Exhibit “A” attached to
original Ordinance 58-96, passed July 22, 1996, and made a part hereof as if
fully rewritten herein.
(Ord. 58-96, passed 7-22-1996)
§ 888.03  ELIGIBILITY.
   Only commercial office properties, industrial facilities and existing
qualified multi-family housing facilities used consistent with the applicable
zoning regulations within the area will be eligible to apply for  exemptions
under this chapter. Commercial retail uses are not eligible to apply for
exemptions under this chapter. As used in this chapter, “existing qualified
multi-family housing facilities” shall mean multi-family housing facilities
with at least 500 units in one or more buildings owned by the same person on
the same or adjacent parcels of land.
(Ord. 58-96, passed 7-22-1996)
§ 888.04  EXEMPTIONS.
   Within the Community Reinvestment Area, new construction and the renovation
of commercial office structures and industrial facilities and the renovation of
existing qualified multi-family housing facilities are hereby declared to be
public purposes and exempt from real property taxation as provided herein and,
in accordance with the procedures and requirements of Ohio R.C. 3735.67, the
exemption periods shall be as follows:
   (A)   Not more than 15 years for new construction of commercial office
facilities;
   (B)   Not more than 12 years for renovation or remodeling of commercial
office facilities;
   (C)   Not more than 15 years for new construction of industrial facilities;
   (D)   Not more than 12 years for renovation or remodeling of industrial
facilities; and
   (E)   Twelve years for the remodeling and renovation of qualified multi-
family housing facilities; with those periods for commercial office and
industrial property to be negotiated and determined on a case-by-case basis in
advance of commencement of construction, all in accordance with Schedule 1
following the text of this chapter, and Ohio R.C. 3735.67, and shall be set
forth in writing in a Community Reinvestment Area agreement (a “CRA Agreement”)
pursuant to and in accordance with Ohio R.C. 3735.671, each of which CRA
Agreements shall be approved by Council.
(Ord. 131-96, passed 10-21-1996)
§ 888.05  PERCENTAGE OF EXEMPTION.
   (A)   The percentage of tax exemption on the increase in the assessed
valuation resulting from improvements to qualified multi-family housing
facilities shall be 50%. The percentage of tax exemption on the increase in the
assessed valuation resulting from improvements to commercial office and
industrial real property shall be negotiated and determined on a case-by-case
basis in advance of commencement of construction, consistent with the
guidelines set forth in Schedule 1 following the text of this chapter, as
amended, all in accordance with Ohio R.C. 3765.67, and shall be set forth in
writing in a CRA Agreement.
   (B)   There shall be no exemptions within the area for new residential
construction, the remodeling or renovation of single-family housing facilities
or commercial retail uses.
(Ord. 58-96, passed 7-22-1996)
§ 888.06  APPLICATION FEES.
   All projects in the area seeking tax abatement pursuant to this chapter are
required to comply with the state’s application fee requirements of Ohio R.C.
3735.672(C).
(Ord. 58-96, passed 7-22-1996)
§ 888.07  HOUSING OFFICER.
   To administer and implement the provisions of this chapter, the city’s
Community Development Director/Building Commissioner is hereby designated as
the Housing Officer, as described in Ohio R.C. 3735.65 through 3735.70.
(Ord. 192-98, passed 10-19-1998)
§ 888.08  COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT AREA HOUSING COUNCIL.
   (A)   A Community Reinvestment Area Housing Council shall be created,
consisting of two members appointed by the Mayor of the city, two members
appointed by Council, and one member appointed by the City Planning Commission.
A majority of those members shall then appoint two additional members who shall
be residents of the city. Terms of the members of the Housing Council shall be
for three years. An unexpired term resulting from a vacancy in the Housing
Council shall be filled in the same manner as the initial appointment was made.
   (B)   The Community Reinvestment Area Housing Council shall make an annual
inspection of the properties within the area for which an exemption has been
granted under Ohio R.C. 3735.67. The Housing Council shall also hear appeals
under Ohio R.C. 3735.70.
(Ord. 58-96, passed 7-22-1996)
§ 888.09  TAX INCENTIVE REVIEW COUNCIL.
   A Tax Incentive Review Council shall be established pursuant to Ohio R.C.
5709.85, and shall consist of three members appointed by the Board of County
Commissioners of the county in accordance with Ohio R.C. 5709.85(A)(2); two
members appointed by the Mayor with the concurrence of Council; the County
Auditor or his or her designee, in accordance with Ohio R.C. 5709.85(A)(2); an
individual appointed by the Board of Education of the Brecksville-Broadview
Heights City School District; and an individual appointed by the North Royalton
City School District; and an individual appointed by the Board of Education of
the Cuyahoga Valley Joint Vocational School District. At least two members of
the Tax Incentive Review Council shall be residents of the city. The Tax
Incentive Review Council shall annually review the compliance of all agreements
involving the granting of exemptions for commercial or industrial real property
improvements under Ohio R.C. 3735.671 and make written recommendations to
Council for continuation, modification or cancellation of those agreements
based upon the performance of each agreement. The Tax Incentive Review Council
shall annually review the compliance of each recipient of a tax exemption under
Ohio R.C. 3735.67 with the nondiscriminatory hiring policies developed by the
city under Ohio R.C. 5709.832 and make written recommendations for enhancing
compliance with such nondiscriminatory hiring policies.
(Ord. 58-96, passed 7-22-1996)
§ 888.10  RIGHT OF COUNCIL TO REVIEW DESIGNATION.
   Council hereby reserves the right to reevaluate the designation of the
Community Reinvestment Area after December 31, 1996, at which time Council may
direct the Housing Officer not to accept any new applications for exemptions,
as described in Ohio R.C. 3735.67, with respect to any additional new
construction thereafter commenced in the Community Reinvestment Area.
(Ord. 58-96, passed 7-22-1996)
PART X: STREETS, UTILITIES AND PUBLIC SERVICES CODE
TITLE TWO - STREET AND SIDEWALK AREAS
   
CHAP. 1020.   STREET IMPROVEMENTS
   
CHAP. 1022.   EXCAVATIONS
   
CHAP. 1023.   DRIVEWAYS
   
CHAP. 1024.   SIDEWALKS
   
CHAP. 1026.   TREES
   
CHAP. 1028.   SNOW REMOVAL FOR SENIOR CITIZENS, PHYSICALLY DISABLED PERSONS AND
CITY OFFICIALS
TITLE FOUR - UTILITIES
   
CHAP. 1040.   WATER
   
CHAP. 1041.   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
   
CHAP. 1042.   SEWERS GENERALLY
   
CHAP. 1043.   SEWER RATES AND CHARGES
   
CHAP. 1044.   CONNECTIONS TO EPA-FINANCED SEWERAGE SYSTEM
   
CHAP. 1045.   GAS
   
CHAP. 1046.   ELECTRICITY
   
CHAP. 1047.   STORM DRAINAGE
   
CHAP. 1048.   SEPTIC SYSTEMS
   
CHAP. 1049.   POST-CONSTRUCTION WATER QUALITY RUNOFF
TITLE SIX - OTHER PUBLIC SERVICES
   
CHAP. 1060.   GARBAGE AND RUBBISH COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
   
CHAP. 1062.   PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
   
CHAP. 1064.   ALARM SYSTEMS
TITLE TWO:  STREET AND SIDEWALK AREAS
   
CHAP. 1020.   STREET IMPROVEMENTS
   
CHAP. 1022.   EXCAVATIONS
   
CHAP. 1023.   DRIVEWAYS
   
CHAP. 1024.   SIDEWALKS
   
CHAP. 1026.   TREES
   
CHAP. 1028.   SNOW REMOVAL FOR SENIOR CITIZENS, PHYSICALLY DISABLED PERSONS AND
CITY OFFICIALS
CHAPTER 1020: STREET IMPROVEMENTS
Section
1020.01   Filling streets; permit required
1020.02   Plan and sketch required; issuance of permit; fee
1020.03   Equitable remedies
1020.04   Asphalt paved surface requirements
1020.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Obstruction and special uses of public ways, see
Chapter 412
   Street improvements in subdivisions, see §
1248.07
   Street lighting, see
Chapter 1330
   Street maintenance in subdivisions, see §
1248.14
   Street planning in subdivisions, see §§
1246.02(A),
1246.03
   Street trees in subdivisions, see §
1248.09
§ 1020.01  FILLING STREETS; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall fill in with dirt, stone or any other similar material any
portion of any public street without first obtaining a permit therefor from the
Building Commissioner.
(Ord. 28-59, passed 9-28-1959)
§ 1020.02  PLAN AND SKETCH REQUIRED; ISSUANCE OF PERMIT; FEE.
   Any person desiring to fill in a street as provided in §
1020.01 shall file with the Building Commissioner a plan of such proposed work,
containing the name and address of the person making such application, the
location where the proposed work is to be done, the name of the owner thereof
and the area and depth of the fill to be made, which plan shall have attached
thereto a sketch of the present grade and the proposed grade after completion,
which sketch shall be drawn to a scale of one inch to a foot. Upon receipt of
such plan and sketch, the Building Commissioner shall forward the same to the
Foreman of the Street Division who, after examining the same and being
satisfied that such work will not interfere with the proper drainage of the
street, shall endorse his or her approval thereon. Upon such approval, the
Building Commissioner shall issue the permit, the fee for which shall be $5.
(Ord. 28-59, passed 9-28-1959)
§ 1020.03  EQUITABLE REMEDIES.
   The application of the penalty provided for in §
202.99 shall not be deemed to prevent or limit the city from availing itself of
any other remedy it might have to prevent such work or to cause the removal of
such work in the street even though a permit has been issued.
(Ord. 28-59, passed 9-28-1959)
§ 1020.04  ASPHALT PAVED SURFACE REQUIREMENTS.
   All asphalt paved surfaces in the city shall be composed of a nine-inch 301
bituminous aggregate base course and a two-inch 404 finish course.
(Ord. 89-87, passed 7-17-1989)
§ 1020.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
202.99 for general code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 1022:  EXCAVATIONS
Section
1022.01   Permit required; application information
1022.02   Permit fee
1022.03   Bond required; inspection
1022.04   Tunneling; backfilling
1022.05   Barricades and warning lights
1022.06   Flag persons; other safety precautions
1022.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Barricades and warning lights, see §
660.09
   Fees for excavations, see §
1449.08(T)
   Street improvements, see
Chapter 1020
Statutory reference:
   Digging, excavating and piling earth on streets, see Ohio R.C. 5589.10
   Excavation liability, see Ohio R.C. 723.49 et seq.
   Openings by the municipality, see Ohio R.C. 723.02
§ 1022.01  PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION INFORMATION.
   No person, other than one carrying out a contract with the city, or a public
utility in case of an emergency, shall make an opening or remove any pavement
in any street or other public way or public ground in the city without first
filing with the City Engineer a written or printed application for a permit
therefor, setting forth and indicating therein the location, kind and extent of
the pavement to be taken up and the number, purpose and size of openings or
excavations which are desired or necessary.
(Ord. 21-86, passed 3-3-1986; Ord. 156-12, passed 10-15-2012; Ord. 33-2017,
passed 12-18-2017)
§ 1022.02  PERMIT FEE.
   The applicant shall pay to the Finance Department, for the benefit of the
General Fund, a fee as set forth in §
1449.08(T) before a permit is issued by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 33-2017, passed 12-18-2017)
§ 1022.03  BOND REQUIRED; INSPECTION.
   (A)   Before an excavation permit is issued, the applicant shall deposit
with the Finance Department cash, a certified check or surety bond for $5,000
for four or fewer openings, and $10,000 for five or more openings, to cover the
cost of repairing and relaying the pavement to be removed and the cost of any
new material required. However, any public utility company duly licensed by the
state or private contractor approved by the City Engineer may deposit, in lieu
of cash or a certified check, a surety bond issued by an insurance company
licensed to do business in the state in the amount specified in this division
(A). If the pavement is not, in the sole judgment of the city, properly
repaired and re-laid, work areas not properly restored to original condition
and/or damage to other infrastructure as a result of the work performed, the
Director of Public Service shall make, or cause to be made, such repairs as are
necessary in his or her sole judgment, and the costs thereof, together with any
other expenses incurred by the city, shall be charged against the deposit or
surety bond, and the balance shall be returned to the applicant after the
completion of the repairs or repaving. If the deposit is insufficient to
reimburse the city, the Director shall issue a warrant for the collection of
the remainder due the city.
   (B)   Before a permit is issued, the City Engineer may require any public
utility or contractor, at its sole cost, to provide an inspection of the
project, utilizing a city inspector approved by the City Engineer.
   (C)   Notwithstanding division (A) hereof, an applicant may be issued an
excavation permit upon the posting of cash, a certified check or surety bond
for $1,000, subject to the other conditions provided in division (A) hereof,
if, in the opinion of the Director, the excavation does not encroach on the
pavement or the berm of a street or other public way.
(Ord. 73-92, passed 7-20-1992; Ord. 33-2017, passed 12-18-2017)
§ 1022.04  TUNNELING; BACKFILLING.
   (A)   No tunneling or directional boring under the pavement shall be
permitted, except with the consent of the City Engineer.
   (B)   Crushed limestone or other approved, compactable, granular backfill
material shall in all cases be used to fill trenches excavated as provided in
this chapter, to the full depth of such trenches, and this fill shall be
maintained by the person to whom the permit is issued, to the level of the
original pavement, until the pavement has been repaired by the Foreman of the
Street Division.
(Ord. 28-53, passed 11-23-1953; Ord. 156-12, passed 10-15-2012)
§ 1022.05  BARRICADES AND WARNING LIGHTS.
   The person to whom the permit is issued shall at all times keep all openings
and obstructions caused by removing the pavement carefully guarded and
protected. During the time from one-half hour after sunset to one-half hour
before sunrise, such permittee shall define such openings or obstructions by
red or amber lights, and shall take such other precautions as are necessary to
guard against accidents. At all times the work shall be done so as to cause the
least inconvenience to the property owners and the general public.
(Ord. 28-53, passed 11-23-1953)
§ 1022.06  FLAG PERSONS; OTHER SAFETY PRECAUTIONS.
   (A)   Whenever any public utility or other person finds it necessary to cut,
open, excavate, tunnel, bore, surface, resurface or repair any street or park
or operate any vehicle on the streets in connection with any work on the street
or on the adjacent berm, a flag person shall be at the scene at all times to
assist in the direction of traffic and protect the residents whether they are
walking, bicycling or traveling by vehicle. Such flag person shall be trained
in traffic control.
   (B)   In the event that the public utility or other person cannot furnish a
flag person with the qualifications set forth in division (A) hereof, the Chief
of Police shall furnish a qualified flag person.
   (C)   The compensation of the flag person shall be assumed by the public
utility or other person performing the work and shall be paid directly to the
flag person in the same manner and pay period as other employees on the
project.
   (D)   Whenever workers are not actively engaged in performing work on any
such project, there shall be adequate warning devices, barricades and lights
placed around the site of the project so as to protect the public from injury.
The placing and location of safety devices shall be under the direction of the
Chief of Police or such other person designated by him or her to act as his or
her agent.
(Ord. 61-75, passed 7-14-1975; Ord. 156-12, passed 10-15-2012)
§ 1022.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
202.99 for general code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 1023:  DRIVEWAYS
Section
1023.01   Construction specifications for driveways in residential districts
1023.02   Specifications for driveways in residential districts
1023.03   Construction specifications for access driveways and aprons
1023.04   Specifications for access driveways
1023.05   Specifications for access driveway aprons
Cross-reference:
   Paving and drainage of driveways in Class B-3 Districts, see §
1272.13
   Right-of-way at private driveway, alley or building, see §
432.20
   Snow removal program, see
Chapter 1028
   Speed limits on private driveways, see §
434.035
   Stop signs at private driveways, see §
432.205
   Temporary driveways and protective plankings, see
Chapter 1336
§ 1023.01  CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS FOR DRIVEWAYS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   All driveways constructed in residential districts shall be
constructed with a hard surface.
   (B)   A hard surface shall be deemed to be any of the following:
      (1)   Concrete;
      (2)   Asphalt; or
      (3)   Any other permanent material approved by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 80-90, passed 6-18-1990; Ord. 89-07, passed 7-16-2007; Ord. 18-15, passed
8-31-2015)
§ 1023.02  SPECIFICATIONS FOR DRIVEWAYS IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   Residential driveways shall be located not less than three feet from the
property line and shall not be more than 20 feet wide. A drive pad equal to the
width of the garage and extending 30 feet from the front of the garage may be
installed in the case of a garage that is wider than 20 feet, however one edge
shall be tapered at a deflection of 30 to 45 degrees to meet the specified
driveway width. Drive aprons shall be flared three feet at each side where they
meet the existing roadway. Concrete aprons installed on a street without curbs
shall terminate 18 inches from the edge of the existing roadway and the
remaining area filled with asphalt. The grade of the apron shall not exceed 8%
for a distance of ten feet from the sidewalk and the maximum driveway grade at
any point shall not exceed 12%.
(Ord. 142-03, passed 9-15-2003; Ord. 89-07, passed 7-16-2007; Ord. 02-15,
passed 1-5-2015; Ord. 18-15, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 1023.03  CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS FOR ACCESS DRIVEWAYS AND APRONS.
   (A)   All access driveways and aprons shall be constructed with a hard
surface.
   (B)   A hard surface shall be deemed to be any of the following:
      (1)   Concrete; or
      (2)   Asphalt.
   (C)   Concrete quality, proportioning, mixing, finishing, curing, joints,
isolation joints, time and temperature of pour should follow the ACI 318
manual. Isolation joint material thickness shall be one-half inch in thickness
and shall match the depth/thickness of the pour. The driveway thickness shall
be a minimum four inches on a four-inch base of approved tamped fill base or
undisturbed earth. Aprons thickness shall be six inches on a four-inch base of
approved tamped fill base or undisturbed earth. Reinforcing can be with steel
bar, wire mesh or fiber mesh. The contractor shall provide access to a batch
plant delivery tickets if requested by the Building Official. This report
should include the specifications of the concrete, batch report(s), time and
temperature, address of the project and the name of the concrete supplier and
contractor installing the concrete.
(Ord. 89-07, passed 7-16-2007; Ord. 18-15, passed 8-31-2015)
§ 1023.04  SPECIFICATIONS FOR ACCESS DRIVEWAYS.
   Access driveways shall be located not less than three feet from the property
line. A hard surface drive pad shall extend a minimum of 20 feet from the
street right-of-way. The grade of the driveway at any point shall not exceed
12%.
(Ord. 89-07, passed 7-16-2007)
§ 1023.05  SPECIFICATIONS FOR ACCESS DRIVEWAY APRONS.
   Access driveway aprons shall be of hard surface and extend from the edge of
the street to the end of street right-of-way (approximately 15 feet). The grade
of the apron shall not exceed 8% for a distance of ten feet from the sidewalk.
(Ord. 89-07, passed 7-16-2007)
CHAPTER 1024:  SIDEWALKS
Section
1024.01   Repair and construction; permit required; application for permit
1024.02   Inspections; fee; replacement of nonconforming sidewalks
1024.03   Line and grade; sidewalks on paved streets
1024.04   Sidewalks on unpaved streets; width
1024.05   Construction specifications
1024.06   Notice to construct or repair; resolution; service
1024.07   Noncompliance; construction or repair by city; costs
1024.08   Existing sidewalks; compliance with chapter; remedy of city for
noncompliance
1024.09   Performance bond; insurance
1024.10   Construction of buildings and structures; sidewalks required
1024.11   Board of Sidewalk Appeals; hardship variances
1024.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Driving upon sidewalks, see §
432.22
   Maintenance and repair of sidewalks, see §
660.05
   Paving permit fee, see §
1449.08(N)
   Public sidewalks in subdivisions, see §
1248.07(D)
   Sidewalk obstructions, damage or injury, see §
660.10
Editor’s note:
   Ordinance 85-99, passed June 7, 1999, adopted a Sidewalk Installation Plan
and limited the assessments for the installation of sidewalks pursuant thereto.
Copies of the ordinance and of the Plan may be obtained, at cost, from the
Clerk of Council.
Statutory reference:
   Sidewalks and gutters, see Ohio R.C. 729.01 et seq.
§ 1024.01  REPAIR AND CONSTRUCTION; PERMIT REQUIRED; APPLICATION FOR PERMIT.
   (A)   No sidewalk shall be improved or constructed as herein provided, nor
shall any sidewalk be repaired or re-laid, unless a permit for so doing has
first been obtained from the Building Commissioner.
   (B)   The application for the permit herein required shall specify the owner
of the property in front of which the sidewalk is to be laid and the sublot and
house numbers thereof or, where no such numbers have been established, adequate
measurements identifying the location.
   (C)   A sidewalk permit shall be obtained for each continuous strip of new
sidewalk constructed, i.e., any continuous strip of any number of lots to be
graded, formed and poured in one continuous operation requiring two inspection
trips.
   (D)   The purpose of the permit is to control uniform quality of sidewalk
construction in accordance with the city sidewalk standards and specifications.
   (E)   Services rendered by the city for such permits shall be the keeping of
established street profile plats and sidewalk standards and specifications
available to the owner, contractor, engineer or surveyor, to stake out and
build sidewalks to the established line and grade.
(Ord. 31-65, passed 6-24-1965)
§ 1024.02  INSPECTIONS; FEE; REPLACEMENT OF NONCONFORMING SIDEWALKS.
   (A)   The inspection and approval of forms by the City Engineer is required
before pouring concrete. The owner or contractor shall call the City Engineer
and obtain his or her approval before pouring such concrete.
   (B)   A finished inspection by the City Engineer or the Building Department
is required when the work is completed and the area cleaned up. The fee for
such inspection shall be $0.15 per lineal foot of sidewalk constructed.
   (C)   In the event of a violation, the owner or contractor shall replace a
sidewalk that is not in conformity with city standards.
   (D)   Prior to receiving a permit to repair or relay a sidewalk, the
Building Commissioner shall determine if the replacement sections shall be so
improved as to the city sidewalk standards and specifications as herein before
prescribed or whether it will be improved to the existing sidewalk width and/or
whether more sections need repaired or re-laid.
(Ord. 31-65, passed 6-24-1965; Ord. 14-14, passed 4-21-2014)
§ 1024.03  LINE AND GRADE; SIDEWALKS ON PAVED STREETS.
   The owner or contractor shall have an engineer or surveyor stake out all new
sidewalks for line and grade according to city sidewalk standards and the
established street profile with a layout card furnished by the City Engineer or
the Building Department, which shall be filled in and returned to the City
Engineer before the inspection of forms. The owner or contractor may request
the City Engineer to perform this service, at cost, if no engineer or surveyor
has been retained. All sidewalks shall be under the supervision of the Building
Department. The space between the property line and the curb line on each side
of the paved roadway of curb streets shall constitute the sidewalk.
(Ord. 31-65, passed 6-24-1965)
§ 1024.04  SIDEWALKS ON UNPAVED STREETS; WIDTH.
   On unpaved streets, the sidewalk shall be the portion adjoining the property
line on each side and shall have a width of five feet.
(Ord. 31-65, passed 6-24-1965; Ord. 14-14, passed 4-21-2014)
§ 1024.05  CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   All sidewalks hereafter improved by placing walks with a permanent
surfacing on any public street within the city shall be so improved by
constructing the walks with concrete in accordance with the specifications
provided by the Building Department. The width shall be as hereinbefore
prescribed.
   (B)   The sidewalks shall be so laid that the top surface is properly
roughened so that the same is prevented from becoming slippery when covered
with moisture. The roughened finish shall be of such character as, in the
judgment of the Building Department, will effectively prevent a slippery
condition of such walks at any time.
   (C)   Any grading necessary between the walks as laid and the curb line, or
between such walks and the edge of the sidewalk space, as herein established,
shall be done at the time of laying such walks so as to leave the sidewalk
space at the grade hereinafter described.
   (D)   The sidewalks so improved shall coincide with the line described as
follows. Beginning at the curb line with the established curb grade as
determined by the Building Department, thence extending to the street line at
right angles to the curb line with a rise of three-eighths of an inch to the
foot, provided that at such street intersections where the grade of the
intersecting streets prevents compliance with the above provisions, the walk
shall be laid under the direction and to the acceptance of the Building
Department.
(Ord. 31-65, passed 6-24-1965)
§ 1024.06  NOTICE TO CONSTRUCT OR REPAIR; RESOLUTION; SERVICE.
   (A)   Council may, by resolution, declare that certain specified sidewalks,
curbs or gutters shall be constructed or repaired.
   (B)   Upon the passage of such a resolution, the Director of Finance shall
cause written notice of the passage thereof to be served upon the owner or
agent of the owner, if he or she is a resident of the city, of each parcel of
land abutting upon such sidewalks, curbs or gutters, in the manner provided by
law for the service of summons in civil actions.
   (C)   A copy of the notice, with the time and manner of service endorsed
thereon, signed by the person serving it, shall be returned to the office of
the Director of Finance and there filed and preserved.
   (D)   For the purpose of such service, if the owner of any such property is
not a resident of the city, any person charged with the collection of rent or
the payment of taxes upon such property, or having control thereof in any way,
shall be regarded as the agent of the owner and service upon such person shall
have like force and effect as though personal service were made on the owner
thereof. If it appears in any such return that the owner is a nonresident or
that neither such owner nor his or her agent could be found, one publication of
a copy of the resolution in a newspaper of general circulation in the city
shall be deemed sufficient notice to such owner.
(Ord. 31-65, passed 6-24-1965)
§ 1024.07  NONCOMPLIANCE; CONSTRUCTION OR REPAIR BY CITY; COSTS.
   (A)   If sidewalks, curbs or gutters are not constructed or repaired within
30 days from the date of service of the notice provided for in §
1024.06, or the date of completion of the publication thereof, the city may
proceed, through the appropriate department or office, either by direct
employment of labor or by contract, to carry out such construction or repair at
the expense of the owner.
   (B)   As in the case of other improvements, all such expense shall be
reported by the Director of Finance to Council.
   (C)   Council shall thereupon, by ordinance, assess such expenses upon the
owner or owners of all of the property bounding or abutting the sidewalks,
curbs or gutters, and such assessment shall be collected by certifying the same
to the County Auditor for placement on the regular tax duplicate with a penalty
of 5% interest for failure to pay at the time fixed by the assessment
ordinance.
(Ord. 31-65, passed 6-24-1965)
§ 1024.08  EXISTING SIDEWALKS; COMPLIANCE WITH CHAPTER; REMEDY OF CITY FOR
NONCOMPLIANCE.
   (A)   No sidewalk heretofore laid shall be raised or lowered without the
approval of the Building Department, and all sidewalks hereafter laid shall be
in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and under the supervision of
the Building Department.
   (B)   No curly line or grade for curbs shall be changed except at the
direction and with the written consent of the Building Department. Any sidewalk
laid in any public street within the city in a manner inconsistent with the
provisions of this chapter shall, upon the order of the Building Department, be
re-laid to the proper grade and upon failure of the property owner to make the
change or relay such sidewalk as so ordered within the time specified within
the notice, the city may relay the sidewalk, and the cost thereof, together
with interest and a penalty of 5%, will be taxed or assessed against the
property in a manner allowed by law.
(Ord. 31-65, passed 6-24-1965)
§ 1024.09  PERFORMANCE BOND; INSURANCE.
   Each person engaged in the business of laying or repairing sidewalks in the
city shall furnish to the Building Commissioner a performance bond of $5,000
and shall further carry public liability insurance in the amount of $100,000/
$300,000 to the benefit of the builder and the city, saving the city free and
harmless from all claims due to negligence of any kind.
(Ord. 31-65, passed 6-24-1965)
§ 1024.10  CONSTRUCTION OF BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES; SIDEWALKS REQUIRED.
   A person signing the application for a permit to build a main use building
or a main use structure of any kind on any lot or land in the city is hereby
required to place sidewalks on such lot or land as directed by the proper
authority of the city. The Building Commissioner is hereby directed to refuse
final approval of any main use building or a main use structure until such
sidewalks have been installed to the satisfaction of the Building Commissioner
with the following minimum specifications:
   (A)   Five feet wide - concrete with welded wire or fiber mesh;
   (B)   Four inches thick except for driveway areas and adjacent to the apron;
   (C)   Six inches thick in driveway areas with welded wire mesh;
   (D)   All corners have at least five feet of walk facing the opposite
corner;
   (E)   Shall comply with ICC A117.1-2009 requirements for disabled persons;
and
   (F)   Apply sealcoat as soon as possible - cold weather precautions shall
prevail.
(Ord. 31-65, passed 6-24-1965; Ord. 149-02, passed 9-16-2002; Ord. 14-14,
passed 4-21-2014)
§ 1024.11  BOARD OF SIDEWALK APPEALS; HARDSHIP VARIANCES.
   There is hereby established a Board of Sidewalk Appeals. The Board shall
consist of the City Engineer, the Building Commissioner, the Director of Public
Service and the Ward Councilperson involved. The Board, upon proper hearing,
may, in cases of hardship to individual lots only, grant permission to the
builder not to install sidewalks in front of such lot.
(Ord. 31-65, passed 6-24-1965)
§ 1024.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
202.99 for general code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 1026:  TREES
Section
1026.01   Short title
1026.02   Definitions
1026.03   Permits required
1026.04   Removal and maintenance of trees on public property
1026.05   Pruning of trees by utilities
1026.06   Emergencies
1026.07   Duties of property owners
1026.08   Notice to trim; noncompliance; remedies of city
1026.09   Right of entry
1026.10   Injuring trees and shrubs
1026.11   Obstructing tree roots
1026.12   Shade Tree Trust Fund; donations
1026.13   Sale of urban forest products
1026.14   Review by Council; appeals
1026.15   Interference with Shade Tree Commission
1026.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Fees for tree planting, see §§
1448.03,
1449.07(E), (F)
   Injuring vegetation, see §
642.06
   Shade Tree Commission, see
Chapter 288
   Street trees in subdivisions, see §
1248.09
   Tree removal and sales, see
Chapter 848
Editor’s note:
   This chapter, previously a codification of Ordinance 55-62, passed May 20,
1963, was repealed and re-enacted in its entirety by Ordinance 13-87, passed
March 16, 1987.
§ 1026.01  SHORT TITLE.
   This chapter shall be known and may be cited as the “Shade Tree Ordinance of
the City of Broadview Heights” or just the “Shade Tree Ordinance.”
(Ord. 13-87, passed 3-16-1987)
§ 1026.02  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter.
   “Director of Public Service.” The Director of Public Service of the city or
a specially assigned member of his or her staff.
   “Dripline.” The approximately circular vertical extension to the ground of
the outermost branches and leaves of a tree as an indication of the spread of
the root system.
   “Large trees.” Trees that have attained a height of 45 feet or more.
   “Lawn strip” or “curb strip.” That part of a street or highway right-of-way
outside of the portion improved for travel, including the sidewalk.
   “Medium trees.” Trees that have attained a height of 30 to 45 feet.
   “Park.” Includes all public parks.
   “Person.” Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company
or organization of any kind.
   “Property line.” The legal boundary line.
   “Property owner.” Means the person owning property as shown by the County
Auditor’s plat.
   “Public place.” Means and includes all grounds owned by the city.
   “Public trees.” Means and includes all shade and ornamental trees now or
hereafter growing on any street, including the lawn strip, or on any other
public land.
   “Shade tree” or “ornamental tree or shrub.” Means any and all woody
vegetation.
   “Small trees.” Means trees that have attained a height of 20 to 30 feet.
   “Street” or “highway.” Means the entire width of every public way or right-
of-way when any part thereof is open for the use of the public, as a matter of
right, for purposes of vehicular and pedestrian traffic.
(Ord. 13-87, passed 3-16-1987)
§ 1026.03  PERMITS REQUIRED.
   (A)   Generally.
      (1)   No person shall plant, spray, fertilize, preserve, prune, remove,
cut above or below ground or otherwise disturb any tree on any street or city-
owned property without first filing an application and procuring a permit
therefor from a specified authority. The person receiving the permit shall
abide by the Arboricultural Specifications and Standards of Practice adopted by
the Shade Tree Commission.
      (2)   Applications for permits shall be made at the office of the
Department of Public Service or from a designated member of the Commission.
      (3)   The Commission shall issue the permit provided for in this section
if, in its judgment, the proposed work is desirable and the proposed method and
workmanship thereof are of a satisfactory nature.
      (4)   Every permit issued by the Commission shall be in writing and shall
describe the work to be done, shall specify the tree species or variety, size,
nursery grade and location, shall briefly specify the method of planting,
support and trimming of all trees or shrubs concerned and shall contain a
definite expiration date. Any permit may be declared void if its terms are
violated.
      (5)   Notice of completion of the work authorized by such permit shall be
given within five days to the Commission for an inspection thereof.
      (6)   The Commission shall meet and render a decision on any permit
application within 14 days of receipt of the application by the Commission.
   (B)   Planting.
      (1)   The application required in this section shall state the number of
trees to be set out; the location, grade, species, cultivar or variety of each
tree; the method of planting; and such other information as the Commission
finds reasonably necessary to a fair determination of whether or not a permit
should be issued.
      (2)   Whenever any tree is planted or set out in conflict with this
chapter, the Commission may remove or cause the removal of such tree, and the
exact cost thereof shall be assessed to the owner as provided by law in the
case of special assessments. Such payments or assessments shall be paid into
the Shade Tree Trust Fund and used solely for the purpose of enhancing the
urban forest.
      (3)   The Commission may deny a permit to any person who proposes to
plant any tree or shrub upon a public way, street, alley, park or other
property owned by the city of a size, type or species found by the Commission
to be undesirable for the location proposed; or may deny a permit to any person
who proposes to plant any tree or shrub upon a public way, street, alley, park
or other property owned by the city at a location found by the Commission to be
of a size or type unsuitable for the planting of trees or shrubs.
   (C)   Maintenance, Removal, Replanting and Replacement.
      (1)   The application required by this section shall state the number and
kinds of trees to be sprayed, fertilized, pruned or otherwise preserved; the
kind of treatment to be administered; the composition of the spray material to
be applied; and such other information as the Commission finds reasonably
necessary to a fair determination of whether or not a permit should be issued.
      (2)   Whenever any public tree is damaged in any way, the city may repair
such damage and the exact cost thereof shall be assessed to the person
responsible for the damage as provided by law in the case of special
assessments. Such payments or assessments shall be paid into the Shade Tree
Trust Fund and used solely for the purpose of enhancing the urban forest.
      (3)   No person or property owner shall remove a tree from the lawn strip
or other city property in connection with the paving of a sidewalk or the
paving or widening of the portion of a street or highway used
for vehicular traffic, for the purpose of construction, or for any other
reason, without first filing an application and procuring a permit therefor
from the Commission.
      (4)   No person shall remove any public tree without replacing such tree
with a tree of equivalent dollar value in the vicinity of the removed tree. The
value of trees shall be determined by the Commission in accordance with
regulations adopted by the Commission considering the species, location, size
and condition of trees. If no suitable location exists in the vicinity of the
tree removed, or if the replacement tree is of a lesser value, the person
causing the tree to be removed shall make a compensatory payment to the city
equal to the difference in value between the tree removed and any replacement
tree. Such compensatory payment shall be paid into the Shade Tree Trust Fund
and used solely for the purpose of enhancing the urban forest.
      (5)   The Commission may deny a permit to any person who proposes to
remove or maintain any tree or shrub upon a public way, street, alley, park or
other property owned by the city when such removal or maintenance does not
benefit the preservation of public health, safety, welfare and aesthetics.
(Ord. 13-87, passed 3-16-1987)
§ 1026.04  REMOVAL AND MAINTENANCE OF TREES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY.
   Trees or shrubs planted upon a public way, curb strip, street, alley or city
property may be removed or maintained by the city as necessary to protect the
public health, safety, welfare and aesthetics. The Shade Tree Commission may
cause the removal or maintenance of any such tree or shrub by using city
employees, Commission members or private contractors under contract with the
city.
(Ord. 13-87, passed 3-16-1987)
§ 1026.05  PRUNING OF TREES BY UTILITIES.
   All utility companies shall obtain the written approval of the Shade Tree
Commission for any pruning project undertaken for the clearing of utility
lines. All work shall be performed according to the specifications of the
Commission.
(Ord. 13-87, passed 3-16-1987)
§ 1026.06  EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   No permit shall be required to remove any tree or part thereof which,
by reason of damage by fire, windstorm or other natural calamity, poses a
threat to the public health or safety or which obstructs any public way.
   (B)   In the event of a windstorm, fire, flood or other widespread natural
calamity, the Mayor may declare a state of emergency and exempt from the permit
requirements all operations necessary to remove threats to public safety.
(Ord. 13-87, passed 3-16-1987)
§ 1026.07  DUTIES OF PROPERTY OWNERS.
   (A)   Any person owning or occupying real property bordering on any street,
upon which property there are trees, shall:
      (1)   Prune such trees in such a manner that they will not obstruct or
shade street lights or obstruct the passage of pedestrians on sidewalks, the
vision of traffic signs or the view of any street or alley intersection. The
minimum clearance of any overhanging portion of such trees shall meet the
requirements of the Shade Tree Commission;
      (2)   Treat or remove any tree or plant so diseased or insect-ridden as
to constitute a hazard to trees or plants in public places;
      (3)   Remove and refrain from planting any of the species of trees
prohibited by the Commission; and
      (4)   Obtain a permit for all required work as provided in this chapter.
   (B)   If any person owning real property bordering on any street fails to
act as herein provided, the Commission shall order such person to prune, treat
or remove such trees within ten days after receipt of a written notice to do
so.
   (C)   When a person to whom an order is directed fails to comply with such
order within the specified time, the city may take the action needed to solve
the problem, and the exact cost thereof shall be assessed to the owner as
provided by law in the case of special assessments. Such payments or
assessments shall be paid into the Shade Tree Trust Fund and used solely for
the purpose of enhancing the urban forest.
(Ord. 13-87, passed 3-16-1987)
§ 1026.08  NOTICE TO TRIM; NONCOMPLIANCE; REMEDIES OF CITY.
   (A)   Rights of City; Notice. The city may cause the removal, trimming or
preservation of trees or plants upon private property when such trees or plants
constitute a hazard to life or property or harbor insects or disease that
constitute a potential threat to other trees or plants in the city. When the
Shade Tree Commission finds such action necessary, it shall serve a written
order to correct the condition to be served upon the owner of the premises and
upon any operator, occupant or other person responsible for the existence of
such condition.
   (B)   Method of Service. Such order shall be served by one or more of the
following methods:
      (1)   Making personal delivery of the order to the persons to be served;
      (2)   Leaving the order with some person of suitable age and discretion
upon the premises;
      (3)   Affixing a copy of the order to the door at the entrance of a
dwelling place, office or other principal building located on the premises;
      (4)   Mailing a copy of the order to the last known address of the owner
of the premises by certified or registered mail; or
      (5)   Publishing a copy of the order in a newspaper of general
circulation in the city once a week for three consecutive weeks.
   (C)   Time for Compliance. Such order shall set forth a time limit for
compliance, dependent upon the nature and imminence of the hazard and danger
created by the condition that is ordered to be remedied. In a case of serious
and imminent danger to persons or property, the Shade Tree Commission may
require compliance immediately upon service of the order.
   (D)   Failure to Comply. Upon failure of the person to whom the order is
directed and served to comply with the order within the specified time, a
citation to appear in court for noncompliance with these provisions may be
issued. Also, any duly authorized employee of the city or any contractor hired
by the city may enter upon the property in violation and remove or trim the
trees or plants that are the subject of the order. The cost of such work shall
be billed to the owner of the premises and may be collected by any of the
following methods: by means of appropriate civil court action; as an additional
penalty and fine in any criminal proceeding associated with a violation of
Chapter 1348 of the codified ordinances of the city; or the Director of Finance
may send to the owner of the premises an invoice for the cost of the work done.
The invoice shall be sent to the last-known address of the owner or to the
address to which tax bills with respect to that lot or parcel of land are sent.
If the amount of the invoice is not paid within 30 days from the date of the
invoice, the amount of the delinquency shall be reported to the Council, which
may order that amount to be assessed and certified to the County Auditor for
collection in the same manner that real property taxes are collected.
(Ord. 13-87, passed 3-16-1987; Ord. 160-08, passed 11-17-2008)
§ 1026.09  RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   The Shade Tree Commission may authorize officers or employees of the city,
with the consent of the owner, to enter upon private property for the purpose
of examining any tree or other plant located thereon for the purpose of
carrying out the purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 13-87, passed 3-16-1987; Ord. 160-08, passed 11-17-2008)
§ 1026.10  INJURING TREES AND SHRUBS.
   No person shall, without the consent of the owner in the case of a private
tree or shrub, or without a written permit from the Shade Tree Commission in
the case of a public tree or shrub, do or cause to be done any of the following
acts:
   (A)   Secure, fasten or run any rope, wire, sign or other device or material
to, around or through a tree or shrub;
   (B)   Break, injure, mutilate, deface, kill or destroy a tree or shrub, or
permit any fire to burn where it will injure a tree or shrub;
   (C)   Permit any toxic chemical, gas, smoke, salt, brine, oil or other
injurious substance to seep, drain or be emptied upon or about a tree or shrub;
   (D)   Excavate any ditch, runnel or trench or lay any drive within a radius
of ten feet from a tree or shrub;
   (E)   Erect, alter, repair or raze any building or structure without placing
suitable guards around all nearby public trees or shrubs which may be injured
or defaced by such operation. Such trees shall be guarded with a good
substantial fence, frame or box not less than four feet high and eight feet
square, or at a distance in feet from the tree equal to the diameter of the
trunk in inches D.B.H., whichever is greater. All building material, dirt or
other debris shall be kept outside the barrier.
   (F)   Remove a guard, stake or other device or material intended for the
protection of a public tree or shrub, or close or obstruct any open space about
the base of a public tree or shrub designed to permit access of air, water and
fertilizer;
   (G)   Transplant or remove any tree or shrub; or
   (H)   Damage, cut or carve any portion of a tree, whether it is above or
below ground level.
(Ord. 13-87, passed 3-16-1987)
§ 1026.11  OBSTRUCTING TREE ROOTS.
   No person shall place or maintain upon the ground in any public place any
stone, concrete, brick or other impervious material or substance in such a
manner as to obstruct the free access of air and water to the roots of any tree
upon any public place in the city without first obtaining written permission
therefor. Unless otherwise provided, there shall be maintained about the base
of the trunk of each tree at least nine square feet of open ground for each
three inches in diameter of the tree, and for every additional two inches of
such diameter there shall be an increase of at least one square foot of open
ground.
(Ord. 13-87, passed 3-16-1987)
§ 1026.12  SHADE TREE TRUST FUND; DONATIONS.
   (A)   Establishment. There is hereby established a fund to be known as the
Shade Tree Trust Fund. All gifts of money received and accepted by or on behalf
of the city for the purpose of planting, maintaining, protecting, utilizing and
promoting shade trees, in accordance with the decision and approval of the
Shade Tree Commission, shall be paid into such Fund. In addition, all funds
collected from developers pro-rated for disbursement into said Shade Tree Trust
Fund, pursuant to §
1448.03  of the Building and Housing Code, as well as all compensatory payments
and assessments as specified in this chapter, shall be paid into such Fund.
   (B)   Disbursement of Funds. The Finance Director shall make payments from
such Fund upon the presentation of vouchers or orders therefor by the Director
of Public Service, as approved by the Commission.
   (C)   Donations. The Finance Director is hereby authorized to accept, on
behalf of the city, all gifts, money or other things or items of value for the
purpose of planting, maintaining, removing, protecting, utilizing and promoting
shade trees in accordance with the decision and approval of the Commission.
However, a gift given expressly for a specific purpose shall, before the city
is deemed to have accepted it, be accepted by a motion and vote of Council. If
such motion to accept is rejected by Council, then such gift, if already
delivered to the city, shall be returned to the donor and not accepted.
(Ord. 13-87, passed 3-16-1987; Ord. 80-96, passed 6-5-1995)
§ 1026.13  SALE OF URBAN FOREST PRODUCTS.
   The city may sell, without competitive bidding, wood and other forest
products generated during urban forestry operations, which forest products are
not needed by the city, pursuant to regulations promulgated by the Shade Tree
Commission. Moneys generated from compensatory payments, permit fees,
donations, gifts and the sale of forest products and wood shall be used solely
for the purpose of enhancing the urban forest.
(Ord. 13-87, passed 3-16-1987)
§ 1026.14  REVIEW BY COUNCIL; APPEALS.
   Council may review the conduct, acts and decisions of the Shade Tree
Commission. Any person may appeal from any ruling or order of the Commission to
Council within 24 hours of the service of such order. Unless the order is
revoked or modified, it shall remain in full force and be obeyed by the person
to whom it is directed. No person to whom an order is directed shall fail to
comply with such order within 30 days after an appeal has been determined.
(Ord. 13-87, passed 3-16-1987)
§ 1026.15  INTERFERENCE WITH SHADE TREE COMMISSION.
   No person shall hinder, prevent, delay or interfere with the Shade Tree
Commission while engaged in carrying out the execution or enforcement of this
chapter. However, nothing in this chapter shall be construed as an attempt to
prohibit the pursuit of any remedy, legal or equitable, in any court of
competent jurisdiction for the protection of property rights by the owner of
any property in the municipality.
(Ord. 13-87, passed 3-16-1987)
§ 1026.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 1028:  SNOW REMOVAL FOR SENIOR CITIZENS,
PHYSICALLY DISABLED PERSONS AND CITY OFFICIALS
Section
1028.01   Eligible resident classifications
1028.02   Fee
1028.03   Occupancy of house required
1028.04   Supervision of Program
1028.05   Weather conditions necessitating removal
1028.06   Qualifications for program
1028.07   Application review
1028.08   Income eligibility guidelines
1028.09   Proof of income for eligibility; where obtained
1028.10   Release of liability
1028.11   Driveways of municipal officers and employees
Cross-reference:
   Snow emergency parking ban, see §
452.13
Editor’s note:
   Chapter 1028, previously titled “Snow Removal for Senior Citizens and City
Officials,” was re-titled and re-enacted in its entirety by Ordinance 95-92,
passed September 8, 1992. The chapter was again re-enacted in its entirety by
Ordinance 68-96, passed August 19, 1996.
§ 1028.01  ELIGIBLE RESIDENT CLASSIFICATIONS.
   Residents 70 years of age or older by the date of registration and all
residents who are of the physically disabled citizen classification (regardless
of age) shall be eligible for participation in the City of Broadview Heights
Snow Removal Program.
(Ord. 152-98, passed 8-24-1998)
§ 1028.02  FEE.
   There shall be no fee for snow removal services.
(Ord. 68-96, passed 8-19-1996)
§ 1028.03  OCCUPANCY OF HOUSE REQUIRED.
   All residents receiving snow removal service shall occupy the house where
such service shall be performed. No unoccupied house shall receive said
service.
(Ord. 68-96, passed 8-19-1996)
§ 1028.04  SUPERVISION OF PROGRAM.
   The Director of Public Service shall administer the rules and regulations,
and any questions concerning the same shall be addressed to him or her. All
residents who qualify for snow removal service will be expected to fully
cooperate with the Department of Public Service in providing such service. Any
violation of the rules and regulations shall result in termination of service.
(Ord. 68-96, passed 8-19-1996)
§ 1028.05  WEATHER CONDITIONS NECESSITATING REMOVAL.
   The city will provide snow removal service when, as determined by the
Director of Public Service, there has been at least a four-inch snowfall
locally. The service shall be rendered to qualifying residents after the
removal of snow from all main arteries, streets and roads has rendered them
passable for normal traffic.
(Ord. 68-96, passed 8-19-1996)
§ 1028.06  QUALIFICATIONS FOR PROGRAM.
   (A)   In order to qualify for the senior citizen classification, the
resident must do all of the following:
      (1)   Complete an application for city snow removal. Said application
shall contain the following certifications:
         (a)   That the resident and his or her spouse are retired and live
alone;
         (b)   That there is no able bodied person residing with the resident
who is capable of removing snow;
         (c)   Proof of age (birth certificate, driver’s license and the like);
and
         (d)   That the total household income qualifies under the city’s
eligibility requirements, with documentation, per the guidelines referred to in
§
1028.08. Total income includes Social Security.
      (2)   Execute a consent and release form, provided with the application,
granting permission to the city to provide such service and exonerating the
city and the service provider from any and all liability for providing such
service.
   (B)   In order to qualify for the physically disabled citizen
classification, the resident must do all of the following:
      (1)   Complete an application for city snow removal. Said application
shall contain the following certifications:
         (a)   That the resident and his or her spouse are living alone;
         (b)   That there is no able bodied person residing with the resident
who is capable of removing snow;
         (c)   That the total household income qualifies under the city’s
eligibility requirements, with documentation, per the guidelines referred to in
§
1028.08. Total income includes Social Security; and
         (d)   A doctor’s letter stating the exact type of disability.
      (2)   Execute a consent and release, provided with the application,
granting permission to the city to provide such service and exonerating the
city and the service provider from any and all liability for providing such
service.
(Ord. 68-96, passed 8-19-1996)
§ 1028.07  APPLICATION REVIEW.
   All applications shall be reviewed by a committee appointed by the Mayor.
(Ord. 68-96, passed 8-19-1996)
§ 1028.08  INCOME ELIGIBILITY GUIDELINES.
   (A)   Eligibility for the city Snow Removal Program shall be preconditioned
upon the resident(s) income being at or below the income guidelines established
by H.E.A.P.
   (B)   Resident(s) not qualifying under division (A) hereof will be placed on
a waiting list. If the Snow Removal Program does not reach 100 participants
using the criteria set forth in division (A) hereof, then resident(s) will be
added in the order of financial need, up to 100 total participants as
determined by income ranking.
(Ord. 147-00, passed 10-2-2000; Ord. 131-08, passed 9-15-2008; Ord. 99-10,
passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1028.09  PROOF OF INCOME FOR ELIGIBILITY; WHERE OBTAINED.
   (A)   All applicants for snow removal service under this chapter shall
provide to the Department of Public Service proof of income for eligibility
from the following services:
 
Proof of Income                                     Source
(1)   Current H.E.A.P. letter                    H.E.A.P. Office
(2)   Assistance I.D.                            County Employment & Family
                                                    Services
(3)   Federal Income Tax Form from the preceding  
year
 
   (B)   Other proof of income may also be considered.
(Ord. 68-96, passed 8-19-1996)
§ 1028.10  RELEASE OF LIABILITY.
   Because snow removal service will sometimes cause damage to grass and
surrounding land and/or mailboxes, and while the city shall use all reasonable
effort to avoid such damage, each applicant, by applying for the snow removal
program and accepting the benefits thereof, will assume the risk of any and all
said damage and, in consideration of participation in such program, shall be
required to release and  indemnify the city, in writing, in a form approved by
the Law Director, from all liability for any such damage.
(Ord. 68-96, passed 8-19-1996)   
§ 1028.11  DRIVEWAYS OF MUNICIPAL OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES.
   The Mayor is hereby authorized to have the driveways of all city officials,
department heads, employees and members of the Police Department and the Fire
Department cleared as he or she deems necessary at his or her discretion for
the preservation of the health, peace, safety and welfare of the residents of
the city during an emergency caused by an act of God or otherwise.
(Ord. 68-96, passed 8-19-1996)
TITLE FOUR:  UTILITIES
   
CHAP. 1040.   WATER
   
CHAP. 1041.   STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
   
CHAP. 1042.   SEWERS GENERALLY
   
CHAP. 1043.   SEWER RATES AND CHARGES
   
CHAP. 1044.   CONNECTIONS TO EPA-FINANCED SEWERAGE SYSTEM
   
CHAP. 1045.   GAS
   
CHAP. 1046.   ELECTRICITY
   
CHAP. 1047.   STORM DRAINAGE
   
CHAP. 1048.   SEPTIC SYSTEMS
   
CHAP. 1049.   POST-CONSTRUCTION WATER QUALITY RUNOFF
CHAPTER 1040:  WATER
Section
1040.01   Drawing water from fire hydrants; permit required
1040.02   Water mains from private wells prohibited; equitable remedies
1040.03   Emergencies
1040.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Polluting and diverting watercourses, see §
660.04
   Water supply in subdivisions, see §
1248.06
Editor’s note:
   Ordinance 19-65, passed March 15, 1965, as amended by Ordinance 30-65,
passed June 24, 1965, authorized the Mayor to execute a contract with the City
of Cleveland for water service to the City of Broadview Heights and to its
residents. Copies of the ordinances and the contract are available, at cost,
from the Clerk of Council.
Statutory reference:
   City consent for water fixtures on public property, see Ohio R.C. 4933.01,
4933.03
   Tampering with water hydrants, pipes or meters; unauthorized connections,
see Ohio R.C. 4933.22
§ 1040.01  DRAWING WATER FROM FIRE HYDRANTS; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person, other than a firefighter or a public employee while in the
discharge of his or her duty, shall draw water from or attempt to draw water
from a street fire hydrant without first obtaining a written permit therefor
from the Foreman of the Street Division.
   (B)   The use of a wrench, other than a standard five pointed fire hydrant
wrench, on a street fire hydrant shall be sufficient evidence of such an
attempt to draw water.
   (C)   No person, after obtaining such a permit, shall use on a street fire
hydrant any wrench other than a standard fire hydrant wrench.
(Ord. 31-56, passed 7-9-1956)
§ 1040.02  WATER MAINS FROM PRIVATE WELLS PROHIBITED; EQUITABLE REMEDIES.
   (A)   No person shall lay or maintain a water main upon private land the
purpose and intention of which is to serve water to consumers from a private
well.
   (B)   The penalty provided in §
202.99 shall be cumulative to other remedies provided by law and shall in no
way be deemed exclusive so as to prevent the city from invoking equitable
remedies for violations or intended violations of division (A) hereof.
(Ord. 51-57, passed 12-23-1957)
§ 1040.03  EMERGENCIES.
   (A)   Declaration. Whenever the Division of Water of the City of Cleveland
issues a directive to the public to conserve water, or at any time that the
Director of Public Safety determines that a significant water shortage exists
in the City of Broadview Heights, a public water emergency shall be deemed to
exist.
   (B)   Notice. Whenever such an emergency exists, the Director of Public
Safety shall request the cooperation of the local press and radio and
television stations to announce the emergency and the time that emergency use
regulations will become effective. Such emergency use regulations shall become
effective not sooner than one hour after the first announcement. Such
announcement by two local radio stations, or in a daily newspaper of general
circulation in the city, shall constitute notice to the general public of the
existence of the emergency. The emergency shall continue until an announcement
by the Director or the City of Cleveland, Division of Water, that the emergency
has ceased to exist. Such announcement shall be made in the same manner as
provided in this division (A) for an emergency.
   (C)   Imposition of Regulations. During the period of an emergency, the
Director may prohibit the use of any water for the sprinkling or irrigation of
lawns and/or gardens, for the washing of motor vehicles and for the filling of
swimming pools. The Director may also prohibit any use of water for other than
drinking and sanitation purposes. The prohibited uses shall be specified in the
announcement of the public water emergency.
   (D)   Violations. Whoever violates an emergency use regulation is guilty of
misconduct at an emergency and shall be prosecuted under §§
648.06  and
202.99  of these codified ordinances.
(Ord. 88-84, passed 6-6-1988)
§ 1040.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 1041:  STORM WATER MANAGEMENT
Section
1041.01   Storm Water Management Program adopted by reference
1041.02   Storm Water Management Program Task Force
1041.03   Storm water system management funds
Cross-reference:
   Connections to EPA-financed sewerage system, see
Chapter 1044
   East Wallings Road Sanitary Sewer Fund, see §
236.22
   Municipal Environmental Maintenance Specialist, see §
248.07
   Sanitary facilities in subdivisions, see §
1248.05
   Sewer rates and charges, see
Chapter 1043
   Storm Sewer Maintenance Fund, see §
236.15
   Tap-in fees and sewer charges, see
TSO Table IX
   Wastewater treatment plants, see
Chapter 1342
Statutory reference:
   Compulsory sewer connections, see Ohio R.C. 729.06
   Interference with sewage flow, see Ohio R.C. 4933.24
   Management and control of sewerage system, see Ohio R.C. 729.50 et seq.
   Sewerage rates, see Ohio R.C. 729.49, 729.52
   Water quality requirements, see Ohio R.C. Chapter 6111
§ 1041.01  STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM ADOPTED BY REFERENCE.
   The city hereby adopts the Storm Water Management Program attached as
Exhibit A to original Ordinance 25-03, passed March 3, 2003, and made a part
hereof as if fully rewritten herein.
(Ord. 25-03, passed 3-3-2003; Ord. 06-16, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1041.02  STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PROGRAM TASK FORCE.
   (A)   There is hereby created a Storm Water Management Program Task Force
which shall consist of the Storm Water Management Program Director, who shall
be a non-voting member, one member of City Council appointed by the Council
President, who shall be a non-voting member, and five residents of the city who
shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of Council.
   (B)   One clerical employee of the city shall be appointed by the Mayor as
Secretary and shall record minutes and maintain records of the Storm Water
Management Program Task Force.
   (C)   The duties of the Storm Water Management Program Task Force shall be
to review the goals of the Storm Water Management Program, develop policies and
procedures to meet the minimum control measures outlined in the Storm Water
Management Program, recommend appropriate actions to City Council and the
administration in order to meet the water quality requirements of Ohio R.C.
Chapter 6111 and the Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq., review
the effectiveness of the various activities, and recommend changes as
necessary.
(Ord. 77-03, passed 6-16-2003; Ord. 90-04, passed 9-7-2004; Ord. 06-16, passed
3-7-2016)
§ 1041.03  STORM WATER SYSTEM MANAGEMENT FUNDS.
   (A)   Findings and Determinations. This Council finds and determines that:
      (1)   There exists in this city an urgent need to provide for
improvements to, and for repair and maintenance of, public facilities for the
control and management of surface waters, which facilities in their current
state are inadequate to prevent flooding during periods of heavy rainfall and
resulting threats to the lives and safety of persons and damage to roadways,
storm sewers, culverts, ditches, retention basins, buildings and other
structures, recreation areas, and other property both public and private. Such
improvements, repair and maintenance are needed also to reduce or eliminate
infiltration of the city’s sanitary sewer system, to reduce the amount of
standing water that enables the breeding of harmful insects, and to reduce
environmental hazards to streams and other watercourses from contaminants that
are picked up by flowing surface water. The improvements and activities
described in this division (A)(1) are needed to comply with current and
anticipated federal and state environmental laws and regulations;
      (2)   Financial resources currently available to the city for the
improvement, repair and maintenance of public storm water system management
facilities and systems are inadequate to provide for an effective and
continuing program of storm water systems management, and the charges for such
purpose provided for herein, along with other money that is available and to be
made available, are estimated to be adequate for such purpose and are fair and
reasonable in amount;
      (3)   All of the residents of the city and all of the owners of lots and
lands in the city will benefit from such an effective and continuing program of
storm water system management, and a fairly apportioned charge for such
benefits as provided for herein will help to provide the necessary financial
resources for such purpose;
      (4)   The cost of a detailed survey of the size and configuration of all
of the lots and lands in the city and of the buildings, paved areas and other
features of each of those parcels, as estimated in reports and proposals made
to the city, for the purpose of apportioning costs of the Storm Water System
Management Program would impose prohibitively high and unnecessary costs on
both the city and its residents and property owners, and the method of
apportionment of such costs provided for herein is fair and reasonable and is
in the best interests of this city and its residents; and
      (5)   It is necessary to provide procedures for the collection,
administration, and enforcement of charges provided for in this section as the
first phase of a multi-phase and comprehensive Storm Water Management Program.
   (B)   Deficits Prohibited. As part of an annual review of the Storm Water
System Management Fund, the Director of Finance and the Director of Public
Service shall make an estimate of the revenues and expenses for the next year
for the Storm Water System Management Fund. After deducting: (1) the estimated
operation and maintenance costs; (2) any estimated debt service costs; and (3)
any repair and replacement reserve payment, from the total estimated revenues
and net carry-over from the previous year for the Fund, the Storm Water Systems
Management Fund shall maintain a positive year-end balance. The Director of
Public Service and the Director of Finance, following each such annual review,
shall recommend to the Council any changes to the storm water system management
charges that they believe to be necessary.
   (C)   Definitions. As used in this section, the following words, terms and
phrases have the meanings given to them in this section, except where the
context clearly indicates a different meaning.
      “Credits.” On-going reductions in the storm water management program
charges applicable to a given parcel in recognition of its underdeveloped state
and on-site detention/retention facilities.
      “Domestic user.” Any single-family house, government building, or
individual condominium unit that is part of a building or development
consisting of fewer than four condominium units.
      “Drainage system.” Natural and structural channels, swales, ditches,
swamps, rivers, streams, creeks, wetlands, branches, reservoirs, ponds,
drainageways, inlets, catch basins, gutters, pipes, culverts, bridges, head
walls, storm sewers, lakes, and other physical works, properties and
improvements that transfer, control, convey or otherwise influence the movement
of storm water runoff.
      “Earth-disturbing activity.” Any grading, excavating, filling, or other
alteration of the earth’s surface by which natural or human-made ground cover
is destroyed.
      “Equivalent dwelling unit.” One domestic use per 4,000 square feet of
impervious surface area.
      “Impervious surface.” Any surface that cannot effectively absorb or
infiltrate water. “Impervious surfaces” include, but are not limited to, roads,
streets, parking lots, rooftops and sidewalks.
      “Natural state.” Describes existing land, water, soil, and vegetation
characteristics that have not been substantially modified or disturbed by
development activities and the hydrologic function is in an unaltered
condition.
      “Service charge.” A storm water management service charge that generally
reflects the impact on or demand for storm water management services provided
by the city to properly control and manage storm water runoff quantity and/or
quality associated with the lot or parcel.
      “Storm water.” The runoff from precipitation that travels over the
natural state or developed land surfaces and enters a drainage system.
      “Storm Water Management Program.” An identified set of measures and
activities designed to protect, restore, and/or manage storm water quality by
controlling velocity, volume, and rate.
      “Undisturbed parcel.” Real property that is in its natural state, that
has not been altered by any earth-disturbing activity, and as to which the
ground cover and/or tree canopy has not been altered.
      “Vacant parcel.” Any tract, lot or parcel of land without a structure or
dwelling unit that does not meet the definition of an undisturbed parcel.
   (D)   Storm Water System Management Program Charges, Residential. For the
purpose of providing money that is needed to improve, repair and maintain storm
water facilities in the city and to comply with the requirements of the NPDES
Phase II Storm Water Program of the United States Environmental Protection
Agency, commencing January 1, 2008, there is hereby imposed on each lot or
parcel in the city, including condominium units, a Storm Water System
Management Program management charge. For each domestic user the charge shall
be at the rate of $4 per month for each domestic user and shall be added to and
billed quarterly with the sanitary sewer charges imposed by the city. In the
case of any lot or parcel that is used or zoned for residential purposes
(including multi-family dwellings) and that is not subject to a sanitary sewer
charge, the storm water system management charge shall be billed to the owner
of the lot or parcel and sent to the owner’s last known address or to the
address to which tax bills are sent.
   (E)   Storm Water System Management Program Charges, Nonresidential. The
Storm Water System Management Program charges for parcels, including multi-
tenant apartment buildings, and condominium developments consisting of four or
more units, that are not subject to the charges for domestic users provided for
in division (D) of this section shall be calculated as multiples of the
Equivalent Dwelling Unit (EDU) charge for a single-family house, which has been
calculated as 1 unit = 4,000 square feet of impervious surface area, determined
as follows.
      (1)   The City Engineer shall calculate an average area of impervious
surface of a typical residential parcel in the city by measuring the impervious
surface area for no fewer than 12 developed, single-family, residential parcels
in the city. The measured parcels shall be located throughout the city and
shall be selected to represent a cross-section of the houses throughout the
city. An average amount of impervious surface per residential parcel shall be
determined by dividing the sum of all measured impervious area by the total
number of parcels measured and shall be known as the equivalent dwelling unit
(“EDU”).
      (2)   The City Engineer shall measure the impervious area of each
nonresidential parcel in the city and shall calculate the appropriate number of
EDUs for each parcel by dividing its measured value by the average area value
for residential parcels calculated as provided above. In no case shall the EDU
value for a nonresidential parcel be less than one, provided that the EDU value
for individual units on a single parcel may be a percentage of one. The monthly
charge for any parcel that is vacant and does not have impervious surfaces
shall be equal to the rate for domestic users provided for in division (D) of
this section.
      (3)   The City Engineer shall use a consistent method of measurement,
shall have the authority to determine the method most appropriate for carrying
out the intent and purposes of this section, and shall keep all EDU
calculations on file for inspection by any interested person.
      (4)   The Building Commissioner shall upon issuance forward to the City
Engineer a copy of each permit issued for a nonresidential parcel that will
create additional impervious surface area, in order that EDU values can be
updated as necessary.
      (5)   A current list of the EDU values for all nonresidential parcels in
the city shall be forwarded to the Director of Finance on or before January 1
of each year.
   (F)   Billing Procedures.
      (1)   The charges established by this section shall be billed quarterly
in arrears.
      (2)   Bills shall be mailed to the owner of the property at the mailing
address of the property being billed unless the owner shall, in writing,
request the bill be sent to a different mailing address of the owner. Bills
shall not be sent to a lessee of the property. In the case where the land is
separately owned from the building, the bill shall be sent to the mailing
address of the owner of the building.
   (G)   Changes of Address or Ownership.
      (1)   Upon the change of his or her or its mailing address, an owner of
property shall inform the Finance Department of the city of the change. Failure
to inform the city of a change of address shall not excuse an owner from any
payment penalties incurred because of the failure to report an address change.
      (2)   Prior to the sale of a property, the present owner shall contact
the Finance Department to arrange for pro-ration of the final bill. The final
bill shall be sent to the mailing address specified by the present owner.
Failure of a previous owner to comply with this requirement shall not excuse
the new owner from responsibility for any and all delinquencies certified
pursuant to the Ohio Revised Code, current charges or penalties remaining
unpaid by the previous owner.
      (3)   Prior to the sale of a property, the purchaser shall contact the
Finance Department to arrange for a pro-ration of the first bill and to inform
the city of the mailing address of the new owner. Failure to comply with this
requirement shall not excuse the new owner from responsibility for any and all
delinquencies certified pursuant to the Ohio Revised Code, current charges or
penalties remaining unpaid by the previous owner.
   (H)   Payments and Penalties.
      (1)   Payment shall be due on the thirtieth day after the date of the
bill. If that thirtieth day of the month falls on a Sunday or holiday, payment
shall be due the previous business day. If payment is made by mail, the
envelope must be postmarked not later than the due date of the bill. A penalty
of 10% of the amount billed shall be added to any bill that is not paid by the
due date.
      (2)   Checks and money orders shall be paid to the City of Broadview
Heights.
      (3)   A bill that remains unpaid at the end of the calendar year will be
certified to the County Auditor to be collected on the real estate taxes as a
sewer assessment.
      (4)   If a bank should return a check for insufficient funds, an account
will be subject to an insufficient funds charge of $25.
      (5)   If a person has two checks returned for insufficient funds, the
city may require all future payments to be made in cash or money order.
      (6)   Upon the claim of a person that the return of a check for
insufficient funds was a bank error, the city may waive an insufficient funds
charge and/or accept payment by check if the bank supplies adequate
documentation of its error.
      (7)   A person should contact the Finance Department if he or she fails
to receive a bill by the eighth day of the first month of a calendar quarter.
Upon a claim of a person that a bill was not received:
         (a)   If the records of the city show the bill was duly mailed to the
last reported mailing address, the person shall be responsible for timely
payment of the bill.
         (b)   If the records of the city show the bill was not duly mailed to
the last reported mailing address, the Finance Department may either:
            1.   Issue a bill due ten days from the date of mailing; or
            2.   Add the unpaid charge to the following quarter’s bill without
a penalty.
      (8)   In using the U.S. postal service for delivery of their payment of a
sewer service charge, owners assume responsibility for any failure of the U.S.
postal service to deliver the payment to the city. Accordingly, the Finance
Department shall not waive payment penalties for any person claiming that the
U.S. postal service failed to deliver a payment.
   (I)   Delinquencies. Any unpaid billings, together with accrued penalties,
shall be annually certified to the County Auditor, pursuant to the Ohio Revised
Code, who shall place such delinquencies upon the real property tax duplicate
for the property receiving sewage service. Such delinquencies shall be a lien
upon the property from the date the delinquency is placed upon the real
property tax duplicate and shall be collected in the same manner as other real
estate taxes. Failure to pay delinquencies certified may result in a
foreclosure of the property by the County Prosecuting Attorney. This procedure
shall be in addition to all other collection remedies provided by law,
including an action in small claims court.
   (J)   Liberal Interpretation. This section shall be interpreted liberally to
effectuate its broad remedial purpose of protection of the public health,
safety and welfare. Absent a showing of actual abuse of discretion, the city’s
interpretation of this section shall have a strong presumption of validity.
   (K)   Grievances and Appeals.
      (1)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the city under this section
may file a written grievance with the Director of Public Service. The written
grievance shall set forth the substance of the city’s decision and the basis of
the person’s complaint.
      (2)   The Director of Public Service shall investigate the grievance and
issue a written determination. The determination shall include the following:
         (a)   Name, address and location of the premises of the complainant;
         (b)   A summary of the complainant’s claim;
         (c)   A summary of the facts revealed by the city’s investigation;
         (d)   An interpretation of any applicable regulation, law or policy;
         (e)   A notice of the person’s right of appeal to the city; and
         (f)   A copy of this grievance and appeal procedure.
   (L)   Deposit of Proceeds. Money received by the city in payment of the
charges imposed and billed pursuant to this section shall be deposited promptly
upon receipt into the Storm Sewer Fund, which hereafter shall be designated as
the Storm Water System Management Fund, as part of the city’s budget and
accounting system, separate and apart from the General Fund. Interest earned on
investment of the moneys in the Storm Water System Management Fund shall be
credited to that Fund, and the city’s expenses incurred in the billing and
administration of that Fund shall be charged to that Fund. Moneys in the Storm
Water System Management Fund shall be used exclusively for the purposes set
forth in division (D) of this section, including payment of debt service
charges on any notes or bonds of the city issued for any of such purposes.
   (M)   Credits.
      (1)   The calculated Storm Water Management Program charge may be reduced
for a parcel as to which runoff control measures have been approved by the
city, successfully implemented, and properly managed and implemented in
accordance with the code of ordinances of the city. Review and analysis of
these measures shall be conducted bi-annually, upon the written request of the
owner of the parcel, on an individual case basis by the City Engineer,
according to established policies and standards, and the decision of the City
Engineer as to the eligibility of the parcel for such reduction or for the
continuance or revocation of a reduction that was previously approved shall be
provided in writing to the property owner and to the Director of Finance. The
maximum rate reduction shall be 50% of the calculated rate.
      (2)   The calculated Storm Water System Management Program charges may be
reduced for an undisturbed parcel. Review and analysis of such a parcel shall,
upon the written request of the owner of the parcel, be conducted on an
individual basis by the City Engineer, and the decision of the City Engineer
shall be provided in writing to the property owner and to the Director of
Finance. The maximum rate reduction shall be 100% of the calculated rate. An
approved credit shall immediately be revoked from an undisturbed parcel upon
the determination by the City Engineer, which shall be communicated in writing
to the owner of the parcel and to the Director of Finance, that any earth-
disturbing activity has taken place or that the parcel has been changed from
its natural state.
      (3)   Vacant parcels are not eligible for credits under this section.
      (4)   The City Engineer and his or her authorized employees and agents
are authorized, during regular business hours and upon not less than three
days’ written notice to the owner of a parcel as to which a credit has been
requested or granted under this section, to enter upon the property for the
purpose of making a review and analysis of the property as provided for in this
section.
(Ord. 100-07, passed 9-4-2007; Ord. 52-08, passed 4-21-2008)
CHAPTER 1042:  SEWERS GENERALLY
Section
Sewer Connections and Discharges
1042.01   Definitions
1042.02   Connection with sanitary sewers required when available
1042.03   Timing of connections
1042.04   Licenses required; bond; supervision of work
1042.05   Sanitary sewer connection permits
1042.06   Manner of making sanitary sewer connections; inspections
1042.07   Sanitary sewer connection standards
1042.08   Connections to sanitary sewer in vicinity of Old Route 82
1042.09   Conditions for connection to sanitary sewers serving the Broadview
Heights South facilities plan drainage area
1042.10   Storm sewer connections; inspections; permit
1042.11   New or reconstructed sewers; photographic inspection required
1042.12   Unacceptable discharges generally
1042.13   Specific prohibited discharges
1042.14   Special arrangements
1042.15   Permitted discharges to sanitary sewers
1042.16   Permitted discharges to storm sewers
1042.17   Discharge of storm water into sanitary sewers
1042.18   Control of unacceptable discharges
1042.19   Enforcement
1042.20   Right of entry
1042.21   Board of Review
1042.22   Penalty
Illicit Discharge and Illegal Connection Control
1042.35   Purpose and scope
1042.36   Applicability
1042.37   Definitions
1042.38   Disclaimer of liability
1042.39   Conflicts, severability, nuisances and responsibility
1042.40   Responsibility for administration
1042.41   Discharge and connection prohibitions
1042.42   Monitoring of illicit discharge and illegal connections
1042.43   Enforcement
1042.44   Remedies not exclusive
1042.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Connections to EPA-financed sewerage system, see
Chapter 1044
   East Wallings Road Sanitary Sewer Fund, see §
236.22
   Municipal Environmental Maintenance Specialist, see §
248.07
   Riparian setbacks, see
Chapter 1334
   Sanitary facilities in subdivisions, see §
1248.05
   Sewer rates and charges, see
Chapter 1043
   Storm Sewer Maintenance Fund, see §
236.15
   Storm water management and urban sediment pollution abatement, see
Chapter 1334,
1049
   Tap-in fees and sewer charges, see
TSO Table IX
   Wastewater treatment plants, see
Chapter 1342
Editor’s note:
   This chapter, previously titled “Sewers,” was repealed in part, by
implication, by Ordinance 13-86, passed January 21, 1986, Ordinance 14-86,
passed January 21, 1986, and Ordinance 15-86, passed January 27, 1986.
Unaffected provisions were retained but renumbered and recodified in this
chapter and in Chapter 1043.
Statutory reference:
   Compulsory sewer connections, see Ohio R.C. 729.06
   Interference with sewage flow, see Ohio R.C. 4933.24
   Management and control of sewerage system, see Ohio R.C. 729.50 et seq.
   Sewerage rates, see Ohio R.C. 729.49, 729.52
SEWER CONNECTIONS AND DISCHARGES
§ 1042.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this subchapter:
   “BOD.” Biochemical oxygen demand or the quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory conditions in
five days at 20°C, expressed in milligrams per liter.
   “Building drain.” The part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage
system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes,
including sump pumps and similar connections, inside the walls of a building,
and conveys it to the building sewer beginning three feet (1.5 meters) outside
the building wall.
   “Building sewer.” The part of the horizontal piping of a drainage system
which receives and conveys the discharge from the building drain to the public
sanitary sewer, private sanitary sewer, household sewage disposal system or
other point of disposal.
   “C.” Means Centigrade degrees.
   “City.” The City of Broadview Heights, its officials and employees.
   “Combined sewer.” A sewer which intentionally serves as both a sanitary
sewer and a storm sewer.
   “Cooling water.” The water discharged from any use, such as air
conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, during which the only pollutant added
to the water is heat.
   “Domestic wastes.” Sanitary sewage derived principally from dwellings,
commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions, originating as
wastes from kitchens, water closets, lavatories, bathrooms and showers.
   “Garbage.” Solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation,
cooking and dispensing of food and from the handling, storage and sale of
produce.
   “Grease” or “fats.” Any material which is extractable from an acidified
sample of waste by hexane or other designated solvent.
   “Industrial wastewater.” The liquid wastes resulting from the processes
employed in industrial, manufacturing, trade or business establishments, as
distinct from domestic wastes.
   “mg/l.” Milligrams per liter.
   “NEORSD.” The Northeast Ohio Regional Sewer District which was formerly
known as the Cleveland Regional Sewer District.
   “Normal domestic sewage.” Wastewater derived principally from dwellings,
commercial buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, originating
as wastes from kitchens, water closets, lavatories, bathrooms and showers, and
is the same as that defined in the NEORSD Sewer Use Code. Unless otherwise
defined, normal domestic sewage has a strength of less than 210 mg/l BOD and
less than 214 mg/l suspended solids.
   “NPDES (National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System) permit.” The permit
issued by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency specifying effluent quality
for treatment plants discharging into surface waters as defined in the Code of
Federal Regulations, 40 C.F.R. Part 125, and in Pub. L. No. 92-500, § 402,
being 33 U.S.C. § 1342.
   “Person.” The state, any political subdivision or a public or private
corporation, partnership, firm, association, individual or entity.
   “pH.” The logarithm of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions
in gram equivalents per liter.
   “Pretreatment.” The application of physical, chemical and/or biological
processes to reduce the amount of pollutants or alter the nature of the
pollutant properties in wastewater prior to discharge into a public sewer.
   “Public sewer.” A sewer which is owned and/or controlled by a public
authority.
   “Sanitary sewer.” A sewer which carries only wastewater from residences,
commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together with minor
quantities of unintentionally admitted storm, surface or ground water.
   “Sewer.” A pipe or conduit for carrying wastewater.
   “Sewer connection permit.” A permit issued by the city for the purpose of
connecting a building sewer to a public sewer.
   “Sewer service charge.” The total sewer charges assigned to each user,
consisting of a user charge to defray a user’s proportionate share of the cost
of operation, maintenance and replacement and a capital financing charge to
defray the debt (capital and interest costs) on the sewerage system.
   “Storm sewer.” A sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage,
excluding sewage and industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water.
   “Storm water.” Any flow occurring during or immediately following any form
of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.
   “Surcharge.” That part of the sewer service charge which is applied to extra
strength wastes to cover added operation and maintenance costs.
   “Suspended solids.” The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of
or is suspended in water, wastewater or other liquids, and which is removable
by laboratory filtering.
   “User charge.” The charge assigned to each user, which charge defrays a
proportionate share of the cost of operation and maintenance of the sewerage
system.
   “Wastewater.” A combination of water-carried waste from dwellings,
commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions, together with
such ground, surface or storm water as may be present.
(Ord. 14-86, passed 1-21-1986)
§ 1042.02  CONNECTION WITH SANITARY SEWERS REQUIRED WHEN AVAILABLE.
   No property owner in the city shall fail to make use of a public sanitary
sewer facility that is available to him or her within 90 days of the time such
sanitary sewer line is installed.
(Ord. 56-68, passed 12-2-1968)
§ 1042.03  TIMING OF CONNECTIONS.
   The City Engineer, the Building Commissioner and the Chairperson of the
Service Committee shall designate the areas and timing of sanitary sewer
connections.
(Ord. 34-87, passed 4-6-1987)
§ 1042.04  LICENSES REQUIRED; BOND; SUPERVISION OF WORK.
   (A)   Trunk Sewers. No person shall tap any trunk sewer or lay any house
connection pipe flowing into any trunk sewer, unless such person first obtains
from the city a license for doing such work. The work shall, at all times, be
under the supervision of a builder licensed to do such work.
   (B)   Sewer Builders.
      (1)   No person shall tap any sanitary sewer, lay any building sewer or
dig or open any street, road or other public way for the purpose of tapping any
such sanitary sewer or laying such sanitary house connections, unless such
person first obtains from the city a license for doing such work.
      (2)   Any competent person shall, on application to the city, be granted
a sewer builder’s license. Such application shall be accompanied by
satisfactory evidence of qualifications and responsibility.
      (3)   A sewer builder’s license shall be valid until December 31 of the
year for which it is issued, unless previously revoked.
      (4)   A bond will be required of all persons making application for a
sewer builder’s license and must be available for the valid period of such
license.
      (5)   These regulations shall not prevent any licensed sewer builder from
building house laterals as part of any contract job approved by and being done
under the inspection of the city.
      (6)   Licenses will be revoked if the holder violates any of the
provisions of these regulations.
(Ord. 14-86, passed 1-21-1986; Ord. 34-87, passed 4-6-1987)
§ 1042.05  SANITARY SEWER CONNECTION PERMITS.
   (A)   No person shall make any connection with any sanitary sewer, any
repair or removal thereof, or any excavation therefor, without first obtaining
from the city a separate sanitary sewer connection permit for each such
connection.
   (B)   Applications for sanitary sewer connection permits shall be made by a
licensed sewer builder on the prescribed form and shall contain intelligible
plans and specifications of the work to be done, including the location and
character of the work.
   (C)   Before a sewer connection permit is issued, the owner of the property
or his or her agent, if requested by the city, shall file with the city a
complete and intelligible sketch and specifications showing the existing or
proposed sanitary sewers or plumbing, in detail, together with a schedule of
all fixtures, connections and branches for future connections, as well as any
other information which may be required to determine the acceptability or
unacceptability of the probable discharge from the proposed connection to the
system.
   (D)   Sanitary sewer connection permits shall be kept on the job at all
times while work is in progress and shall be valid for 90 days from the date of
issuance.
   (E)   A sanitary sewer connection fee will be required for each sanitary
sewer connection permit.
   (F)   No sanitary sewer connection permit will be issued for any connection
which will result in a downstream flow in excess of the capacity of the
downstream facilities.
   (G)   Any misrepresentation in the application for a sanitary sewer
connection permit, or a violation of any of the provisions of these
regulations, shall constitute sufficient grounds for revocation of the
applicant’s sewer builder’s license.
(Ord. 14-86, passed 1-21-1986)
§ 1042.06  MANNER OF MAKING SANITARY SEWER CONNECTIONS; INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   All sanitary sewer connections shall be designed and made in
accordance with the latest edition of the “Design and Construction of Sanitary
and Storm Sewers” prepared by the Joint Committee of the American Society of
Civil Engineers and the Water Pollution Control Federation.
   (B)   The inspection of all new sanitary sewer connections shall be at the
direction and under the supervision of the Director of Public Service.
   (C)   No work shall be performed without inspection. All new sanitary sewer
connections shall be inspected by an authorized city sanitary sewer inspector.
Inspectors will be available Monday through Friday, 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., and
Saturdays from 8:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m.
   (D)   A 24 hour notice will be necessary to obtain an inspector. Any work
covered prior to inspection shall be uncovered by the sewer builder and
opportunity must be given to inspect the interior as well as the exterior of
the pipe.
   (E)   The actual tapping of a connection into the sanitary sewer shall be
done only in the presence of an authorized city sanitary sewer inspector.
   (F)   The city shall be the final judge of the quality of all sanitary sewer
materials and workmanship used in sewer service connections and may inspect the
same at all times.
   (G)   The city shall have free access to all buildings and fixtures therein
connected to sanitary sewers to inspect such fixtures, and may take samples of
any waste entering the sanitary sewers.
   (H)   The sole purpose of the inspection provided for in division (G) hereof
is to determine the proper connection of discharge points to the proper outlet.
The city, in any duty prescribed by this chapter, may act through its inspector
or other properly authorized representatives.
   (I)   The City Engineering Department will be the authorized representative
for inspections on sanitary connections into the EPA-funded sewers.
(Ord. 15-77, passed 9-6-1977; Ord. 14-86, passed 1-21-1986; Ord. 34-87, passed
4-6-1987; Ord. 137-06, passed 10-2-2006)
§ 1042.07  SANITARY SERVICE CONNECTION STANDARDS.
   (A)   Compliance Required.
      (1)   The sanitary service connection standards set forth in this section
are hereby duly adopted as the sanitary service connection standards of the
city.
      (2)   No person shall connect or tap into any part of the city sanitary
sewerage system without fully complying with these sanitary service connection
standards.
   (B)   Preconnection Procedures. A sewer contractor, before laying pipe or
making a connection, shall uncover the existing tee or crossover to ascertain
the condition thereof. No sewer pipe shall be laid before the city is given 24
hours’ notice. The sewer contractor shall determine the slope of the building
sanitary sewer from the elevation of the existing public sanitary sewer and the
connection at the building. If there is not enough fall available to provide a
1% minimum slope, the city shall be advised immediately. Sewer pipe laying
shall start at the downstream end.
   (C)   Grease, Oil and Sand Traps. Service connection sewers from wash racks,
grease racks, loading docks, and the like and all types of commercial or
industrial installations where grease, oil and petroleum waste products are
discarded, shall be connected to appropriate grease separators and/or sand or
oil traps and connected to sanitary sewers. Service connection sewers from
commercial kitchens shall be connected to appropriate grease traps and sanitary
sewers.
   (D)   Building Connections. A separate and individual sewer connection shall
be made to each building. No connection shall serve more than one building,
unless specific authority is given by the city.
   (E)   Cover. All service connections shall have a minimum cover of three
feet.
   (F)   Grades. All service connections shall be constructed on a minimum
grade of 1%.
   (G)   Sewer Bedding. Sewers shall be bedded on six inches of premium bedding
with a cover of one foot of premium fill over the pipe. Premium bedding and
fill shall be No. 8 limestone.
   (H)   Test Tee Cleanouts. A test tee cleanout must be installed one foot
behind the right-of-way on the sewer line at all deflections over 30 feet, and
every 100 feet in straight runs, in order to facilitate future cleaning. The
test tee cleanout fitting shall be marked with arrows on driveways, sidewalks
or curbs at right angles to such test tee cleanout. A plastic cover with metal
embedded in it will be used at all locations to cap the test tee and cleanouts.
   (I)   Interior Plumbing. Interior plumbing work shall be done by plumbers
licensed in accordance with Chapter 1445.
   (J)   Abandonment of Household Sewage Disposal Systems.
      (1)   Household sewage disposal systems shall be abandoned in the
following manner after connection is made to a sanitary sewer.
         (a)   All lines to underground tanks shall be cut off.
         (b)   Underground tanks shall be pumped out dry, cleaned and
disinfected. A receipt of pump out is required and a copy shall be submitted to
the city.
         (c)   The lid shall be crushed and all tanks shall be completely
filled with stone or other approved suitable material.
      (2)   Components to be filled include septic tanks, leaching wells,
holding tanks, aeration tanks, dosing tanks, distribution boxes, and the like.
   (K)   Connection Materials. The following materials may be used for sanitary
service connections:
 
Type of Pipe                                     Material Specifications
Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC)                         ASTM D-3034-78 (SDR 35)
Polyvinyl Chloride Schedule 40 (PVC)             ASTM D-2466-78
Acrylonitrile Butadiene Styrene (ABS Solid Wall) ASTM D-2751-77A (SDR 35)
 
   (L)   Use of Old and New Pipe. If new pipe is used from the foundation wall
to the street, no air test is required. If old pipe is to be used, it shall be
inspected by the city. New pipe must be used to at least five feet before the
inlet to a septic tank. New pipe shall be connected to old pipe by Michelin
coupling or other approved devices. In cases of extreme hardship in complying
with this division (L), a resident may ask for a review by the Board of Review,
as constituted in §
1042.21 . In all cases before final tie-in, the sewer line shall be smoke
tested. Such test will be inspected by the city.
   (M)   County Standards. Any item not covered in this section will be
governed by County Sanitation Engineering Standards.
(Ord. 34-87, passed 4-6-1987; Ord. 42-87, passed 5-4-1987)
 
§ 1042.08  CONNECTIONS TO SANITARY SEWER IN VICINITY OF OLD ROUTE 82.
   (A)   Definitions. For the purpose of this section, including the effective
application and enforcement thereof, the following terms as used herein shall
be deemed to have the meanings indicated.
      “Connection.” The connection of any service sewers to the Royalton Sewer,
either directly or through public lateral or local sewers.
      “Industrial wastes.” Water-carried and liquid wastes from industrial or
commercial processes as distinct from sanitary sewage.
      “Permit.” The permission by the Building Commissioner or his or her
designated representative for business buildings or properties, institutions,
industrial establishments or other buildings to connect to the Royalton Sewer.
      “Service sewers.” Those private sewers that collect sewage and wastes
from business buildings or properties, institutions, industrial establishments
or other buildings that transport such sewage and wastes to the Royalton Sewer,
either directly or through public lateral or local sewers.
      “Sewage” or “waste.” The water-carried waste from business buildings or
properties, institutions, industrial establishments or other buildings,
singularly or in any combination, together with such ground, surface and storm
waters that may be present, and becoming water wastes only when permitted or
authorized by permit issued by the Building Commissioner or his or her
designated representative.
   (B)   Connection Permit Charges.
      (1)   No person, corporation, public agency, partnership or association
shall connect or cause to be connected any building or other structure, either
directly or indirectly, with the Royalton Sewer for the purpose of discharging
sanitary sewage or industrial waste therefrom without first securing from the
Building Commissioner or his or her designated representative a permit for such
purpose in a form prescribed by Council. In addition, prior to the issuance of
such permit, the applicant therefor shall first pay the charge provided for in
division (B)(2) hereof, and the additional charges determined in accordance
with other provisions of this section.
      (2)   The Building Commissioner shall not issue a permit for the purpose
described in division (B)(1) hereof until the applicant therefor shall have
paid:
         (a)   A charge of $110, which is intended to reimburse the city for
the reasonable expenses of inspection and other administrative costs related to
the making of connections to a Royalton Sewer; and
         (b)   A charge equal to $0.10 for each square foot of floor area
(without any deduction for common areas, service areas or otherwise) for each
business building or property, institution, industrial establishment or other
building located on property that is to be served by a connection.
      (3)   After a connection shall have been made as provided for herein, the
Building Commissioner shall not issue an occupancy permit for any business
building or property, institution, industrial establishment or other building
located on property that is served by that connection until the applicant
therefor shall have paid a charge equal to $0.10 for each square foot or floor
area (without any deduction for common areas, service areas or otherwise) for
any business building or property, institution, industrial establishment or
other building or addition thereto thereafter constructed as to which the
charge provided for in this section has not heretofore been paid.
   (C)   Sewer Fund. All money collected by the city as charges pursuant to the
provisions of this section shall be deposited in the Sewer Fund.
   (D)   Special Assessments. The imposition of charges and the issuance of
permits provided for in this section shall not preclude the subsequent levy of
special assessments against benefitted lots and lands to provide funds for the
construction of sanitary sewers required to provide sewer service to such lots
and lands, and the permits and charges provided for herein are in addition to
any other permits and charges required by law and by ordinance or regulation of
the city.
   (E)   Disconnection and Lien.
      (1)   In the event that any lot or land or building or other structure
thereon is connected directly or indirectly to the system in violation of any
of the provisions of this section, and the owner, agent, lessee, tenant or
occupant of such lot or land fails or refuses to disconnect the same upon being
directed to do so by the Mayor, the Mayor is hereby authorized to cause such
lot or land to be disconnected from the Royalton Sewer or from any public
lateral or local sewer that is connected to the Royalton Sewer, and the
violator shall be liable to the city for the cost of making such disconnection.
      (2)   If any permit charge is not paid when due, the amount thereof shall
be certified by Council to the County Auditor, who shall place the same upon
the real property tax list and duplicate against the property for which the
permit is required, and such charge shall be a lien on such property from the
date the same is placed upon the real property tax list and duplicate by the
Auditor and shall be collected in the same manner as other taxes.
   (F)   Filing. The Clerk of Council is hereby directed to file a certified
copy of this section with the County Auditor not less than 20 days after the
passage hereof.
   (G)   Separate Offenses. A separate offense shall be deemed to have been
committed for each day that a violation of any of the provisions of this
section continues after a period of 30 days following the original conviction.
(Ord. 160-90, passed 11-19-1990)
§ 1042.09  CONDITIONS FOR CONNECTION TO SANITARY SEWERS SERVING THE BROADVIEW
HEIGHTS SOUTH FACILITIES PLAN DRAINAGE AREA.
   (A)   Conditions Precedent to Connection. Unless otherwise required by
federal or state law, any person (including, but not limited to, realtors,
contractors and land developers of all types, individually or as a group)
seeking to connect into or otherwise utilize the sanitary sewers of the city
that serve the Broadview Heights South facilities plan drainage area, for any
purpose other than to serve a residence or business that was in existence at
the time this section becomes effective, shall, as conditions precedent to such
connection:
      (1)   Submit to the city for approval all appropriate plans and
specifications prepared by a licensed engineer. Said plans and specifications
shall contain, at a minimum, the following information:
         (a)   A map of the service area, including the location of all ponds,
streams, drainageways and any other surface waters;
         (b)   The estimated flow to be introduced into the sewer, categorized
by the type of user, both at the time of connection and in ultimate design; and
         (c)   The location, length, size and material of all sanitary sewers
tributary to the connection.
      (2)   Submit a notice of intent to the Ohio EPA and prepare a detailed
storm water management plan for any proposed development that will, initially
or ultimately, exceed five acres in size, as required by the Ohio EPA’s General
Storm Water Permit for Construction Activity under the NPDES permit system. The
Storm Water Management Plan shall include best management practices for
controlling erosion and measures for protecting surface waters and their
associated riparian areas.
   (B)   Riparian Area Protection.
      (1)   Riparian areas, as currently defined by the Ohio EPA, are those
areas that extend three and one- half times the average wetted width on each
side from the center of a stream or 50 feet from the bank-full edge, whichever
is greater, up to 120 feet. This applies to any streams, including intermittent
ones, that have water flowing for sufficient times of the year to develop and
maintain defined channels.
      (2)   Riparian vegetation plays a critical role in establishing and
protecting the water quality and biological integrity of a stream. Loss of such
vegetation can lead to stream degradation and violation of state water quality
standards.
      (3)   The city shall utilize the following procedures to help protect
streams and their riparian areas.
         (a)   The city shall review all requests for access to the city’s
sanitary sewers for possible impact upon streams and riparian areas.
         (b)   The city shall review all development plans for possible impact
upon streams and riparian areas.
         (c)   Before approving any development plans or any connections to the
sanitary sewers, the city shall require the applicant to demonstrate how
existing riparian vegetation will be protected and preserved and how streams
will be kept free of sediment runoff from construction activity.
         (d)   The city shall not permit access to the sanitary sewers if any
streams and/or riparian areas have been or will be modified, altered or
converted to other uses without prior authorization from the Ohio EPA, the city
and any other applicable regulatory authority.
(Ord. 59-94, passed 5-16-1994)
§ 1042.10  STORM SEWER CONNECTIONS; INSPECTIONS; PERMIT.
   (A)   All new storm sewer connections shall be inspected to ensure their
proper installation.
   (B)   The inspection of all new storm sewer connections shall be at the
direction and under the supervision of the City Engineer.
   (C)   No person shall make a connection to a storm sewer in the city without
first obtaining a permit therefor from the Director.
(Ord. 16-77, passed 9-6-1977)
§ 1042.11  NEW OR RECONSTRUCTED SEWERS; PHOTOGRAPHIC INSPECTION REQUIRED.
   (A)   The City Engineer is hereby directed, prior to final approval of a
newly installed sewerage system and/or reconstructed sewer, to require that any
and all contractors or developers cause to be made  photographs of the entire
sewerage system installed showing thereby that the system has been constructed
upon a sound engineering basis, that it is free of accumulations of foreign
substances, that it is of sound workmanship and that there is nothing present
to prevent the free flow of sewage. The City Engineer is hereby authorized to
approve the same as a final inspection, placing in safekeeping all photographs
and/or inspection reports for future reference by the city.
   (B)   The cost of such photography, photographs and inspection reports shall
be entirely paid for by the contractor or developer of such land and/or
sewerage system and such photographs and inspection reports shall remain the
property of the city.
(Ord. 21-67, passed 4-3-1967)
§ 1042.12  UNACCEPTABLE DISCHARGES GENERALLY.
   No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, into the sanitary
sewerage system, any wastewater, materials or substances which are hereby
determined to be unacceptable. Unacceptable discharges include those which have
been determined by the city to:
   (A)   Contain materials or substances which would constitute a hazard to
life and limb of personnel engaged in the inspection, maintenance and operation
of the system, or to persons who may come in contact with various discharges
from the system;
   (B)   Contain materials or substances which are toxic, as defined in §
1042.11(B), or which may otherwise create a public health hazard;
   (C)   Contain materials, substances or properties which may be detrimental
to the functional integrity or operation of sewers, pumping stations or
wastewater treatment plants, or which are in any way deleterious to any part of
the system;
   (D)   Produce excessive odors or in any other way produce a public nuisance;
   (E)   Be in violation of any rule or regulation for sewer use adopted by the
NEORSD, the county or any other agency responsible for sewers, pumping
stations, wastewater treatment plants or other system components into which
wastewater is discharged;
   (F)   Cause the city to incur excess expense in the handling or treatment
thereof;
   (G)   Be of such a volume or be discharged at such a rate as to exceed the
capacity of any part of the sanitary sewerage system;
   (H)   Directly or indirectly cause water pollution in violation of any state
or federal permit conditions or regulations; or
   (I)   Contain concentrations of toxic or deleterious materials or substances
which are prohibited or which are in excess of any limits set thereon in
accordance with this chapter.
(Ord.14-86, passed 1-21-1986)
§ 1042.13  SPECIFIC PROHIBITED DISCHARGES.
   No person shall discharge or deposit, or cause or allow to be discharged or
deposited, into the wastewater treatment system, any wastewater which contains
the following:
   (A)   Explosive Mixtures. Any liquids, solids or gases which, by reason of
their nature or quantity, are or may be sufficient, either alone or by
interaction with other substances, to cause fire or explosion or be injurious
in any other way to the sewerage facilities or to the operation of the system.
At no time shall two successive readings on an explosion hazard meter, at the
point of discharge into the sewerage system, be more than 5%, nor shall any
single reading be over 10% of the Lower Explosive Limit (L.E.L.) of the meter.
Prohibited materials include, but are not limited to, gasoline, kerosene,
naphtha, benzene, toluene, xylene, ethers, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes,
peroxides, chlorates, perchlorates, bromates, carbides, hydrides and sulfides;
   (B)   Toxic Substances. Any gaseous, liquid or solid substances which, when
discharged into the sewerage system in sufficient quantities, may, alone or by
interaction with other substances, interfere with any wastewater treatment
process, constitute a hazard to persons or animals, inhibit aquatic life or
create a hazard to recreation in the receiving waters at the effluent from the
wastewater treatment plant, or as defined in § 307(b) of Pub. L. No. 92-500,
being 33 U.S.C. § 1317(a), the Clean Water Act;
   (C)   Solid or Viscous Substances. Construction materials, ashes, cinders,
sand, mud, straw, shavings, metal, glass, rags, feathers, tar, asphalt,
plastic, wood, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides or fleshings, grass clippings,
wastepaper or any solid or viscous substance capable of causing obstruction to
the flow in sewers or otherwise interfering with the proper operation of the
wastewater system;
   (D)   Oils and Grease. Any water or waste containing fats, wax, grease or
oils, whether emulsified or not, in excess of 100 mg/l, or containing
substances which may solidify or become viscous at temperatures between 1°C and
65°C at the point of discharge into the system;
   (E)   Steam and Hot Water. Any hot water, waste or steam with a temperature
above 65°C (150°F);
   (F)   pH and Corrosivity. Any water or waste having a pH lower than 5.5 or
higher than 10.0 or which may cause corrosion or deterioration of the system
per the MS4 Permit, including, but not limited to, acids, alkalis, sulfides,
concentrated chloride and fluoride compounds and substances which will react
with water to form acidic products;
   (G)   Cyanide. Any water or waste containing total cyanide in excess of five
mg/l or containing readily releasable cyanide (cyanide released at a
temperature of 65°C (150°F and pH = 2.5) in excess of two mg/l;
   (H)   Radioactive Wastes. Radioactive wastes or isotopes of such half-life
or concentration that they do not comply with regulations or orders issued by
the appropriate authority having control over their use and/or which may cause
damage or hazard to the wastewater system, human beings or animals;
   (I)   Noxious Materials. Any solids, liquids or gases which, either alone or
by interaction with other substances in the wastewater system, are capable of
producing objectionable odors or colors or which may otherwise create a public
nuisance;
   (J)   Improperly Shredded Garbage. Garbage that has not been ground or
comminuted to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely in
suspension under flow conditions normally prevailing in the sewerage system,
with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension;
   (K)   Excessive Discharge Rate. Wastewater flow rates which exceed the
design capacity of any component of the wastewater system; or
   (L)   Unpolluted Water. Any water, including, but not limited to, cooling
water, storm water, surface water, subsurface drainage, or other relatively
unpolluted water which increases the hydraulic load on the wastewater system.
(Ord.14-86, passed 1-21-1986; Ord. 07-16, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1042.14  SPECIAL ARRANGEMENTS.
   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as preventing any special
agreement or arrangement between the city and any user of the wastewater system
whereby unacceptable discharges are pretreated prior to acceptance into the
system, subject to any payments or surcharges for laboratory testing, metering
or administrative expenses as may be applicable. Such surcharges are in
addition to any surcharges for transportation and treatment in the NEORSIS
system.
(Ord.14-86, passed 1-21-1986)
§ 1042.15  PERMITTED DISCHARGES TO SANITARY SEWERS.
   A sanitary sewer shall be used for all water-borne wastes from water
closets, urinals, slop sinks, lavatories, bathtubs, showers, laundry tubs,
refrigerator drips, soda fountains, drinking fountains, sinks, floor drains and
stable floor drains, whether from residences, factories or businesses, as
provided by the Ohio Revised Code, and for no other purpose. No wastes from
such fixtures shall be permitted to enter any storm sewer, and no connection
shall be permitted to be made from such fixtures to storm sewers. No wastes
which are likely to cause damage to or stoppage of sewers or which may
interfere with treatment of sewage shall be permitted to enter sanitary sewers,
and if any such wastes are discovered, the sewer discharging such wastes shall
be disconnected and the offending waste shall be treated or otherwise disposed
of by the owner.
(Ord. 34-87, passed 4-6-1987)
§ 1042.16  PERMITTED DISCHARGES TO STORM SEWERS.
   Connections to storm sewers shall be for the removal of surface, roof and
ground water from surface water inlets, catch basins, yard drains, downspouts
from roofs, cistern overflows, subsoil drains, foundation drains, loading dock
floor drains, and for no other purpose. No water or waste of the character
described in this section shall be admitted to sanitary sewers.
(Ord. 34-87, passed 4-6-1987; Ord. 07-16, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1042.17  DISCHARGE OF STORM WATER INTO SANITARY SEWERS.
   (A)   The discharge of storm water by any means whatsoever into the city’s
sanitary sewer system is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
   (B)   No person shall connect any downspout of any building, any subsoil
drain, any storm water connection, or the waste drain of any hydrant or water
plug, or any open gutter, cesspool or privy vault, either directly or
indirectly, to any sanitary sewer, or permit any storm water to be in any
manner discharged into such sewer. No person shall permit any sanitary sewer
lateral located on land owned by the person to remain in a state that permits
the infiltration of storm water into the sanitary sewer lateral.
   (C)   The owner or person in control of real property shall:
      (1)   Cause the disconnection from the sanitary sewer system of any
downspout of any building, any subsoil drain, any storm water connection, or
the waste drain of any hydrant or water plug, or any open gutter, cesspool or
privy vault, located on the real property;
      (2)   Repair any sanitary sewer lateral located on the real property to
prevent the infiltration of storm water into the sanitary sewer lateral; and
      (3)   Remove and/or correct any condition upon the real property that
permits the infiltration or inflow of storm water into the city’s sanitary
sewer system.
   (D)   If the owner or person in control of real property fails to take the
remedial actions provided for in division (C) above, in addition to any other
penalties provided by law, the Director of Public Service may cause written
notice to be served on the owner of the real estate or person having control of
the real estate. The notice shall set forth the nature of the nuisance, the
Director’s estimate of the cost of abating the same if done by the city, the
statement that the owner or person having control of the real estate shall
abate the nuisance within 105 days from the date of the letter. The owner shall
obtain a permit for the required work to abate the nuisance within 45 days from
the date of the letter and the nuisance shall be abated within 60 days of
obtaining the required permit.
(Ord. 143-11, passed 11-7-2011; Ord. 07-16, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1042.18  CONTROL OF UNACCEPTABLE DISCHARGES.
   (A)   Regulatory Actions. If wastewater containing any of the unacceptable
substances described in §§
1042.12 and
1042.13 is discharged or proposed to be discharged into the sewerage system of
the city or to any sewerage system tributary thereto, the city may take any of
the following actions:
      (1)   Prohibition. Prohibit the discharge of such wastewater;
      (2)   On-Site Modifications. Require the discharger to demonstrate that
on-site modifications will reduce or eliminate the discharge of such substances
in conformity with this chapter;
      (3)   Pretreatment. Require pretreatment, including storage facilities or
flow equalization necessary to reduce or eliminate objectionable
characteristics or substances so that the discharge will not violate these
regulations and will be rendered acceptable;
      (4)   Surcharge. Require the person making, causing or allowing the
discharge to pay any additional cost or expense incurred by the city for
handling and treating of excess loads imposed on the wastewater collection
system and/or pumping stations owned and/or operated by the city; or
      (5)   Other Action. Take such other remedial action as may be deemed
desirable or necessary to achieve the purpose of this chapter.
   (B)   Pretreatment.
      (1)   Generally.
         (a)   Where pretreatment or equalization of wastewater flows prior to
discharge into any part of the wastewater system is required, plans,
specifications and other pertinent data or information relating to such
pretreatment or flow-control facilities shall first be submitted to the city
for review and approval.
         (b)   Such approval shall not exempt the discharger of such flows from
compliance with any applicable code, ordinance, rule, regulation or order of
any governmental authority with jurisdiction for such discharges. No subsequent
alteration or addition to such pretreatment or flow-control facilities shall be
made without due notice to and prior approval of the city.
      (2)   Requirements. Any person whose discharge is determined to be
unacceptable in accordance with this chapter or in accordance with the NEORSD
Sewer Use Code may apply to the city for permission to render such discharge
acceptable by pretreatment. Pretreatment may be approved if it complies with
all requirements and conditions of the NEORSD Sewer Use Code and this chapter.
At the discretion of the city, the installation of grease, oil or sand
interceptor’s may be required for the safe and proper handling of wastes
containing excess quantities of such materials.
      (3)   Operations. If pretreatment or control of waste flows is required,
such facilities shall be maintained in good working order and operated as
efficiently as possible by the owner at his or her own cost and expense,
subject to the requirements of these regulations and all other applicable
codes, ordinances, laws, rules and regulations.
   (C)   Accidental Discharges. If, for any reason, a facility does not comply
with or will not be able to comply with any prohibition or limitation in this
chapter, the owner or person responsible for the facility shall immediately
notify the city so that the necessary corrective action may be taken to protect
persons and the treatment system.
(Ord. 14-86, passed 1-21-1986)
§ 1042.19  ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Notice of Violations. Whenever the city finds that any person violated
or is violating any of the provisions of this chapter, the city may serve upon
such person a written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing
a reasonable time, not to exceed 90 days, for the satisfactory correction
thereof.
   (B)   Hearing.
      (1)   If the violation is not corrected by timely compliance, the city
may order any person who causes or allows an unacceptable discharge to show
cause at a hearing before the Board of Review why service should not be
terminated.
      (2)   A notice of the hearing shall be served personally on the offending
party by registered or certified mail at least ten days before the hearing.
      (3)   After the Board has reviewed the evidence from the hearing, it may
issue an order to the party responsible for the discharge to comply with one of
the regulatory actions described in §
1042.18(A).
   (C)   Legal Action. A violation of any of the substantive provisions of this
chapter or an order of the Board of Review, as constituted in §
1042.19 , will be considered a public nuisance and the Law Director shall
commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in a court of
competent jurisdiction.
(Ord. 14-86, passed 1-21-1986; Ord. 07-16, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1042.20  RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   For the purpose of administration of this chapter, the city shall, at all
times, have free access to the premises of any user of the wastewater system
and free access to the premises of any person reasonably believed by the city
to be a user or potential user of the wastewater system. Such access may be for
the purpose of inspection, observation, measurement or testing. Any entry under
this section will be made in accordance with any safety or insurance
regulations applicable to the site, and the city will treat as confidential and
reasonably protect any trade secrets or proprietary information which it
obtains from such entry.
(Ord. 14-86, passed 1-21-1986)
§ 1042.21  BOARD OF REVIEW.
   (A)   If a conflict arises in the interpretation of this chapter, the Board
of Review will be convened and the decision of the Board regarding such
interpretation shall be final.
   (B)   The Board shall be comprised of the Building Commissioner, the
Chairperson of the Service Committee of Council or his or her representative,
and three disinterested residents of the city. A majority vote will be
constituted by a vote of three.
(Ord. 14-86, passed 1-21-1986; Ord. 42-87, passed 5-4-1987)
§ 1042.22  PENALTY.
   Payment of any fine for a violation of any of the provisions of this
subchapter shall in no way relieve any person of liability for damage to
persons or property which may be caused by such violation, or of such person’s
responsibility to comply with this subchapter.
(Ord. 34-87, passed 4-6-1987)
Editor’s note:
   See §
202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTION CONTROL
§ 1042.35  PURPOSE AND SCOPE.
   (A)   The purpose of this regulation is to provide for the health, safety,
and general welfare of the citizens of the city through the regulation of
illicit discharges to the city separate storm sewer system (MS4). This
regulation establishes methods for controlling the introduction of pollutants
into the MS4 in order to comply with requirements of the National Pollutant
Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit process as required by the Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency (Ohio EPA).
   (B)   The objectives of this regulation are:
      (1)   To prohibit illicit discharges and any illegal connections to the
MS4 and/or sanitary sewer system; and
      (2)   To establish legal authority to carry out inspections, monitoring
procedures, and enforcement action necessary to ensure compliance with this
regulation.
(Ord. 07-16, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1042.36  APPLICABILITY.
   This regulation shall apply to all residential, commercial, industrial, or
institutional facilities responsible for discharges to the MS4 and on any lands
in the city, except for those discharges generated by the activities detailed
in §
1042.36(A)(1) to (A)(3).
(Ord. 07-16, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1042.37  DEFINITIONS.
   The words and terms used in this regulation, unless otherwise expressly
stated, shall have the following meaning.
   “Best Management Practices (BMPs).” Schedules of activities, prohibitions of
practices, general good housekeeping practices, pollution prevention and
educational practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices
to prevent or reduce the discharge of pollutants to storm water. “BMPs” also
include treatment practices, operating procedures, and practices to control
site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw
materials storage.
   “Community.” The City of Broadview Heights, its designated representatives,
boards, or commissions.
   “Environmental Protection Agency” or “United States Environmental Protection
Agency (USEPA).” The United States Environmental Protection Agency, including,
but not limited to, the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency (Ohio EPA), or any
duly authorized official of said agency.
   “Floatable material.” In general, any foreign matter that may float or
remain suspended in the water column, and includes, but is not limited to,
plastic, aluminum cans, wood products, bottles, and paper products.
   “Hazardous material.” Any material including any substance, waste, or
combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute
to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety,
property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported,
disposed of, or otherwise managed.
   “Illegal connection.” Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or
subsurface, that allows an illicit discharge to enter the MS4 and/or storm
water to enter into the sanitary sewer system.
   “Illicit discharge.” As defined at 40 C.F.R. § 122.26(b)(2), means any
discharge to an MS4 that is not composed entirely of storm water, except for
those discharges to an MS4 pursuant to a NPDES permit or noted in §
1042.36.
   “Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4).” As defined at 40 C.F.R. §
122.26(b)(8), city separate storm sewer system means a conveyance or system of
conveyances (including roads with drainage systems, city streets, catch basins,
curbs, gutters, ditches, human-made channels, or storm drains):
      (1)   Owned or operated by a state, city, town, borough, county, parish,
district, township, county, district, association, or other public body
(created by or pursuant to state law) having jurisdiction over sewage,
industrial wastes, including special districts under state law such as a sewer
district, or similar entity, or an Indian tribe or an authorized Indian tribal
organization, or a designated and approved management agency under § 208 of the
Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1288 that discharges to waters of the United
States;
      (2)   Designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water;
      (3)   Which is not a combined sewer; and
      (4)   Which is not part of a publicly owned treatment works (POTW) as
defined at 40 C.F.R. 122.2.
   “National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) Storm Water
Discharge Permit.” A permit issued by EPA (or by a state under authority
delegated pursuant to 33 U.S.C. § 1342(b)) that authorizes the discharge of
pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on
an individual, group, or general area wide basis.
   “Off-lot discharging home sewage treatment system.” A system designed to
treat home sewage on-site and discharges treated wastewater effluent off the
property into a storm water or surface water conveyance or system.
   “Owner/operator.” Any individual, association, organization, partnership,
firm, corporation or other entity recognized by law and acting as either the
owner or on the owner’s behalf.
   “Pollutant.” Anything that causes or contributes to pollution. “Pollutants”
may include, but are not limited to, paints, varnishes, solvents, oil and other
automotive fluids, non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes, yard wastes, refuse,
rubbish, garbage, litter or other discarded or abandoned objects, floatable
materials, pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers, hazardous materials, wastes,
sewage, dissolved and particulate metals, animal wastes, residues that result
from constructing a structure, and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
   “Storm water.” Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of
water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such
precipitation.
   “Wastewater.” The spent water of a community. From the standpoint of a
source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions.
“Wastewater” is intended to be conveyed through the sanitary sewer system.
(Ord. 07-16, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1042.38  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   (A)   Compliance with the provisions of this regulation shall not relieve
any person from responsibility for damage to any person otherwise imposed by
law.
   (B)   The provisions of this regulation are promulgated to promote the
health, safety, and welfare of the public and are not designed for the benefit
of any individual or for the benefit of any particular parcel of property.
(Ord. 07-16, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1042.39  CONFLICTS, SEVERABILITY, NUISANCES AND RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Where this regulation is in conflict with other provisions of law or
ordinance, the most restrictive provisions, as determined by the city, shall
prevail.
   (B)   If any clause, section, or provision of this regulation is declared
invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, the validity
of the remainder shall not be affected thereby.
   (C)   This regulation shall not be construed as authorizing any person to
maintain a nuisance on their property, and compliance with the provisions of
this regulation shall not be a defense in any action to abate such a nuisance.
   (D)   Failure of the city to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly
conditions or to recommend corrective measures shall not relieve the site owner
from the responsibility for the condition or damage resulting therefrom, and
shall not result in the city, its officers, employees, or agents being
responsible for any condition or damage resulting therefrom.
(Ord. 07-16, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1042.40  RESPONSIBILITY FOR ADMINISTRATION.
   The city shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this
regulation. The city may contract with the County Board of Health and/or other
consultants, companies or organizations to conduct inspections and monitoring
and to assist with enforcement actions.
(Ord. 07-16, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1042.41  DISCHARGE AND CONNECTION PROHIBITIONS.
   (A)   Prohibition of Illicit Discharges. No person shall discharge, or cause
to be discharged, an illicit discharge into the MS4. The commencement, conduct,
or continuance of any illicit discharge to the MS4 is prohibited except as
described below:
      (1)   Water line flushing; landscape irrigation; diverted stream flows;
rising ground waters; uncontaminated ground water infiltration; uncontaminated
pumped ground water; discharges from potable water sources; foundation drains;
air conditioning condensate; irrigation water; springs; water from crawl space
pumps; footing drains; lawn watering; individual residential car washing; flows
from riparian habitats and wetlands; de-chlorinated swimming pool discharges;
street wash water; and discharges or flows from firefighting activities. These
discharges are exempt until such time as they are determined by the city to be
significant contributors of pollutants to the MS4;
      (2)   Discharges specified in writing by the city as being necessary to
protect public health and safety; and
      (3)   (a)   Discharges from off-lot discharging home sewage treatment
systems permitted by the Cuyahoga County Board of Health for the purpose of
discharging treated sewage effluent in accordance with O.A.C. 3701-29-02 until
such time as the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency issues an NPDES
permitting mechanism for residential one-, two-, or three-family dwellings.
These discharges are exempt unless such discharges are deemed to be creating a
public health nuisance by the County Board of Health.
         (b)   In compliance with the City Storm Water Management Program,
discharges from all off-lot discharging home sewage treatment systems must
either be eliminated or have coverage under an appropriate NPDES permit issued
and approved by the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency. When such permit
coverage is available, discharges from off-lot discharging home sewage
treatment systems will no longer be exempt from the requirements of this
regulation.
   (B)   Prohibition of Illegal Connections. The construction, use,
maintenance, or continued existence of illegal connections to the MS4 and/or
sanitary sewer system is prohibited.
      (1)   This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal
connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was
permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of
connection.
      (2)   A person is considered to be in violation of this regulation if the
person connects a line conveying illicit discharges to the MS4 and/or sanitary
sewer system, or allows such a connection to continue.
(Ord. 07-16, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1042.42  MONITORING OF ILLICIT DISCHARGE AND ILLEGAL CONNECTIONS.
   (A)   Establishment of an Illicit Discharge and Illegal Connection
Monitoring Program. The city shall establish a program to detect and eliminate
illicit discharges and illegal connections to the MS4 and sanitary sewer
system. This program shall include the mapping of the MS4, including MS4
outfalls and home sewage treatment systems; the routine inspection of storm
water outfalls to the MS4, and the systematic investigation  of potential
residential, commercial, industrial, and institutional facilities for the
sources of any dry weather flows found as the result of these inspections.
Smoke and dye testing methods shall also be used.
   (B)   Inspection of Residential, Commercial, Industrial, or Institutional
Facilities.
      (1)   The city and/or its representatives acting on behalf of the
Commissioner shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to this
regulation as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this
regulation.
      (2)   The city and/or its representatives acting on behalf of the
Commissioner shall have the right to set up at facilities subject to this
regulation such devices as are necessary to conduct monitoring and/or sampling
of the facility’s storm water discharge, as determined by the city.
      (3)   The city and/or its representatives acting on behalf of the
community shall have the right to require the facility owner/operator to
install monitoring equipment as necessary. This sampling and monitoring
equipment shall be maintained at all times in safe and proper operating
condition by the facility owner/operator at the owner/operator’s expense. All
devices used to measure storm water flow and quality shall be calibrated by the
city and/or its representatives acting on behalf of the community to ensure
their accuracy.
      (4)   Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and reasonable
access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed
by the facility’s owner/operator at the written or oral request of the city and
shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the
facility owner/operator.
      (5)   Unreasonable delays by the owner(s) in allowing the city and/or its
representatives acting on behalf of the community access to a facility subject
to this regulation for the purposes of illicit discharge inspection and/or
illegal connection inspection is a violation of this regulation.
      (6)   If the city and/or its representatives acting on behalf of the
community is refused access to any part of the facility from which storm water
is discharged, and the city demonstrates probable cause to believe that there
may be a violation of this regulation, or that there is a need to inspect and/
or sample as part of an inspection and sampling program designed to verify
compliance with this regulation or any order issued hereunder, or to protect
the public health, safety and welfare, the city may seek issuance of a search
warrant, civil remedies including, but not limited to, injunctive relief, and/
or criminal remedies from any court of appropriate jurisdiction.
      (7)   Any costs associated with these inspections shall be assessed to
the facility owner/operator.
(Ord. 07-16, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1042.43  ENFORCEMENT.
   (A)   Notice of Violation. When the city finds that a person has violated a
prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this regulation, the city’s
Building Commissioner and/or the City Engineer may order compliance by written
notice of violation. Such notice must specify the violation and shall be hand
delivered, and/or sent by registered mail, to the owner/operator of the
facility. Such notice may require the following actions:
      (1)   The performance of monitoring, analyses and reporting;
      (2)   The elimination of illicit discharges or illegal connections;
      (3)   That violating discharges, practices or operations cease and
desist;
      (4)   The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; or
      (5)   The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs.
   (B)   Deadline in Notice. If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of
affected property is required, the notice of violation shall set forth a
deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said
notice shall further advise that, should the facility owner/operator fail to
remediate or restore within the established deadline, a legal action for
enforcement may be initiated.
   (C)   Compliance Standards. Any person receiving a notice of violation must
meet compliance standards within the time established in the notice of
violation.
   (D)   Administrative Hearing. If the violation has not been corrected
pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, the city’s
Building Commissioner shall schedule an administrative hearing to determine
reasons for noncompliance and to determine the next enforcement activity.
Notice of the administrative hearing shall be hand delivered and/or sent
registered mail.
   (E)   Injunctive Relief. It shall be unlawful for any owner/operator to
violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this
regulation pursuant to Ohio R.C. 3709.211. If an owner/operator has violated or
continues to violate the provisions of this regulation, the city may petition
for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the owner/operator from
activities that would create further violations or compelling the owner/
operator to perform abatement or remediation of the violation.
(Ord. 07-16, passed 3-7-2016; Ord. 07-2019, passed 3-18-2019)
§ 1042.44  REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE.
   The remedies listed in this regulation are not exclusive of any other
remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is
in the discretion of the city to seek cumulative remedies.
(Ord. 07-16, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1042.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any provision of this
regulation is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined no
more than $1,000 or imprisoned for no more than 180 days, or both, for each
offense.
   (B)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.
(Ord. 07-16, passed 3-7-2016)
CHAPTER 1043:  SEWER RATES AND CHARGES
Section
1043.01   Deficits prohibited
1043.02   Residential sanitary sewer charges
1043.03   Industrial and commercial sanitary sewer charges
1043.04   Billing procedures
1043.05   Changes of address or ownership
1043.06   Payments and penalties
1043.07   Delinquencies
1043.08   Liberal interpretation
1043.09   Grievances and appeals
1043.10   Deposit of proceeds
Cross-reference:
   Connections to EPA-financed sewerage system, see
Chapter 1044
   Sanitary facilities in subdivisions, see §
1248.05
   Sewers generally, see
Chapter 1042
   Storm Sewer Maintenance Fund, see §
236.15
   Wastewater treatment plants, see
Chapter 1342
Statutory reference:
   Compulsory sewer connections, see Ohio R.C. 729.06
   Management and control of sewerage system, see Ohio R.C. 729.50 et seq.
   Sewerage rates, see Ohio R.C. 729.49, 729.52
§ 1043.01  DEFICITS PROHIBITED.
   As part of the annual review provided herein, the Director of Finance and
the Director of Public Service shall make an estimate of the revenues and
expenses for the next year for the Sanitary Sewer Fund. After deducting the
estimated operation and maintenance costs; the estimated debt service costs;
and any repair and replacement reserve payment, from the total estimated
revenues and net carry-over from the previous year for the Fund, the Fund shall
maintain a positive year-end balance.
(Ord. 08-08, passed 1-22-2008)
§ 1043.02  RESIDENTIAL SANITARY SEWER CHARGES.
   Sanitary sewer charges shall be charged to all parcels connected to the
sanitary sewer system and to all parcels having the ability to connect to the
sanitary sewer system regardless of whether they are actually connected, as
follows:
   Presently and through June 30, 2016 the rates shall be as provided for
below:
 
Type of Domestic User                                    Sanitary Sewer Charge
Single-family house, government building or apartment or $80/year
condominium having more than 3 bedrooms:
Vacant parcels                                           $70/year
3 bedroom apartment or condominium:
2 bedroom apartment or condominium:                      $60/year
1 bedroom apartment or condominium:                      $50/year
 
   From July 1, 2016 and through June 30, 2020 the rates shall be as provided
for below:
 
Type of Domestic User                                    Sanitary Sewer Charge
Single-family house, government building or apartment or $132/year
condominium having more than 3 bedrooms:
Vacant parcels                                           $132/year
3 bedroom apartment or condominium:                      $116/year
2 bedroom apartment or condominium:                      $100/year
1 bedroom apartment or condominium:                      $84/year
 
   Beginning July 1, 2020, the rates shall be as provided for below:
 
Type of Domestic User                                    Sanitary Sewer Charge
Single-family house, government building or apartment or $152/year
condominium having more than 3 bedrooms:
Vacant parcels                                           $152/year
3 bedroom apartment or condominium:                      $132/year
2 bedroom apartment or condominium:                      $112/year
1 bedroom apartment or condominium:                      $96/year
 
(Ord. 08-08, passed 1-22-2008; Ord. 30-16, passed 5-23-2016)
§ 1043.03  INDUSTRIAL AND COMMERCIAL SANITARY SEWER CHARGES.
   (A)   The quarterly sanitary sewer charge for any property classified as C,
D or E Zoning shall be the greater of: $20; or $4.77 per 1,000 cubic feet of
water furnished to the premises by the City of Cleveland Division of Water
during that period. This shall be the fee through June 20, 2016.
   (B)   From July 1, 2016 and through June 30, 2020, the quarterly sanitary
sewer charge for any property classified as C, D or E Zoning shall be the
greater of: $33 or $7.87 per 1,000 cubic feet of water furnished to the
premises by the City of Cleveland Division of Water during that period.
   (C)   Beginning July 1, 2020, the quarterly sanitary sewer charge for any
property classified as C, D or E Zoning shall be the greater of: $38 or $9.07
per 1,000 cubic feet of water furnished to the premises by the City of
Cleveland Division of Water during that period.
(Ord. 08-08, passed 1-22-2008; Ord. 30-16, passed 5-23-2016; Ord. 50-16, passed
12-19-2016)
§ 1043.04  BILLING PROCEDURES.
   (A)   The charges established by this chapter shall be billed after the
service is rendered.
   (B)   Bills shall be mailed to the owner of the property at the mailing
address of the property being billed unless the owner shall, in writing,
request the bill be sent to a different mailing address of the owner. Bills
shall not be sent to a lessee of the property. In the case where the land is
separately owned from the building, the bill shall be sent to the mailing
address of the owner of the building.
   (C)   Any current user of the city’s sanitary sewer system who is determined
by the Director of Finance to have accumulated delinquencies of sanitary sewer
service charges while such user owned or occupied the property to which such
charges were applicable and who was not furnished by the city with periodic
statements as to those charges became due shall have the option to pay such
charges in installments, under the following conditions.
      (1)   The Director of Finance shall notify each such current user, by
notice sent to the address to which statements for sanitary sewer service
charges are to be sent, of the aggregate amount of the unpaid charges that are
owed by that user to the city and of the user’s option to pay the delinquent
amount in installments as provided in this chapter.
      (2)   Any portion of the unpaid amount that is not received by the city
within 30 days of the mailing of such notice shall be payable in installments
of $5 per month, which installments shall be added to, and shall be payable
with, the current charges shown on the next and subsequent quarterly statements
sent to the user.
      (3)   Payments made by a user pursuant to such quarterly statements shall
be applied first to the current user charge, and any balance shall be credited
against the delinquent amount. Any amounts that are paid in excess of the total
shown on a quarterly statement shall be applied to reduce the amount of the
accumulated delinquency, but shall not reduce the amount of any remaining
monthly installment payments. The final monthly installment shall be in such
amount as shall be required to satisfy the then remaining amount of the
delinquency after application of the previous installments.
      (4)   The Director of Finance shall, at the request of any user or of a
prospective purchaser of the property of a user whose property is subject to
the provisions of this section, furnish to such person a statement of the then-
current balance of the delinquent sanitary sewer service charges that are owed
with respect to that user’s property. Any accumulated delinquent amount shall
constitute an obligation related to the property and shall be payable by each
then-current owner regardless of any transfer of ownership or control of the
property.
      (5)   Unpaid delinquent amounts that are not paid as they become due
pursuant to this section shall be certified for collection as provided in §
1043.07.
   (D)   The Director of Finance and the Director of Law shall take such
actions not inconsistent with the provisions of this section as they shall
determine to be reasonable or useful to collect delinquent sanitary sewer
service charges from prior owners or occupants of the property in question,
including entering into installment payment arrangements with such users.
(Ord. 08-08, passed 1-22-2008)
§ 1043.05  CHANGES OF ADDRESS OR OWNERSHIP.
   (A)   Upon the change of his or her mailing address, an owner of property
served by the sewage collection system shall inform the city of the change.
Failure to inform the city of a change of address shall not excuse an owner
from any payment penalties incurred because of the failure to report an address
change.
   (B)   Prior to the sale of a property, the present owner shall contact the
city to arrange for proration of the final bill. The final bill shall be sent
to the mailing address specified by the present owner. Failure of a previous
owner to comply with this part shall not excuse the new owner from
responsibility for any and all delinquencies certified pursuant to the Ohio
Revised Code, current charges or penalties remaining unpaid by the previous
owner.
   (C)   Prior to the sale of a property, the purchaser shall contact the city
to arrange for a proration of the first bill and to inform the city of the
mailing address of the new owner. Failure to comply with this part shall not
excuse the new owner from responsibility for any and all delinquencies
certified pursuant to the Ohio Revised Code, current charges or penalties
remaining unpaid by the previous owner.
(Ord. 08-08, passed 1-22-2008)
§ 1043.06  PAYMENTS AND PENALTIES.
   (A)   Payment shall be due on the thirtieth after the date of the bill. If
that thirtieth day of the month falls on a Sunday or holiday, payment shall be
due the previous business day. If payment is made by mail, the envelope must be
postmarked not later than the due date of the bill. A penalty of 10% of the
amount billed shall be added to any bill that is not paid by the due date.
   (B)   Checks and money orders shall be paid to the City of Broadview
Heights.
   (C)   A bill that remains unpaid at the end of the calendar year will be
certified to the County Auditor to be collected on the real estate taxes as a
sewer assessment.
   (D)   If a bank should return a check for insufficient funds, an account
will be subject to an insufficient funds charge of $25.
   (E)   If a person has two checks returned for insufficient funds, the city
may require all future payments to be made in cash or money order.
   (F)   Upon the claim of a person that the return of a check for insufficient
funds was a bank error, the city may waive an insufficient funds charge and/or
accept payment by check if the bank supplies adequate documentation of its
error.
   (G)   A person should contact the Finance Department if he or she fails to
receive a bill by the eighteenth day of the first month of a calendar quarter.
Upon a claim of a person that a bill was not received:
      (1)   If the records of the city show the bill was duly mailed to the
last reported mailing address, the person shall be responsible for timely
payment of the bill.
      (2)   If the records of the city show the bill was not duly mailed to the
last reported mailing address, the Finance Department may either:
         (a)   Issue a bill due ten days from the date of mailing; or
         (b)   Add the unpaid charge to the following quarter’s bill without a
penalty.
   (H)   In using the U.S. Postal Service for delivery of their payment of a
sewer service charge, users assume responsibility for any failure of the U.S.
Postal Service to deliver the payment to the city. Accordingly the Finance
Department shall not waive payment penalties for any person claiming that the
U.S. Postal Service failed to deliver a payment.
(Ord. 08-08, passed 1-22-2008)
§ 1043.07  DELINQUENCIES.
   Any unpaid billings, together with accrued penalties, shall be annually
certified to the County Auditor, pursuant to the Ohio Revised Code, who shall
place such delinquencies upon the real property tax duplicate for the property
receiving sewage service. Such delinquencies shall be a lien upon the property
from the date the delinquency is placed upon the real property tax duplicate
and shall be collected in the same manner as other real estate taxes. Failure
to pay delinquencies certified may result in a foreclosure of the property by
the County Prosecuting Attorney. This part shall be in addition to all other
collection remedies provided by law including an action in Small Claims Court.
(Ord. 08-08, passed 1-22-2008)
§ 1043.08  LIBERAL INTERPRETATION.
   This chapter shall be interpreted liberally to effectuate its broad remedial
purpose of protection of the public health, safety and welfare. Absent a
showing of actual abuse of discretion, the city’s interpretation of this
chapter shall have a strong presumption of validity.
(Ord. 08-08, passed 1-22-2008)
§ 1043.09  GRIEVANCES AND APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person aggrieved by a decision of the city under this chapter may
file a written grievance with the Director of Public Service. The written
grievance shall set forth the substance of the city’s decision and the basis of
the person’s complaint.
   (B)   The Director of Public Service shall investigate the grievance and
issue a written determination. The determination shall include the following:
      (1)   Name, address and location of the premises of the complainant;
      (2)   A summary of the complainant’s claim;
      (3)   A summary of the facts revealed by the city’s investigation;
      (4)   An interpretation of any applicable regulation, law or policy;
      (5)   A notice of the person’s right of appeal to the city; and
      (6)   A copy of this grievance and appeal procedure.
(Ord. 08-08, passed 1-22-2008)
§ 1043.10  DEPOSIT OF PROCEEDS.
   Money received by the city in payment of the charges imposed and billed
pursuant to §§
1043.02 and
1043.03 for sanitary sewer system services shall be deposited by the Director
of Finance in the Sanitary Sewer Maintenance Fund. Interest earned on
investment of the moneys in that Fund shall be credited to that Fund, and the
city’s expenses incurred in the billing and administration of that Fund shall
be charged to that Fund.
(Ord. 08-08, passed 1-22-2008)
CHAPTER 1044:  CONNECTIONS TO EPA-FINANCED SEWERAGE SYSTEM
Section
1044.01   Definitions
1044.02   Use benefits
1044.03   Connection permit required; charges
1044.04   Renovation permits; charges
1044.05   Deposit of moneys collected
1044.06   Additional charges
1044.07   Violations; nonpayment of charges; remedies of city
1044.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   East Wallings Road Sanitary Sewer Fund, see §
236.22
   Sanitary facilities in subdivisions, see §
1248.05
   Sewer rates and charges, see
Chapter 1043
   Sewers generally, see
Chapter 1042
   Wastewater treatment plants, see
Chapter 1342
Statutory reference:
   Compulsory sewer connections, see Ohio R.C. 729.06
   Interference with sewage flow, see Ohio R.C. 4933.24
   Management and control of sewerage system, see Ohio R.C. 729.50 et seq.
   Sewerage rates, see Ohio R.C. 729.49, 729.52
§ 1044.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter.
   “Completion date.” The date on which any improvements to the system made
pursuant to a resolution of necessity adopted by Council pursuant to Ohio R.C.
727.12 are certified by the City Engineer to be substantially complete and
available for connection thereto.
   “Connection.” The connection of any service sewers to the EPA-financed
system.
   “EPA-financed system” or “system.” The sanitary sewerage system authorized
in Ordinance 27-84, passed April 2, 1984.
   “Industrial wastes.” Water-carried and liquid wastes from industrial or
commercial processes as distinct from sanitary sewage.
   “Intercepting sewer.” Those sections of the system that intercept sewage and
wastes from trunk sewers and that transport such sewage and wastes to the
wastewater treatment facilities.
   “Lateral or local sewers.” Those sections of the system, eight inches in
size or larger, that are designed and constructed to collect sewage and wastes
from service sewers and that transport such sewage and wastes to the trunk or
sub-trunk sewers. Such sewers provide service for local service for individual
streets only.
   “Permit.” Permission from the Building Commissioner or his or her designated
representative for residences, apartments, business buildings or properties,
institutions and industrial establishments to connect to a public sewer or to
the EPA-financed system.
   “Renovation.” Any renovation, construction, rehabilitation, remodeling,
addition to or improvement of any building connected to, or, upon completion of
such renovation, to be connected to, the system.
   “Sanitary sewage.” Sewage that is discharged or discharging from the
sanitary conveniences of dwellings (including houses and hotels), office
buildings, factories or institutions, and that is free from storm water,
surface water and industrial wastes.
   “Service sewers.” Those sections of the system and private sewers that
collect sewage and wastes from residences, apartments, business buildings or
properties, institutions and industrial establishments and that transport such
sewage and wastes to the lateral or local sewers.
   “Sewage” or “waste.” The water-carried wastes from residences, apartments,
business buildings or properties, institutions and/or industrial
establishments, together with such ground water, surface water and storm water
which may be present, and only becoming water wastes when permitted or
authorized by a permit issued by the Building Commissioner or his or her
designated representative.
   “Trunk or sub-trunk sewers.” Those sections of the system that collect
sewage and wastes from lateral or local sewers and that transport such sewage
and wastes to the intercepting sewers.
   “Use benefits.” The number of units of use benefits considered to be
conferred upon any property by virtue of construction of the system, to be
calculated according to the schedule set forth in §
1044.02.
   “Wastewater treatment facilities.” Any arrangement of devices and structures
used for the treatment of sewage, including interceptor sewers owned and
operated by the Northeast Ohio Regional Sewer District for the purpose of
conveying sanitary sewage to wastewater treatment facilities.
(Ord. 88-171, passed 12-5-1988)
§ 1044.02  USE BENEFITS.
   (A)   The number of use benefits to be conferred upon property shall be
calculated in accordance with the following schedule:
 
Type of Use Use Benefits
Apartments, including condominium
units:
   Efficiency and one-bedroom     Number of units x .625
   Two-bedroom                    Number of units x .75
   Three-bedroom and over         Number of units x .875
Bowling alleys                       Number of lanes x .25
Car washes:
   Manual                         Number of stalls x 1.6
   Automatic                      Number of stalls x 5.3
   Drive-through, automatic (no   33.80 units
recirculation)
   Drive-through, automatic (with 5.3 units
recirculation)
Churches                             Number of seats x .03
Factories, industrial establishments Number of estimated employees x .1
Food service:
   Ordinary restaurant            Number of seats x .25
   Twenty-four hour               Number of seats x .25
   Tavern (limited meal service)  Number of seats x .25
   Drive-in                       Number of seats and/or stalls x .15
   Vending machine                Number of seats x .2
Hospital                             Number of beds x .6 (design capacity)
Institutions, resident               Number of persons x .25 (design
                                     capacity)
Laundry, coin-operated               Number of machines x .10 (design
                                     capacity)
Mobile home parks, trailers (each)   Number of pads x .75
Motels, hotels                       Number of rooms x .3
Nursing and rest homes               Number of persons x .45 (design
                                     capacity)
Office buildings                     Number of persons x .06 (design capacity
                                     - minimum five persons)
Schools                              Numbers of pupils, teachers and staff x
                                     .08 (design capacity)
Service stations                     Number of bays x 2.0
                                     Each 1,000 sq. ft. or part thereof of
Shopping centers                     store or building therein not devoted to
                                     one of the other uses x .3 (Maximum
                                     design-density)
Single-family residence              Unit of one
Swimming pools                       Design capacity number of swimmers x .02
 
   (B)   For any use not shown, the number of units shall be determined by the
City Engineer by the use of accepted engineering practices and on the basis of
anticipated sewage flows from the applicant when  compared to a single-family
residence where the flow of 400 gallons per residence per day will be
considered as a unit of one.
(Ord. 88-171, passed 12-5-1988)
§ 1044.03  CONNECTION PERMIT REQUIRED; CHARGES.
   (A)   No person, corporation, public agency, partnership or association
shall connect, or cause to be connected, any building or other structure,
directly or indirectly, with the EPA-financed system for the purpose of
discharging sanitary sewage or industrial waste therefrom without first
securing from the Building Commissioner or his or her designated representative
a permit for such purpose in a form prescribed by Council. In addition, prior
to the issuance of such permit, the applicant therefor shall pay the charge
provided for in division (B) hereof and any applicable additional charges
determined in accordance with this section.
   (B)   The Building Commissioner shall not issue a permit for the purpose
described in division (A) hereof until the applicant has paid a charge of $110,
which charge is intended to reimburse the city for the reasonable expenses of
inspection and other administrative costs related to the making of connections
to the system.
   (C)   Where the connection is made into the system, and the property to be
connected has not been assessed for a portion of the cost of constructing the
system, the Building Commissioner shall not issue a permit for the purpose
described in division (A) hereof until the applicant has paid, in addition to
the charge specified in division (B) hereof, a connection charge calculated by
determining the number of use benefits in accordance with the schedule set
forth in §
1044.02, by multiplying the number of use benefits by the rate established in
this division (C) for one unit and by multiplying that product by a fraction,
the numerator of which is the construction cost index as published in the
Engineering News Record as of the date nearest to the date of the application
for the connection permit, and the denominator of which is the construction
cost index as of the date nearest to the completion date. The charge for a unit
of one is hereby established as $628.54.
   (D)   Where the connection is made directly into a trunk or lateral sewer or
into a private sewer which connects directly to a lateral sewer, and the
property to be connected has not been assessed for a portion of the cost of
constructing the system, the Building Commissioner shall not issue a permit for
the purpose described in division (A) hereof until the applicant therefor has
paid, in addition to the charges specified in divisions (B) and (C) hereof, a
connection charge calculated by determining the number of use benefits in
accordance with the schedule set forth in §
1044.02, by multiplying the number of use benefits by the rate established in
this division (D) for one unit and by multiplying the product by a fraction,
the numerator of which is the construction cost index as published in the
Engineering News Record as of the date nearest to the date of the application
for the connection permit, and the denominator of which is the construction
cost index as of the date nearest to the completion date. The charge for a unit
shall be based upon frontage and is hereby established as $24.45 per foot.
   (E)   The permit charges determined under divisions (C) and (D) hereof stall
be increased by an amount equal to 5% of the initial charge on July 1, 1988,
and on July 1 each year thereafter until July 1, 2007. Such charges as so
increased, when added to the charge set forth in division (B) hereof, shall be
the total connection permit charge. The incremental charges as set forth in
this division (E) are designed to offset the interest costs incurred by the
city in constructing the system.
   (F)   In any case where a connection is to be made from any lot or land, or
building or other structure thereon, directly into a trunk or lateral sewer or
into a private sewer which connects directly to a lateral sewer, and such lot
or land has not been assessed for a portion of the cost of constructing the
system, the aggregate of the charges provided in divisions (B), (C) and (D)
hereof shall be increased by an amount equal to the number of front feet of the
lot or land bounding and abutting upon the street or easement in which the
sewer to which the connection to be made is located $628.54 per unit; $24.45
per foot of frontage, plus interest at the rate of 5% per year commencing with
the completion date of the particular improvement from which the property
making the connection will benefit.
(Ord. 88-171, passed 12-5-1988)
§ 1044.04  RENOVATION PERMITS; CHARGES.
   (A)   Permit Required. No person, corporation, public agency, partnership or
association shall renovate, or cause to be renovated, any building or other
structure in such a way as would cause the number of use benefits for such
property, as determined in accordance with the schedule set forth in §
1044.02, to be increased by more than 15% without first securing from the
Building Commissioner or his or her designated representative a permit for such
renovation on a form prescribed by Council. In addition, prior to the issuance
of such permit, the applicant therefor shall pay the charge provided for in
division (B) hereof and any applicable additional charges determined in
accordance with this chapter.
   (B)   Trunk Charges. Where renovation is to be made and the property to be
renovated has been assessed or charged a connection charge for a portion of the
cost of constructing the EPA-financed system, the Building Commissioner shall
not issue a permit for the purpose described in division (A) hereof until the
applicant therefor has paid, in addition to any applicable charges specified in
§
1044.03 or any other section of this chapter, a renovation sewer charge
calculated as follows:
      (1)   Determine the number of use benefits in accordance with the
schedule set forth in §
1044.02, multiply that number by the applicable cost as hereinafter established
for a unit of one and multiply the product by a fraction, the numerator of
which is the construction cost index as published in the Engineering News
Record as of the date nearest to the date of the application for the permit
required by this section, and the denominator of which is the construction cost
index as of the date nearest to the completion date;
      (2)   Determine the amount of the special assessment which was in fact
levied against such lot or parcel as of the completion date and increase such
amount by an amount equal to 5% of the initial special assessment multiplied by
the number of full year periods which have passed since the special assessment
was levied; and
      (3)   Subtract the amount determined in accordance with division (B)(2)
hereof from the amount determined in accordance with division (B)(1) hereof.
The positive amount so calculated shall be the applicable cost under this
division (B). The charge for a unit of one is hereby established as $628.54.
   (C)   Lateral Charges. Where renovation is to be made and the property to be
renovated has been assessed or charged a connection charge for a portion of the
cost of constructing the system, and such property is connected directly to a
trunk sewer, lateral sewer or private sewer which connects directly to a
lateral sewer, the Building Commissioner shall not issue a permit for the
purpose described in division (A) hereof until the  applicant therefor has
paid, in addition to the charge specified in division (B) hereof and any
applicable charges specified in §
1044.03 or any other section of this chapter, a renovation sewer charge
calculated as follows:
      (1)   Determine the number of use benefits in accordance with the
schedule set forth in §
1044.02, multiply that number by the applicable cost as hereinafter established
for a unit of one and multiply the product by a fraction, the numerator of
which is the construction cost index as published in the Engineering News
Record as of the date nearest to the date of the application for the permit
required by this section, and the denominator of which is the construction cost
index as of the date nearest to the completion date;
      (2)   Determine the amount of the special assessment which was in fact
levied against such lot or parcel as of the completion date and increase such
amount by an amount equal to 5% of the initial special assessment multiplied by
the number of full year periods which have passed since the special assessment
was levied; and
      (3)   Subtract the amount determined in accordance with division (C)(2)
hereof from the amount determined in accordance with division (C)(1) hereof.
The positive amount so calculated shall be the applicable cost under this
division (C).
(Ord. 88-171, passed 12-5-1988)
§ 1044.05  DEPOSIT OF MONEYS COLLECTED.
   All moneys collected by the city as charges pursuant to this chapter shall
be deposited in the Sewer Fund, to be used in accordance with Ohio R.C. 729.52
or as provided by the city charter or other ordinances.
(Ord. 88-171, passed 12-5-1988)
§ 1044.06  ADDITIONAL CHARGES.
   The imposition of charges and the issuance of permits provided for in this
chapter shall not preclude the subsequent levy of special assessments against
benefitted lots and lands to provide funds for the construction of sanitary
sewers required to provide local sewer service to such lots and lands. The
permits and charges provided for in this chapter are in addition to any other
permits and charges required by law and by ordinance or regulation of the city.
(Ord. 88-171, passed 12-5-1988)
§ 1044.07  VIOLATIONS; NONPAYMENT OF CHARGES; REMEDIES OF CITY.
   (A)   If any lot or land, or building or other structure thereon, is
connected directly or indirectly to the EPA-financed system in violation of any
of the provisions of this chapter, and the owner, agent, lessee, tenant or
occupant of such lot or land fails or refuses to disconnect the same upon being
directed to do so by the Mayor, the Mayor is hereby authorized to cause such
lot or land to be disconnected from the system, and the violator shall be
liable to the city for the cost of making such disconnection.
   (B)   If any permit charge or monthly installment therefor is not paid when
due, the amount thereof shall be certified by Council to the County Auditor who
shall place the same upon the real property tax list and duplicate against the
property for which the permit is required. Such charge shall be a lien on such
property from the date the same is placed upon the real property tax list and
duplicate by the County Auditor and shall  be collected in the same manner as
other taxes.
(Ord. 88-171, passed 12-5-1988)
§ 1044.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be fined not more than $500 for each offense. A separate offense
shall be deemed committed each day during or on which a violation or
noncompliance continues after 30 days following the original conviction.
(Ord. 88-171, passed 12-5-1988)
CHAPTER 1045:  GAS
Cross-reference:
   Oil and gas wells, see
Chapter 824
   Prosecutions for theft of utilities, see §
642.26
Editor’s note:
   The city contracts from time to time for natural gas service to the city and
its residents. Copies of the latest relevant legislation may be obtained, at
cost, from the Clerk of Council.
   There are no sections in Chapter 1045. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross-references and any future legislation.
Statutory reference:
   Compulsory gas connections, see Ohio R.C. 743.37
   Power to erect gas and electric works, see Ohio R.C. 743.34
   Purchase of gas, see Ohio R.C. 715.07
CHAPTER 1046:  ELECTRICITY
Cross-reference:
   Electrical permit fees, see §
1449.08(F)
   Prosecutions for theft of utilities, see §
642.26
   Street lighting, see
Chapter 1330
Editor’s note:
   The city contracts with the Cleveland Electric Illuminating Company and the
Ohio Edison Company for electric service to the city and its residents. Copies
of the latest relevant legislation may be obtained, at cost, from the Clerk of
Council.
   There are no sections in Chapter 1046. This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross-references and any future legislation.
Statutory reference:
   Contract for electricity, see Ohio R.C. 743.38, 4933.04
CHAPTER 1047:  STORM DRAINAGE
Section
1047.01   Lot Storm Drainage Relief Program
1047.02   Storm Drainage Upgrade Program
1047.03   Storm water relief level of service
Cross-reference:
   Storm Water Management Program, see §
1041.01
   Storm Water Management Program Task Force, see §
1041.02
   Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan, see
Chapter 1334
§ 1047.01  LOT STORM DRAINAGE RELIEF PROGRAM.
   (A)   The City Engineer may identify lots within the city which are in need
of storm drainage relief based on the following criteria:
      (1)   The causes of storm drainage issues for which relief is desired are
related to the original design and construction of the developments on the
properties and not related to changes in the property and its topography by
individual owners of lots of record since the original construction on the
property;
      (2)   The storm drainage problem for which relief is desired cannot be
attributed, based on engineering analysis, to actions by individual property
owners as opposed to the original developer or the natural topography of the
area for which relief is requested;
      (3)   The benefit service area shall be a minimum of three or more
parcels;
      (4)   The cause of the lot drainage problem cannot be attributed to a
single entity;
      (5)   Any and all easements or rights-of-way from all affected property
owners shall be made available at no cost to the city; and
      (6)   All affected property owners upon which the relief program is
determined necessary by the City Engineer shall agree to the proposed
remediation and the cost sharing as set forth in this section.
   (B)   The Mayor, based upon a determination by the City Engineer and Service
Committee, shall have final approval of all such projects and shall schedule
the order in which the work is completed and his or her determination shall be
final. Based upon findings by the City Engineer and other analysis as
appropriate, the Mayor may declare certain areas and/or individual properties
of the city ineligible for this program.
   (C)   The cost to the individual property owners for their assessment for
the private property benefit shall be based upon equipment and materials used
in the event the work is performed by city employees. If the city determines it
is necessary to subcontract the work, the total project cost will be assessed
based upon benefitting parcels. The City Engineer will provide preliminary
assessment costs to each parcel effected.
   (D)   Prior to the start of any work, the affected property owners shall be
notified of the total cost for which they will be responsible and a copy of
such notice signed by the property owners and acknowledging their agreement to
pay within the terms of this section must be received by the Director of
Finance. Property owners shall pay the calculated amount prior to commencement
of work.
   (E)   All affected property owners shall be required to sign a joint
agreement with the city setting forth the terms and conditions contained in
this section and further providing that the property owners shall be
responsible for all future maintenance and repairs to the system after its
installation. Such agreement shall be in a form so that, if the city elects to
do so, it can be recorded on the records of the subject property with the
County Recorder.
   (F)   The application of this program to any particular parcel within the
city shall not create a right in other property owners regarding a similar
application. The number of applications that may be approved in any year shall
be limited by the funds available as established in the annual budget by
Council, the availability of city works for construction of the project, the
review of each application by the City Engineer, and the discretion of the
Mayor in establishing the priority and scheduling of projects.
   (G)   Upon approval and execution of all documents, the determination of the
construction schedule shall be that of the Director of Public Service.
(Ord. 20-05, passed 2-7-2005)
§ 1047.02  STORM DRAINAGE UPGRADE PROGRAM.
   (A)   (1)   If deemed necessary by the City Engineer and/or the Director of
Public Service, a residential property owner may participate in the front
footage storm drainage upgrade and/or drive pipe replacement program. The storm
drainage and drive pipe upgrade are subject to the approval of the City
Engineer.
      (2)   The Director of Public Service shall schedule the order in which
the upgrades are completed and his or her determination shall be final.
   (B)   Upgrading of the front footage of the storm drainage ditch shall
include the installation of a 12 inch in diameter plastic pipe and catch basin.
A pipe greater than 12 inches in diameter may be installed if determined
necessary by the City Engineer.
   (C)   The plastic pipe will be connected to the storm water outlet and all
hook-ups for the residential structure.
   (D)   The City Engineer and/or the Director of Public Service shall
determine cost to the property owner for such upgrading as described in
subsections (A) through (C) hereof which shall be per lineal foot of lot
frontage as determined by the County Tax Map.
   (E)   Replacement of the drive pipe only will require the resident to accept
the cost of materials including, but not limited to, restoration of the
driveway.
   (F)   (1)   Prior to the start of any individual upgrade, the property owner
shall be notified of the total cost for which they will be responsible and a
copy of such notice signed by the property owner and acknowledging their
agreement to pay within the terms of this section must be received by the
Director of Finance.
      (2)   Property owners must pay the costs as described in division (D)
herein in one lump sum within 60 days of receiving a notice of completion of
the job from the city. Payments shall be made to the Finance Department.
   (G)   Should a property owner fail to pay as set forth herein, the city
shall place said moneys due as a lien on the property owner’s tax duplicate.
   (H)   (1)   Whoever violates any provisions of this section shall be fined
no more than $500 per day and each day’s violation shall constitute a separate
offense.
      (2)   Nothing herein shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful
action as is necessary to prevent or remedy a violation.
   (I)   (1)   The City Engineer shall inspect drive pipes to determine if they
are in good working order.
      (2)   If the drive pipe is in need of replacement, the Director of Public
Services and/or City Engineer will notify the resident by mail with the cost of
materials. The resident at the time may pull a permit and have a private
contractor do the work.
      (3)   After 30 days, if the resident has not agreed to pay for the cost
of materials, the city shall perform the work and assess the benefitting parcel
for 125% of the materials and labor.
   (J)   (1)   The maintenance of drainage ditches is the responsibility of the
resident.
      (2)   The City Engineer shall inspect drainage ditches periodically.
      (3)   If debris and/or obstructions are found, the resident will be
notified and corrective action must take place within 30 days.
      (4)   After 30 days a re-inspection will occur. If corrective actions are
not taken, the city will perform the work and assess the benefitting parcel
125% of the cost of materials and labor.
      (5)   The city periodically will determine by the Director of Public
Services and/or City Engineer will re-ditch drainage ditches at no cost to the
resident.
(Ord. 19-05, passed 2-7-2005; Ord. 23-2017, passed 7-10-2017; Ord. 29-2017,
passed 9-18-2017)
§ 1047.03  STORM WATER RELIEF LEVEL OF SERVICE.
   (A)   All infrastructure improvements related to storm water relief within
the city right-of-way will be performed at city expense. The City Council may
elect to enact a full or partial assessment of benefitting parcels.
   (B)   All infrastructure improvements related to storm water management
within a recorded city easement will be performed at city expense. The City
Council may elect to enact a full or partial assessment of benefitting parcels.
   (C)   Any retention basins, creeks or waterways which service a drainage
area located on private property will be inspected by designated city
officials.
      (1)   Minor obstructions will be periodically removed from such drainage
courses to allow them to function.
      (2)   Any major maintenance or repair required of a retention basin or
waterway will be the determination of the city; notification will be made to
the respective property owner for action.
      (3)   If the property owner does not take appropriate action, the city
may perform the work and assess the property owner.
   (D)   If an infrastructure improvement is required on private property, the
City Engineer will inspect the problem. The City Engineer will provide a report
and recommendations to the Service Committee. The Service Committee will then
forward a recommendation to City Council for approval. City Council may choose
to assess the effected parcel(s).
   (E)   All work performed on private property will follow the guidelines
defined in §§
1047.01 and
1047.02.
   (F)   The effective date of the storm water level of service is February 7,
2005.
(Ord. 18-05, passed 2-7-2005)
CHAPTER 1048:  SEPTIC SYSTEMS
Section
1048.01   Point of sale inspections of septic systems.
§ 1048.01  POINT OF SALE INSPECTIONS OF SEPTIC SYSTEMS.
   (A)   Certificate of Inspection Required upon Transfer of Premises. No owner
of any premises with a septic system located thereon shall enter into agreement
to sell, convey or transfer said premises, without first obtaining from the
County Board of Health a Certificate of Septic System Evaluation.
   (B)   Presentment of Certificate upon Transfer of Real Estate (Escrow). No
person, agent, firm or corporation shall sell, convey or transfer any premises
with a septic system located thereon, or any interest therein, without
presenting to the prospective purchaser, grantee or transferee a current
Certificate of Septic System Evaluation, and, when an escrow has been
established, without depositing in escrow prior to delivery of possession or
transfer of title, a statement from the transferee acknowledging the receipt of
such certificate.
   (C)   Escrow Agent; Disbursal of Funds Without Statement Prohibited. No
person, firm or corporation acting in the capacity of an escrow agent in any
real estate transaction involving the sale of any premises with a septic system
located thereon within the city shall disburse any funds until the provisions
of this chapter have been complied with.
   (D)   Waiver. The Mayor shall have the authority to waive these requirements
if it is established that the premises in question will be demolished.
   (E)   Penalty. A violation of any provision of this section is a misdemeanor
of the first degree.
(Ord. 113-05, passed 9-6-2005)
CHAPTER 1049:  POST-CONSTRUCTION WATER QUALITY RUNOFF
Section
1049.01   Comprehensive storm water management plan
1049.02   Purpose
1049.03   Disclaimer of liability
1049.04   Conflicts, severability, nuisances and responsibility
1049.05   Effective date
1049.06   Scope
1049.07   Consultations
1049.08   Post-construction water quality control plan
1049.09   Easements
1049.10   Maintenance
1049.11   Minimum standards
1049.12   Redevelopment projects
1049.13   Alternative actions
1049.14   Compliance with other rules and regulations
1049.15   Violations
1049.16   Construction and maintenance guarantee
1049.17   Application procedures for post-construction water quality plans
1049.18   Definitions
1049.99   Penalty
§ 1049.01  COMPREHENSIVE STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   The post-construction water quality plan developed to meet this regulation
will be coordinated and combined with the riparian and wetland setback plan and
the construction site conservation plan that are developed for the same site.
These plans will be titled and numbered in one consecutive sequence to make a
comprehensive storm water management plan for the site. The comprehensive storm
water management plan so developed will serve as the storm water pollution
prevention plan (SWP3) required by Ohio EPA as part of the NPDES Storm Water
Permit for General Construction.
(Ord. 17-05, passed 2-7-2005)
§ 1049.02  PURPOSE.
   The intent of this regulation is to:
   (A)   Allow development while reducing damage to receiving water resources
and drainage systems that may be caused by new development or redevelopment
activities;
   (B)   Protect and maintain the receiving stream’s physical, chemical,
biological characteristics and stream functions;
   (C)   Provide perpetual management of storm water runoff quality and
quantity;
   (D)   Establish consistent technically feasible and operationally practical
standards to achieve a level of storm water quantity and quality control that
will minimize damage to public and private property and degradation of water
resources, and will promote and maintain the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the city;
   (E)   Control storm water runoff resulting from soil disturbing activities;
   (F)   Preserve, to the maximum extent practicable (MEP), the natural
drainage characteristics of the building site;
   (G)   Preserve, to the maximum extent practicable (MEP), natural
infiltration and groundwater recharge, and maintain subsurface flow that
replenishes water resources, wetlands and wells;
   (H)   Assure that storm water quality controls are incorporated into site
planning and design at the earliest possible stage;
   (I)   Reduce the need for costly treatment and mitigation for the damage to
and loss of water resources that are the result of inadequate storm water
quality control;
   (J)   Reduce the long-term expense of remedial projects needed to address
problems caused by inadequate storm water quality control;
   (K)   Require the incorporation of water quality protection that encourages
and promotes habitat preservation into the construction of storm water
management practices; and
   (L)   Ensure that all storm water quality practices are properly designed,
constructed and maintained.
(Ord. 17-05, passed 2-7-2005)
§ 1049.03  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   Neither submission of a plan under the provisions herein, nor compliance
with the provisions of these regulations, shall relieve any person or entity
from responsibility for damage to any person or property that is otherwise
imposed by law.
(Ord. 17-05, passed 2-7-2005)
§ 1049.04  CONFLICTS, SEVERABILITY, NUISANCES AND RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Where this chapter imposes a greater restriction upon land than is
imposed or required by other city provisions of law, ordinance, contract or
deed, the provisions of this chapter shall prevail.
   (B)   If a court of competent jurisdiction declares any clause, section or
provision of these regulations invalid or unconstitutional, the validity of the
remainder shall not be affected thereby.
   (C)   These regulations shall not be construed as authorizing any person to
maintain a private or public nuisance on their property. Compliance with the
provisions of this regulation shall not be a defense in any action to abate
such nuisance.
   (D)   Failure of the city to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly
conditions or to recommend corrective measures shall not relieve the owner from
the responsibility for the condition or damage resulting therefrom, and shall
not result in the city, its officers, employees or agents being responsible for
any condition or damage resulting therefrom.
(Ord. 17-05, passed 2-7-2005)
§ 1049.05  EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter and its regulations shall become effective February 7, 2005.
(Ord. 17-05, passed 2-7-2005)
§ 1049.06  SCOPE.
   (A)   This chapter applies to development areas having new or relocated
projects involving highways, underground cables, pipelines, subdivisions,
industrial projects, commercial projects, building activities on farms,
redevelopment of urban areas and all other land uses not specifically exempted.
This chapter does not apply to:
      (1)   Land-disturbing activities related to producing agricultural crops
or silviculture operations regulated by the Ohio Agricultural Sediment
Pollution Abatement Rules (O.A.C. 1501:15-1-01 to 1501:15-1-06) and existing at
the time of passage of this regulation;
      (2)   Strip mining operations regulated by Ohio R.C. Chapter 1513 and
existing at the time of passage of this regulation;
      (3)   Surface mining operations regulated by Ohio R.C. Chapter 1514 and
existing at the time of passage of this regulation;
      (4)   Construction activities that do not include the installation of any
impervious surface (e.g., soccer fields), abandoned mine reclamation activities
regulated by the Ohio Department of Natural Resources, stream and wetland
restoration activities, and wetland mitigation activities;
      (5)   Linear construction projects, (e.g., pipeline or utility line
installation), which do not result in the installation of impervious surface
and are independent of other construction projects (not part of a larger common
plan of development or sale). However, linear construction projects must be
designed to minimize the number of stream crossings and the width of
disturbance and achieve final stabilization of the disturbed area as defined in
§
1049.17; or
      (6)   Transportation projects that are subject to industry specific Ohio
EPA Rules are exempt from these rules.
   (B)   It is not the role of the city to point out each and every part of the
rules and how to implement them on the individual job sites. It is the project
owner’s responsibility to be proactive in meeting the intent, purpose and
requirements of these regulations.
(Ord. 17-05, passed 2-7-2005; Ord. 102-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1049.07  CONSULTATIONS.
   In implementing these regulations, the City Engineer or other city officials
may consult with the local county SWCD, state and federal agencies and other
technical experts as necessary. Any costs associated with such consultations
may be assessed to the applicant or his or her designated representative.
(Ord. 17-05, passed 2-7-2005)
§ 1049.08  POST-CONSTRUCTION WATER QUALITY CONTROL PLAN.
   In order to control post-construction water quality damage and damage to
public and private lands, the owner of each development area shall be
responsible for developing a post-construction storm water management plan.
   (A)   This plan will be combined with the construction site conservation
plan and the riparian setback and wetland setback plans that are also developed
for the site.
   (B)   This plan will contain a description of controls appropriate for each
construction operation covered by these regulations, and the operator will
implement such controls in a timely manner.
   (C)   The BMPs used to satisfy the conditions of these regulations shall
meet the standards and specifications in the current edition of the Ohio Rain
Water and Land Development Manual, ODOT post- construction storm water
standards, or other manual that is acceptable to the City Engineer or Ohio EPA.
   (D)   The plan must make use of the practices that preserve the existing
natural condition to the maximum extent practicable (MEP).
   (E)   To meet the post-construction requirements of this regulation, the
post-construction water quality plan must contain a description of the post-
construction best management practices (BMPs) that will be installed during
construction for the site and the rationale for their selection. The rationale
must address the anticipated impacts on the channel and floodplain morphology,
hydrology, and water quality and should consider all future anticipated uses of
the site.
   (F)   Structural post-construction BMPs cannot be installed within a state
surface water (e.g., wetland or stream) unless it is authorized by a Clean
Water Act § 401, being 33 U.S.C. § 1341 water quality certification and/or
Clean Water Act § 404, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et seq. permit.
   (G)   This plan will identify the person or entity responsible for continued
maintenance of all vegetative and/or mechanical BMPs for both the construction
and post-construction phases of the development.
   (H)   Long-term maintenance requirements and schedules of all BMPs for both
the construction and post- construction phases of the development will be
provided as a stand alone document to the post construction operator and the
community.
   (I)   This plan will contain long-term maintenance inspection schedules,
including the printed name and contact point of the post-construction landowner
(e.g., president of the homeowners association, store manager, apartment
complex manager, and the like). All reports must be retained for a minimum of
five years and made available to the city for inspection.
   (J)   This plan will identify the person or entity that will serve as the
post-construction operator who will be financially responsible for maintaining
the perpetual inspection and maintenance of permanent storm water conveyance
and storage structures and other conservation practices. The plan must identify
and provide a mechanism to require transfer of responsibilities in the event
the property is sold and a means of notification to the city prior to transfer.
   (K)   The method of ensuring that funding will be available to conduct the
long-term maintenance and inspections of all permanent storm water, soil
erosion and sediment control and water quality practices will be identified.
   (L)   Maintenance plans must ensure that pollutants collected within
structural post-construction practices, be disposed of in accordance with
local, state and federal regulations.
   (M)   Maintenance plans must include legally binding perpetual maintenance
easements and agreements. Easement documents must provide for community access.
   (N)   The post-construction plan will also contain the following information
depending on the size of the development sites as well as any additional
information required by the City Engineer.
      (1)   Development Sites Smaller than Five Acres. A development site that
will disturb one or more, but less than five acres of land and is not a part of
a larger common plan of development or sale which will disturb five or more
acres of land shall identify:
         (a)   Storm Water Issues. A statement as to how the decreased storm
water quality that will be caused by the planned development project will be
handled;
         (b)   Description of Measures. A description of the BMPs that will be
installed during the construction process to control pollutants in storm water
discharges that will continue after construction operations or will be employed
after construction operations have been completed;
         (c)   Upland Areas. Structural measures placed on upland areas to the
degree attainable;
         (d)   Map. A map of the entire site showing the overall development
and including drainage areas and patterns;
         (e)   Riparian and/or Wetland Setback. All riparian and wetland
setback areas will be identified on the plans. They will also be marked in the
field prior to the start of construction;
         (f)   BMPs. Best management practices used in the post-construction
water quality plan may include, but are not limited to:
            1.   Permanent storm water detention ponds that provide extended
detention of the water volume;
            2.   Flow attenuation by use of open vegetated swales and natural
depressions;
            3.   On-site infiltration of runoff;
            4.   Sequential systems that combine several practices;
            5.   Permanent conservation easements, preferably with the easement
being held by a third party with no vested interest in ever seeing the property
developed;
            6.   Natural channel design for drainageways;
            7.   Bioengineering in drainageways;
            8.   Recreating floodplains;
            9.   Chemical and biological filters in storm sewer inlets;
            10.   Sand filters;
            11.   Allowing roof water from buildings to run across lawn areas
to remove pollutants;
            12.   On-site sewage disposals system replacement or conversion to
sanitary sewers;
            13.   Low impact development design;
            14.   Countryside development design meeting the criteria of the
Western Reserve Resource Conservation and Development Area; and
            15.   Aquatic benches in retention basins and ponds.
         (g)   Technical Basis. The plan will contain a statement of the
rationale utilized to select the BMPs used to control pollution and to maintain
and protect water quality.
      (2)   Development sites five acres or larger. A development site that
disturbs five or more acres of land or will disturb less than five acres, but
is a part of a larger common plan of development or sale, which will disturb
five or more acres of land shall identify:
         (a)   Storm water detention: the post-construction BMP(s) chosen must
be able to detain storm water runoff for protection of the stream channels,
stream erosion control and improved water quality;
         (b)   Structural BMPs: structural (designed) post-construction storm
water treatment practices shall be incorporated into the permanent drainage
system for the site;
         (c)   Properly sized BMPs.
            1.   The BMP(s) chosen must be sized to treat the water quality
volume (WQv) and ensure compliance with the state’s water quality standards in
O.A.C. Chapter 3745-1. The WQv shall be equivalent to the volume of runoff from
a 0.75-inch rainfall and shall be determined according to the following
equation:
            2.   WQ v = C * P * A / 12 where: WQ v = water quality volume in
acre-feet; C = runoff coefficient appropriate for storms less than one inch
(either using Table 1 or the following formula: C = 0.858i - 0.78i 2 + 0.774i +
0.04 where i = fraction of post-construction impervious area); P = 0.75 inch
precipitation  depth; and A = area draining into the BMP in acres.
 
Table 1: Runoff Coefficients Based on the Type of Land Use
Land Use                                           Runoff Coefficient
High Density Residential (>8 dwellings/acre)       0.5
Industrial & Commercial                            0.8
Low Density Residential (<4 dwellings/acre)        0.3
Medium Density Residential (4 to 8 dwellings/acre) 0.4
Open Space and Recreational Areas                  0.2
 
         (d)   Where the land use will be mixed, the runoff coefficient should
be calculated using a weighted average. For example, if 60% of the contributing
drainage area to the storm water treatment structure is low density
residential, 30% is high density residential, and 10% is open space, the runoff
coefficient is calculated as follows (0.6)(0.3) + (0.3)(0.5) + (0.1)(0.2) =
0.35;
         (e)   An additional volume equal to 20% of the WQv shall be
incorporated into the BMP for sediment storage and/or reduced infiltration
capacity. The BMPs will be designed according to the methodology included in
the Ohio Rainwater and Land Development Manual, ODOT post-construction storm
water standards, or other manual that is acceptable to Ohio EPA;
         (f)   The BMPs listed in Table 2 below shall be considered standard
BMPs approved for general use. However, communities with a regulated MS4 may
limit the use of some of these BMPs. BMPs shall be designed such that the drain
time is long enough to provide treatment, but short enough to provide storage
available for successive rainfall events and avoid the creation of nuisance
conditions. The outlet structure for the post-construction BMP must not
discharge more than the first half of the WQv in less than one-third of the
drain time;
 
Table 2: Target Drain Times for    Structural Post-Construction BMPs
BMPs Suitable for Drainage BMPs Suitable for Drainage
Areas > 5 Acres            Areas < 5 Acres
Best Management Practice Drain Time  Best Management Practice      Drain Time
Dry extended detention   48 hours    Infiltration basins^          24-48 hours
basin*
Wet extended detention   24 hours    Bioretention cells            40 hours
basin**
Constructed wetlands+    24 hours    Sand and other media filters  40 hours
Infiltration basins^     24-48 hours Enhanced water quality swales 24 hours
                                    Pocket wetlands#              24 hours
                                    Vegetated filter strips       24 hours
*   Dry basins must include forebay and micropool each sized at 10% of the WQv
**   Provide both a permanent pool and an EDv above the permanent pool, each
sized at 0.75 WQ v.
+   Extended detention shall be provided for the full WQv above the permanent
water pool.
^   The WQv shall completely infiltrate within 48 hours so there is no
standing or residual water in the BMP.
#   Pocket wetlands must have a wet pool equal to the WQ v with 25% of the WQ
v in a pool and 75% in marshes. The ED v above the permanent pool must be
equal to the WQ v .
 
         (g)   The owner may request approval from the City Engineer to use
alternative structural post- construction BMPs if the owner can demonstrate, in
a way that is acceptable to Ohio EPA rules and regulations, that the
alternative BMPs are equivalent in effectiveness to those listed in Table 2
above. The use of alternative or vender supplied post-construction BMPs should
be limited to redevelopment projects where justification is provided that the
traditional BMPs in Table 2 are technically and economically infeasible;
         (h)   Construction activities shall be exempt from this condition if
it can be demonstrated that the WQv is provided within an existing structural
post-construction BMP that is part of a larger common plan of development or
sale or if structural post-construction BMPs are addressed in a regional or
local storm water management plan. A municipally operated regional storm water
BMP can be used as a post- construction BMP provided that the BMP can detain
the WQv from the entire drainage area and release it over a 24-hour period upon
written permission from the Community Engineer;
         (i)   For redevelopment projects (i.e., developments on previously
developed property), post- construction practices shall either ensure a 20% net
reduction of the site impervious area, provide for treatment of at least 20% of
the WQv, or a combination of the two. Where projects are a combination of new
development and redevelopment, the total WQv that must be treated shall be
calculated by a weighted average based on acreage, with the new development at
100% WQv and redevelopment at 20% WQv;
         (j)   Site description:
            1.   The prior land uses of the site;
            2.   The nature and type of construction activity (e.g., low
density residential, shopping mall, highway, and the like);
            3.   Total area of the site, area drained and the area of the site
that is expected to be disturbed (i.e., grubbing, clearing, excavating, filling
or grading, including off-site borrow, fill or spoil areas and off-site utility
installation areas);
            4.   Amount of the impervious area and percent imperviousness
created by the construction activity; and
            5.   Name and/or location of the immediate receiving stream or
surface water(s) and the first subsequent named receiving water and the major
river watersheds in which it is located. Provide a volume of flow and if
applicable a water quality designation of the stream or wetland.
         (k)   A vicinity sketch locating:
            1.   The development area;
            2.   The larger common plan of development or sale; and
            3.   All pertinent surrounding natural features within 200 feet of
the development site including, but not limited to:
               a.   Water resources such as wetlands, springs, lakes, ponds,
rivers and streams (including intermittent streams with a defined bed and
bank);
               b.   Conservation easements; and
               c.   Other sensitive natural resources and areas receiving
runoff from the development.
         (l)   The existing and proposed topography shown in the appropriate
contour intervals as determined by the City Engineer (generally one-foot
contours are used);
         (m)   The location and description of existing and proposed drainage
patterns and facilities, including any allied drainage facilities beyond the
development area and the larger common plan of development or sale;
         (n)   Existing and proposed watershed boundary lines, direction of
flow and watershed acreage;
         (o)   The person or entity responsible for continued maintenance of
all permanent vegetative and/or mechanical post-construction water quality
conservation practices (BMPs); and
         (p)   The location of any existing or planned riparian and/or wetland
setback areas on the property.
(Ord. 17-05, passed 2-7-2005; Ord. 102-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1049.09  EASEMENTS.
   Future access to all permanent vegetative and/or mechanical post-
construction water quality conservation practices (BMPs) and other areas, as
required by the City Engineer, shall be secured by means of perpetual
easements.
   (A)   The easements shall be recorded in the name of the city and, in
single-family residential developments, the homeowners association. Recorded
easements must provide for community access.
   (B)   Such easements shall be not less than 25 feet in width, in addition to
the width of the ditch, channel or other facility it is to serve. Further, an
easement of this type shall be provided on one side of the flood control or
storm drainage ditch, channel or similar-type facility.
   (C)   Access along the initial drainage system shall be by means of
easements. Such easements shall be not less than 25 feet in width, with a
minimum ten foot width on either side of the centerline.
   (D)   Access adjacent to storage facilities shall consist of a 25-foot
easement in the case of detention (dry) basins, and a 25-foot easement with a
25-foot level bench in the case of retention (wet) basins, measured from the
top of the bank, and shall include the storage facility itself.
   (E)   Easements for the emergency flow ways shall be a minimum of 25 feet in
width, or larger if required by the City Engineer.
   (F)   Flood control or storm drainage easements containing underground
facilities shall have a minimum width of 25 feet.
   (G)   The easements shall be restricted against the planting within said
easement of trees, shrubbery or plantings with woody growth characteristics,
and against the construction therein of buildings, accessory buildings, fences,
walls or any other obstructions to the free flow of storm water and the
movement of inspectors and maintenance equipment and also restricted against
the changing of final grade from that described by the grading plan.
(Ord. 17-05, passed 2-7-2005; Ord. 102-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1049.10  MAINTENANCE.
   Any portion of the permanent post-construction water quality management
systems, including on-site and off-site treatment/storage facilities that are
constructed by the owner, will be continuously maintained into perpetuity.
   (A)   Drawings and Plans. Detailed drawings and maintenance plans must be
provided for all post- construction best management practices (BMPs).
   (B)   Pollutants. Maintenance plans must ensure that pollutants collected
within structural post- construction BMP practices are disposed of in
accordance with local, state and federal guidelines.
   (C)   Maintenance Plans. Maintenance plans shall be provided by the
permittee to both the City Engineer and the post-construction operator of the
BMP (including homeowners associations) upon completion of construction
activities and prior to the City Engineer giving final approval for the
completed construction. The Engineer must be provided with contact information
for the post-construction operator.
   (D)   Single-Family Residential Developments. A homeowners association shall
be created and placed in title of the affected lands and shall be continuously
responsible for post-construction maintenance and inspections into perpetuity
unless such maintenance and inspections become officially accepted by the city.
   (E)   Multi-Family, Commercial and Industrial Developments. The plans will
clearly state that the owner of the property shall be continuously responsible
for post-construction maintenance and inspections into perpetuity unless such
maintenance and inspections become officially accepted by the city.
   (F)   Maintenance Design. Low maintenance requirements are a priority in the
design and construction of all facilities. Multi-use facilities incorporating
assets such as aesthetics and recreation may be incorporated into the design of
the drainage facilities. All permanent drainage, soil erosion, sediment
control, water quality management systems and BMPs, including on-site and off-
site structures and vegetation that are constructed or planted, must be
inspected and maintained into perpetuity by the responsible party designated in
the plans and the requirements of this chapter. Inspections and maintenance
will be incorporated periodically throughout the year to ensure that the
facilities are properly operational.
   (G)   Perpetual Maintenance Inspections. One inspection with a written
report will be performed by the Community Engineering Department in each and
every year after the best management practice (BMP) has been completed.
      (1)   Structures That Require a Permit from the Ohio Division of Water. A
written and stamped report from a professional engineer on the status of all
structural BMPs that require a permit from the Ohio Department of Natural
Resources (ODNR) Division of Water. This applies to all BMPs that require a
permit either at the time of construction or fall under the jurisdiction of
ODNR Division of Water at any time after construction is completed.
      (2)   Easements. A written report from an inspector on the status of all
storm water management easements for each project shall be submitted to the
City Engineer by May 1 of each year into perpetuity. These reports will
document if restricted plantings, fences and structures are on the easement and
will identify the location of the noted easement restriction violations.
      (3)   Best Management Practices (BMPs) That Do Not Have a High Risk for
Loss of Life, Bodily Injury, or Damage to Structures or Infrastructure Related
to Imminent Failure as Determined by the City Engineer. A written and stamped
report from a professional engineer, landscape architect or certified
professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) on the status of permanent
soil erosion, sediment control, water quality management systems and the status
of the related easements shall be submitted to the City Engineer by May 1 of
each year into perpetuity.
      (4)   BMPs That Have a Potential Loss of Life. A written and stamped
report covering the status of all BMPs that have a potential for loss of life,
bodily injury or damage to structures or infrastructure will be prepared by a
professional engineer or other individual possessing a valid state license that
authorizes them to design the same type of BMP for construction.
(Ord. 17-05, passed 2-7-2005; Ord. 64-08, passed 5-19-2008; Ord. 102-10, passed
8-23-2010)
§ 1049.11  MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   In order to control pollution of water resources, the owner or person
responsible for the development area shall use conservation planning and
practices to maintain the level of conservation established in the following
standards.
   (A)   Standards and Specifications. Post-construction runoff practices used
to satisfy these standards shall meet the standards and specifications in the
current edition of the Rainwater and Land Development Manual, NRCS Field Office
Technical Guide for the local county, or the Ohio EPA, whichever is most
stringent. The construction of new roads and roadway improvement projects by
public entities shall implement post- construction BMPs in compliance with the
current version of the Ohio Department of Transportation’s Location and Design
Manual, Volume Two: Drainage Design that has been accepted by Ohio EPA.
   (B)   Water Quality Basins.
      (1)   Pool Geometry. The minimum length-to-width ratio for the pond is 3:
1 (the length will be three times the width).
      (2)   Riser in Embankment. The riser shall be located within the
embankment for purposes of maintenance access. Access to the riser will be by
manholes.
      (3)   Water Drains. Each retention basin shall have a drainpipe that can
completely drain the pond. The drain shall have an elbow within the pond to
prevent sediment deposition from plugging the drain.
      (4)   Adjustable Gate Valves. Both the water quality and the storm water
management basin drains shall have adjustable gate valves. Valves shall be
located inside of the riser at a point where they will remain dry and can be
operated in a safe and convenient manner. During the annual inspections the
valves shall be fully opened and closed at least once, and the certifying
official shall attest to this on the inspection form. To prevent vandalism, the
handwheel shall be chained to a ringbolt or manhole step.
      (5)   Principal Spillway. Each principal spillway shall be designed in
accordance with the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) standards and
specifications for the office serving the local county. Each principal spillway
shall have the capacity to pass the 100-year design storm flows. The inlet or
riser size for the pipe drops shall be designed so that the flow through the
structure goes from weir flow control to pipe flow control without going into
orifice control in the riser. The crest elevation of the primary spillway shall
be no less than one foot below the emergency spillway crest. Premium joint pipe
is required and a removable trash rack shall be installed at each location.
Anti-seep collars shall be provided for all pipe conduits through an
embankment.
      (6)   Emergency Spillway. An emergency spillway shall be provided on each
water quality and storm water management basin. Emergency spillways shall
convey flood flows safely past the embankment, and shall be designed in
accordance with NRCS standards and specifications for the office serving the
local county. Emergency spillways shall have a 100-year design storm capacity
unless exempted in writing by the City Engineer.
      (7)   Embankments. Each dam embankment shall be designed in accordance
with the NRCS standards and specifications for the office serving the county
that the project is located in. Anti-seep collars shall be provided for all
pipe conduits through an embankment.
      (8)   Safety Features.
         (a)   The primary spillway opening shall not permit access to the
public and other non- maintenance personnel.
         (b)   The perimeter of all water pool areas that are deeper than three
feet shall be surrounded by benches that meet the following:
            1.   A safety bench, with a maximum slope of 3%, which extends
outward, on dry land, from the shoreline. This bench will be a minimum of 25
feet wide to provide for the safety of individuals and maintenance vehicles
that are adjacent to the water pool. The safety bench may be landscaped,
without the use of structures, to prevent access to the water pool.
            2.   Side slopes between the safety bench and the aquatic bench
shall not be steeper than 3:1 (three feet horizontal for every one foot
vertical).
            3.   An aquatic bench that extends inward from the shoreline far
enough to ensure public safety and has a maximum depth of 15 inches below the
normal water surface elevations. The aquatic bench may be landscaped to prevent
access to the deeper water pool. The aquatic bench may also be incorporated
into the post-construction water quality plan.
            4.   Side slopes beyond the aquatic bench and below the permanent
water level shall not be steeper than 2:1 (two feet horizontal for every one
foot vertical).
            5.   The contours of the pond will be designed and managed to
eliminate drop-offs and other hazards. Side slopes getting to the pond shall
not exceed 3:1 and shall terminate on a safety bench.
      (9)   Water Quality Basin.
         (a)   If a water quality basin is needed and can not be incorporated
into an existing or planned detention or retention basin then a separate water
quality basin will need to be planned, designed, constructed and maintained
into perpetuity.
         (b)   Water quality basins will not be constructed in any permanent or
intermittent stream channel.
      (10)   Flexibility.
         (a)   These standards are general guidelines and shall not limit the
right of the City Engineer to impose at any time additional and/or more
stringent requirements nor shall the standards limit the right of the City
Engineer to waive, in writing, individual requirements.
         (b)   If the City Engineer waives, in writing, individual
requirements, the owner will provide the City Engineer with the information and
documentation required to assure Ohio EPA that the waived requirement will not
degrade water quality.
(Ord. 17-05, passed 2-7-2005; Ord. 102-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1049.12  REDEVELOPMENT PROJECTS.
   Sites that have been previously developed where no post-construction BMPs
were installed shall either ensure a 20% net reduction of the site impervious
area, provide for treatment of at least 20% of the WQv , or a combination of
the two. A one-for-one credit towards the 20% net reduction of impervious area
can be obtained through the use of pervious pavement and/or green roofs. Where
projects are a combination of new development and redevelopment, the total WQ v
that must be treated shall be calculated by a weighted average based on
acreage, with new development at 100% and redevelopment at 20% WQ v .
(Ord. 102-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1049.13  ALTERNATIVE ACTIONS.
   Where the City Engineer determines that site constraints exist in a manner
that compromises the intent of this chapter to improve the management of storm
water runoff as established in this chapter, practical alternatives may be used
to result in an improvement of water quality and/or a reduction of storm water
runoff. Such alternatives must be in keeping with the intent and likely cost of
those measures that would otherwise be required to meet the objectives of this
section. All practical alternatives shall be implemented within the drainage
area of the proposed development project unless specifically authorized in
writing by the community engineer.
   (A)   Implementation of off-site storm water management practices: the use
of any off-site post- construction BMPs requires written approval from Ohio EPA
and this approval must be received prior to design approval and/or issuance of
any building permits. Practical alternatives to be considered include:
      (1)   Retrofitting of an existing storm water management practice;
      (2)   Watershed or stream restoration; and
      (3)   Fees paid in an amount specified by the community engineer. The
community shall apply these fees to storm water management practices that
improve the existing water quality.
   (B)   Use of alternative post-construction BMPs: permittees must supply
written approval from Ohio EPA to use post-construction BMPs that have been
demonstrated to be equivalent to the effectiveness of those listed in Table 2
in §
1049.08. Approval from Ohio EPA must be received prior to design approval and/
or issuance of any building permits.
   (C)   Other practices approved by the Community Engineer in keeping with the
intent of this section.
(Ord. 17-05, passed 2-7-2005; Ord. 102-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1049.14  COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Ohio Dam Safety Laws. The provisions of the Ohio Dam Safety Laws shall
be followed. Proof of compliance with the Ohio Dam Safety Law administered by
the ODNR Division of Water shall be, but is not limited to, a copy of the ODNR
Division of Water permit number or a copy of the project approval letter from
the ODNR Division of Water or a letter from the site owner explaining why the
Ohio Dam Safety Law is not applicable. The written proof will be provided to
the City Engineer before a construction permit will be issued.
   (B)   NPDES Permits. The provisions of the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) permits for construction activity, by the Ohio EPA,
shall be followed. Proof of compliance shall be, but is not limited to, a copy
of the Ohio EPA NPDES permit number or a letter from the site owner explaining
why the NPDES permit is not applicable. The written proof will be provided to
the City Engineer before a construction permit will be issued.
   (C)   Federal and State Wetland Permits. The provisions of the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers dredge and fill permits for federally-protected wetlands
shall be followed. The provisions of Ohio EPA’s Isolated Wetlands permits shall
also be followed. Wetlands and other waters of the United States shall be
delineated by protocols accepted by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the
Ohio EPA at the time of the application of these regulations. Written proof of
compliance with both permit programs will be provided to the City Engineer
before a construction permit will be issued. Proof of compliance shall be, but
is not limited to, the following:
      (1)   A copy of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers individual permit, if
required for the project, showing project approval and any restrictions that
apply to site activities;
      (2)   A site plan showing that any proposed fill of waters of the United
States conforms to the general and specific conditions specified in the
applicable nationwide permit; or
      (3)   A letter from the site owner verifying that a qualified
professional has surveyed the site and found no wetlands or other waters of the
United States. Such a letter shall be noted on site plans submitted to the
city.
(Ord. 17-05, passed 2-7-2005)
§ 1049.15  VIOLATIONS.
   No person shall violate, or cause, or knowingly permit to be violated, any
of the provisions of these regulations, or fail to comply with any such
provisions or with any lawful requirements of any public authority made
pursuant to these regulations, or knowingly use or cause or permit the use of
any lands in violation of these regulations or in violation of any permit
granted under these regulations.
(Ord. 17-05, passed 2-7-2005)
§ 1049.16  CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE.
   (A)   All permanent storm water, soil erosion, sediment control and water
quality practices not specifically waived by the city shall be constructed
prior to the final acceptance by City Council. Upon the request of the owner,
the city may defer the construction or installation of a permanent storm water,
soil erosion, sediment control or water quality practice prior to the final
approval where, in the City Engineer’s judgment, such proper construction or
installation is not immediately necessary for the protection of the public
health and safety; and where the prior installation or construction of such
improvement would constitute an undue hardship on the owner because in the case
of new vegetation or weather conditions, or because in the case of concrete,
building construction could cause cracking and excessive wear and tear on new
structures. In such event, the city shall require a security bond, escrow
account, certified check or cash to guarantee that such deferred improvements
will be properly constructed or installed within an agreed specified time, but
not to exceed six months after such final approval.
   (B)   The owner will provide a maintenance guarantee for all permanent
improvements, soil erosion, and sediment control and water quality practices.
   (C)   The city shall require a security bond, escrow account, certified
check or cash to guarantee that the planned temporary and permanent soil
erosion, sediment control and water quality practices will be constructed and
removed in a timely manner, as determined by the City Engineer.
      (1)   The Guarantee. The guarantee of both performance and maintenance
will be in the form of a security bond, escrow account, verified check or cash.
The security bond, escrow account, verified check or cash will be used by the
city to complete any guaranteed construction or removal of improvements or
temporary and permanent soil erosion, sediment control and water quality
practices that are not adequately completed, maintained or removed by the owner
in a timely manner, as determined by the City Engineer. The security bond,
escrow account, verified check or cash will be in the total amount of both the
performance guarantee and the maintenance guarantee. Ohio municipalities and
counties may require performance bonds or other guarantees for water management
improvement as stated in Ohio R.C. 711.101.
         (a)   Security bond, escrow account, verified check or cash shall be
deposited with the city prior to review by the City Engineer and/or its
consultants to cover professional services of the City Engineer, Building
Commissioner, Zoning Inspector and/or other experts required by the City
Engineer, City Council, Mayor or Review Boards.
         (b)   No soil disturbing activities shall be permitted until a
security bond, escrow account, verified check or cash has been posted to the
satisfaction of the City Engineer sufficient for the city to perform the
obligations otherwise to be performed by the owner or person responsible for
the development area as stated in this regulation, and to allow all work to be
performed as needed in the event that the owner or person responsible for the
development area fails to comply with the provisions of this regulation. The
security bond, escrow account, verified check or cash shall be released only
after all work required by this regulation has been completed to the
satisfaction of the City Engineer and all permit and inspection fees required
by these regulations have been paid in full.
         (c)   No project subject to this regulation shall commence without the
soil erosion and sediment control, and storm water management, and water
quality plans having been approved by the City Engineer.
      (2)   Performance Guarantee. The furnishing of a performance guarantee
will be maintained in an amount of not less than 120% of the estimate approved
by the City Engineer, of installation of the deferred improvements.
      (3)   Maintenance Guarantee. The maintenance guarantee shall be
maintained for a period of not less than two years after final acceptance of
the storm water, soil erosion, sediment control, and water quality practices in
an amount equal to 20% of the estimate approved by the City Engineer, of the
construction and, where necessary, removal of such practices.
      (4)   Time Extension. The City Engineer may extend the time allowed for
the installation of the improvements for which the performance guarantee has
been provided with the receipt of a written request from the owner.
      (5)   Completion. Upon completion of the construction of improvements or
temporary and/or permanent, soil erosion, sediment control, and water quality
practices and the removal of the temporary soil erosion, sediment control, and
water quality practices for which the performance guarantee has been provided
the owner shall notify the City Engineer of this fact.
      (6)   Inspection. The city will not release the security bond, escrow
account, verified check or cash guarantee until the City Engineer has inspected
the site to ensure that the guaranteed item(s) have been completed and/or
removed.
      (7)   Release. The construction maintenance guarantee shall not be
released by the city until all temporary soil erosion and sediment control
practices that are no longer needed have been removed, properly disposed of and
any trapped sediment has been stabilized.
(Ord. 17-05, passed 2-7-2005)
§ 1049.17  APPLICATION PROCEDURES FOR POST-CONSTRUCTION WATER QUALITY PLANS.
   (A)   This plan will be combined with the soil erosion and sediment control,
storm water management, riparian setback and wetland setback plans that have
also been developed for the site.
   (B)   Plans developed by the site owners and approved by the city in
accordance with this regulation do not relieve the site owner of responsibility
for obtaining all other necessary permits and/or approvals from federal, state,
county and local agencies and departments. If requirements vary, the most
stringent requirement shall be followed. If the community will be requiring
that the local soil and water conservation district (SWCD) review the post-
construction water quality plans, the community should first discuss this issue
and how to implement the SWCD plan reviews with the local SWCD.
   (C)   The site owner shall submit an additional copy of all plans and storm
water related documents to the City Engineer which shall be forwarded by the
Engineer for a report from the local county soil and water conservation
district, which reviews the owner’s development, plans and improvement plans.
The applicant or his or her designated representative will pay any costs
associated with obtaining the report(s) from the local county SWCD. These
reports shall address the planned development, and soil erosion and sediment
control, storm water management, riparian setback and wetland setback plans and
other sensitive areas.
   (D)   Plans submitted to the City Engineer for review and approval, shall be
accompanied by other required permits and documentation relevant to the
project, including, but not limited to, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, Ohio
EPA, ODNR Division of Water and Ohio EPA NPDES Permit for construction
activities.
   (E)   Five sets of the plans and necessary data required by this regulation
shall be submitted to the City Engineer as follows:
      (1)   Format:
         (a)   Text material will be on eight and one-half by 11 inch paper;
and
         (b)   Drawings will be on paper sized no larger than 24 inches by 36
inches.
      (2)   Construction Projects:
         (a)   At the preliminary plan approval request, the preliminary plans
shall show all of the following existing and planned features: streams; water
bodies; wetlands; riparian and wetland setback areas permanent BMPs; and storm
water management detention and retention basins; and
         (b)   At the improvement plan approval request.
      (3)   For General Clearing Projects. Thirty working days prior to any
soil-disturbing activities;
      (4)   Permits list. A list of all the permits that will be needed from
federal, state and local agencies;
      (5)   Long-Term Maintenance:
         (a)   The requirements and schedules of all permanent vegetative and/
or mechanical post- construction water quality conservation BMPs;
         (b)   Long-term maintenance inspection schedules for all permanent
vegetative and/or mechanical post-construction water quality conservation BMPs;
         (c)   The person or entity financially responsible for inspecting and
maintaining all permanent vegetative and/or mechanical post-construction water
quality conservation BMPs; and
         (d)   The method of ensuring that funding will be available to conduct
the long-term maintenance and inspections of all permanent vegetative and/or
mechanical post-construction water quality conservation BMPs.
      (6)   SWCD Review. If the community will be requiring that the local soil
and water conservation district (SWCD) review the post-construction water
quality plans, the community should first discuss this issue and how to
implement the SWCD plan reviews with the local SWCD.
   (F)   A letter or report from the local county SWCD, after review as
outlined in division (C) hereof, that states that the soil erosion and sediment
control, storm water management and riparian setback and wetland setback plans
all appear to meet Ohio EPA and local regulations. It should be noted that only
the Ohio EPA and the local communities can state that any plans or activities
meet their regulations and rules.
   (G)   The City Engineer shall review the plans, including the approval
report from the local county SWCD, and shall approve or return these with
comments and recommendations for revisions, within 30 working days after
receipt of the plan as described above. A plan rejected because of deficiencies
shall receive a report stating specific problems and the procedures for filing
a revised plan. At the time of receipt of a revised plan, another 30-day review
period shall begin.
   (H)   Approved plans shall remain valid for two years from the date of
approval. After two years the plan(s) approval automatically expires.
   (I)   No soil-disturbing activity shall begin before all necessary local,
county, state and federal permits have been granted to the owner or operator.
   (J)   The city will do construction inspections until the site is stabilized
as determined by the City Engineer. The construction will not be considered
completed until the City Engineer has conducted the post- construction
inspections.
(Ord. 17-05, passed 2-7-2005; Ord. 102-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1049.18  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter.
   “Best management practice (BMP).” Any practice or combination of practices
that is determined to be the most effective, practicable (including
technological, economic, and institutional considerations) means of preventing
or reducing the amount of pollution generated by non-point sources of pollution
to a level compatible with water quality goals. BMPs may include structural
practices, conservation practices and operation and maintenance procedures.
   “Certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC).” A person
that has subscribed to the Code of Ethics and have met the requirements
established by the CPESC Council of Certified Professional in Erosion and
Sediment Control, Inc. to be a certified professional in erosion and sediment
control.
   “Channel.” A natural stream that conveys water, or a ditch or channel
excavated for the natural flow of water.
   “Conservation.” The wise use and management of natural resources.
   “Development area.” Any tract, lot, or parcel of land, or combination of
tracts, lots or parcels of land, which are in one ownership, or are contiguous
and in diverse ownership, where earth disturbing activity is to be performed.
   “Ditch.” An excavation, either dug or natural, for the purpose of drainage
or irrigation, and having intermittent flow.
   “Earth disturbing activity.” Any grading, excavating, filling, or other
alteration of the earth’s surface where natural or human-made ground cover is
destroyed.
   “Erosion.” The process by which the land surface is worn away by the action
of water, wind, ice or gravity.
   “Erosion and sediment control.” A written and/or drawn soil erosion and
sediment pollution control plan to minimize erosion and prevent off-site
sedimentation throughout all earth disturbing activities on a development area.
   “Erosion and sediment control practices.” Conservation measures used to
control sediment pollution and including structural practices, vegetative
practices and management techniques.
   “Existing.” In existence at the time of the passage of this chapter and
these regulations.
   “Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).” The agency with overall
responsibility for administering the National Flood Insurance Program.
   “Grading.” Earth disturbing activity such as excavation, stripping, cutting,
filling, stockpiling or any combination thereof.
   “Grubbing.” Removing, clearing or scalping material such as roots, stumps or
sod.
   “Impervious cover.” Any surface that cannot effectively absorb or infiltrate
water. This includes roads, streets, parking lots, rooftops and sidewalks.
   “Intermittent stream.” A natural channel that may have some water in pools
but where surface flows are non-existent or interstitial (flowing through sand
and gravel in stream beds) for periods of one week or more during typical
summer months.
   “Landslide.” The rapid mass movement of soil and rock material downhill
under the influence of gravity in which the movement of the soil mass occurs
along an interior surface of sliding.
   “Larger common plan of development or sale.” A contiguous area where
multiple separate and distinct construction activities may be taking place at
different times on different schedules under one plan.
   “Local county SWCD.” The local county Soil and Water Conservation District.
   “Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS).” An agency of the United
States Department of Agriculture, formerly known as the Soil Conservation
Service (SCS).
   “NPDES Permit.” A National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit
issued by Ohio EPA under the authority of the USEPA, and derived from the
Federal Clean Water Act.
   “Ohio EPA.” The Ohio Environmental Protection Agency.
   “Outfall.” An area where water flows from a structure such as a conduit,
storm sewer, improved channel or drain, and the area immediately beyond the
structure which is impacted by the velocity of flow in the structure.
   “Person.” Any individual, corporation, partnership, joint venture, agency,
unincorporated association, municipal corporation, township, county, state
agency, the federal government or any combination thereof.
   “Professional engineer.” A person registered in the State of Ohio as a
professional engineer, with specific education and experience in water
resources engineering, acting in strict conformance with the Code of Ethics of
the Ohio Board of Registration for Engineers and Surveyors.
   “Qualified inspection personnel.” A person knowledgeable in the principles
and practice of erosion and sediment controls, who possesses the skills to
assess all conditions at the construction site that could impact storm water
quality and to assess the effectiveness of any sediment and erosion control
measures selected to control the quality of storm water discharges from the
construction activity.
   “Redevelopment.” The demolition or removal of existing structures or land
uses and construction of new ones.
   “Retention basin.” A storm water management pond that maintains a permanent
pool of water. These storm water management ponds include a properly
engineered/designed volume dedicated to the temporary storage and slow release
of runoff waters.
   “Riparian area.” Naturally vegetated land adjacent to watercourses which, if
appropriately sized, helps to limit erosion, reduce flood flows, and/or filter
and settle out runoff pollutants, or which performs other functions consistent
with the purposes of these regulations.
   “Riparian setback.” Those lands within the city which are alongside streams,
and which fall within the area that the city prohibits and restricts changes in
land use and the building of structures.
   “Sediment.” Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in suspension,
is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water,
gravity or ice, and has come to rest on the earth’s surface either on dry land
or in a body of water.
   “Sediment basin.” A temporary sediment pond that releases runoff at a
controlled rate. It is designed to slowly release runoff, detaining it long
enough to allow most of the sediment to settle out of the water. The outlet
structure is usually a designed pipe riser and barrel. The entire structure is
removed after construction. Permanent storm water detention structures can be
modified to function as “temporary sediment basins”.
   “Sediment control.” The limiting of sediment being transported by
controlling erosion or detaining sediment-laden water, allowing the sediment to
settle out.
   “Sediment pollution.” A failure to use management or conservation practices
to control wind or water erosion of the soil and to minimize the degradation of
water resources by soil sediment in conjunction with land grading, excavating,
filling or other soil-disturbing activities on land used or being developed for
commercial, industrial, residential or other purposes.
   “Sediment trap.” A temporary sediment-settling pond having a simple spillway
outlet structure stabilized with geotextile and rip rap.
   “Sensitive area.” An area or water resource that requires special management
because of its susceptibility to sediment pollution, or because of its
importance to the well-being of the surrounding communities, region or the
state and includes, but is not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Ponds, wetlands or small lakes with less than five acres of surface
area;
      (2)   Small streams with gradients less than ten feet per mile with
average annual flows of less than three and one-half feet per second containing
sand or gravel bottoms;
      (3)   Drainage areas of a locally designated or a state designated scenic
river; and
      (4)   Riparian and wetland areas.
   “Settling pond.” A runoff detention structure, such as a sediment basin or
sediment trap, which detains sediment-laden runoff, allowing sediment to settle
out.
   “Sheet flow.” Water runoff in a thin uniform layer or rills and which is of
small enough quantity to be treated by sediment barriers.
   “Slip.” A landslide as defined under “Landslides”.
   “Sloughing.” A slip or downward movement of an extended layer of soil
resulting from the undermining action of water or the earth disturbing activity
of man.
   “Soil.” Unconsolidated erodible earth material consisting of minerals and/or
organics.
   “Soil Conservation Service, USDA.” The federal agency now titled the
“Natural Resources Conservation Service,” which is an agency of the United
States Department of Agriculture.
   “Soil stabilization.” Vegetative or structural soil cover that controls
erosion, and includes permanent and temporary seed, mulch, sod, pavement, and
the like
   “Soil survey.” The official soil survey produced by the Natural Resources
Conservation Service, USDA in cooperation with the Division of Soil and Water
Conservation, ODNR and the local Board of County Commissioners.
   “Storm water runoff.” Surface water runoff which converges and flows
primarily through water conveyance features such as swales, gullies, waterways,
channels or storm sewers, and which exceeds the maximum specified flow rates of
filters or perimeter controls intended to control sheet flow.
   “Stream.” A body of water running or flowing on the earth’s surface, or a
channel with defined bed and banks in which such flow occurs. Flow may be
seasonally intermittent.
   “USEPA.” The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
   “Watercourse.” Any natural, perennial or intermittent channel, stream, river
or brook.
   “Water resources.” All streams, lakes, ponds, wetlands, watercourses,
waterways, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of surface
water, either natural or artificial, which are situated wholly or partly
within, or border upon this state, or are within its jurisdiction, except those
private waters which do not combine or affect a junction with natural surface
waters.
   “Wetland.” Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground
water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances, do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life
in saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs and similar
areas.
   “Wetland setback.” Those lands within the city that fall within the area
defined by the criteria set forth in these regulations.
(Ord. 17-05, passed 2-7-2005; Ord. 102-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1049.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any provision of this chapter
is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined no more than
$1,000 or imprisoned for no more than 180 days, or both, for each offense.
   (B)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.
   (C)   Upon notice from the City Engineer, or designated representative, that
work is being performed contrary to this chapter, such work shall immediately
stop. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner or person
responsible for the development area, or person performing the work, and shall
state the conditions under which such work may be resumed; provided, however,
in instances where immediate action is deemed necessary for public safety or
the public interest, the City Engineer may require that work be stopped upon
verbal order pending issuance of the written order.
   (D)   The imposition of any other penalties provided herein shall not
preclude the city, by or through its Law Director and/or any of his or her
assistants, from instituting an appropriate action or proceeding in a court of
proper jurisdiction to prevent an unlawful development or to restrain, correct
or abate a violation, or to require compliance with the provisions of this
chapter or other applicable laws, or ordinances, rules or regulations or the
orders of the City Engineer.
(Ord. 17-05, passed 2-7-2005)
TITLE SIX:  OTHER PUBLIC SERVICES
   
CHAP. 1060.   GARBAGE AND RUBBISH COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
   
CHAP. 1062.   PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
   
CHAP. 1064.   ALARM SYSTEMS
CHAPTER 1060  GARBAGE AND RUBBISH COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL
Section
1060.01   Definitions
1060.02   Residential waste collection
1060.03   Rules and regulations
1060.04   Placement of refuse receptacles
1060.05   Disposal of refuse during construction
1060.06   Storage area for commercial waste receptacles
1060.08   Depositing commercial refuse prohibited
1060.09   Hours of collection and transportation of solid waste
1060.10   Imposition of host-community fee for solid waste disposal
1060.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Municipal Environmental Maintenance Specialist, see §
248.07
   Noxious odors; filthy accumulations; polluting and diverting watercourses,
see §
660.04
   Open burning, see §
660.08
   Rubbish in exterior property areas, see §
1348.08
   Sanitation and refuse containers at public picnic and recreation places, see
§
832.05
   Storage of junk vehicles and heavy equipment or machinery, see §
660.07
   Unlawful deposits; littering, see §
660.03
   Vehicle loads dropping or leaking, see §
440.06
Editor’s note:
   Ordinance 9-94, passed January 17, 1994, approved the Final Draft Solid
Waste Management Plan of the Cuyahoga County Solid Waste Management District.
Ordinance 73-00, passed May 1, 2000, amended by Ordinance 72-06, passed May 16,
2006, approved the Final Draft of the Solid Waste Management Plan Update 2007-
2015. Copies of these ordinances and of the Plan and Update may be obtained, at
cost, from the Clerk of Council. This chapter was re-enacted in its entirety by
Ordinance 26-94, passed March 7, 1994.
§ 1060.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter.
   “Director.” The Director of Public Service of the city.
   “Double-family residence.” The grouping together of two residential units
under a common roof.
   “Garbage.” The waste or offal of any fish, fowl, fruit, vegetable or animal
matter resulting from the preparation of food for human consumption.
   “Multi-family residence” or “apartment.” The grouping together of three or
more residential units under a common roof.
   “Newspaper recycling container.” A grocery bag or bundle.
   “Recyclable material.” Ferrous (tin) and nonferrous (aluminum) cans,
newspapers, glass bottles, PET/HDPE plastic bottles, cardboard and other
material as determined by the Director.
   “Recycling container.” A transparent plastic bag (whether clear or colored)
which meets the requirements of the Director of Public Service into which
recyclable materials may be placed.
   “Refuse.”
      (1)   Paper, barrels, boxes, baskets, wood, rags, old shoes, leather,
carpets, broken glass, crockery, rubber, ashes, discarded furniture, including
beds, springs, mattresses, overstuffed furniture and other furniture,
appliances, bicycles, sleds, swing sets, tools and comparable material and yard
refuse materials, including grass clippings, weeds, Christmas trees, bushes and
brush and branch clippings, when securely bound in bundles not exceeding four
feet in length.
      (2)   However, the term does not include earth, sod, rocks, concrete,
bricks, stones, sand, plaster or other substances accumulating as a result of
building construction or remodeling and trees or parts thereof, except small
branches bundled as provided herein. This term also does not include the
material defined under “recyclable material”.
   “Residential unit.” The place of abode of persons living separately or
together as an independent family.
   “Waste material.” Includes garbage, refuse, recyclable material and yard
waste material.
   “Yard waste.” Grass, leaves and vegetation clippings and all vegetation that
is of such a size as to fit into a yard waste container.
   “Yard waste container.” A 30-gallon brown biodegradable paper bag for
municipal composting which meets the requirements of the Director of Public
Service into which yard waste must be placed.
(Ord. 26-94, passed 3-7-1994; Ord. 134-10, passed 10-4-2010)
§ 1060.02  RESIDENTIAL WASTE COLLECTION.
   The following regulations govern the collection of waste materials from
residential units and schools serving the citizens of the city.
   (A)   All waste materials, including garbage, refuse, recyclable materials
and yard waste materials, shall be collected once a week at the curb. The day
of the week for collection of waste materials from each residential unit shall
be designated from time to time by the Director of Public Service.
   (B)   Refuse may be put out on the tree lawn near the curb not sooner than
one-half hour before sunset the evening before collection, but not later than
7:00 a.m. on collection day. Containers shall be kept away from mail boxes.
   (C)   All garbage and refuse, other than recyclable material and yard waste,
shall be placed in plastic bags and/or in plastic or metal rubbish cans with
handles, provided that the weight of any plastic or metal rubbish can, along
with the contents therein, shall not exceed 50 pounds.
   (D)   Tree and hedge trimmings shall be securely tied in bundles weighing
not more than 50 pounds and not exceeding four feet in length.
   (E)   Large boxes, crates or furniture boxes shall be collapsed and tied in
bundles not longer than four feet and weighing not more than 50 pounds.
   (F)   Carpeting and carpet padding shall be cut up and rolled into bundles
not to exceed four feet in length or 50 pounds in weight. Carpet and padding
shall be separated.
   (G)   Yard waste materials shall be placed in yard waste containers. Only
yard waste generated on the resident’s property shall be placed adjacent to
said property for collection.
   (H)   Appliances such as washers, refrigerators, stoves, hot water tanks and
the like will be picked up as a special pickup item. (Doors shall be removed
before being placed curbside for collection.) Metal items such as furniture,
lawnmowers, swing sets, metal pipe and the like, or any type of scrap metal are
categorized as special pickup items. Residents shall call City Hall to schedule
the pickup for such items.
   (I)   Residents shall not place anything they wish to keep with or near
trash containers. It may be mistaken for waste and taken away.
   (J)   The following materials will not be collected: earth; rocks; tree
stumps; broken concrete; building materials; chemical solvents; explosives;
ammunition; poison; or materials left by contractors. (Refer to division (O)
hereof for disposal of such items.)
   (K)   Refuse not placed at the curb at the time of the scheduled pick-up
will not be picked up until the next regularly scheduled pick-up.
   (L)   Absolutely no burning of waste material shall be permitted.
   (M)   When holidays fall on a weekday, waste collection will be on the day
immediately subsequent to the regular collection day.
   (N)   The Director of Public Service shall maintain a current listing of
locations where residents may dispose of ammunition, earth, rocks, concrete,
waste oil and cans of paint. Such listing shall be updated periodically by the
Department. Upon inquiry by any interested resident, the Department shall make
such information available to the resident.
   (O)   Commencing on the date as may be prescribed hereafter by the Director
of Public Service and continuing thereafter, on the regularly scheduled garbage
collection day, residents shall place their recyclable material in the proper
recyclable container(s) alongside bins, cans or bags containing other waste for
pick-up. All persons residing in residential dwelling units in the city and who
are affected by this chapter shall place their recyclable material in the
appropriate recycling containers and keep such material separate from their
other garbage and refuse.
   (P)   Upon the placement of recyclable materials curbside, said materials
become the property of the city.
   (Q)   Once the recyclable materials are placed at the curb, no person, other
than an authorized city recycling crewperson, shall remove the recyclable waste
material which has been placed curbside for collection by the city. Any and
each such collection in violation hereof from one or more designated curbside
collection places shall constitute a separate and distinct offense punishable
as provided in this chapter.
   (R)   Nothing in this section shall limit the right of an individual person,
organization or other entity to donate, sell or otherwise dispose of recyclable
waste material, provided such donation, sale or disposal takes place prior to
placement of recyclables at the curb of a residence.
(Ord. 26-94, passed 3-7-1994; Ord. 134-10, passed 10-4-2010)
§ 1060.03  RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   The Director of Public Service shall have full and complete authority to
make rules and regulations, not inconsistent with this chapter, pertaining to
the collection and disposal of waste material and recyclable material, as well
as to the administration thereof, as he or she may deem advisable.
(Ord. 26-94, passed 3-7-1994)
§ 1060.04  PLACEMENT OF REFUSE RECEPTACLES.
   Receptacles for waste materials maintained for public collection shall be
placed so as to be readily accessible for collection.
(Ord. 26-94, passed 3-7-1994)
§ 1060.05  DISPOSAL OF REFUSE DURING CONSTRUCTION.
   Notwithstanding any other provision of these codified ordinances to the
contrary, a contractor may be issued a special permit from the Building
Department to maintain a refuse container or dumpster for the  disposal of
refuse during the construction or renovation of a residence in a residential
zone. Such permit shall be effective for the duration of the construction
project.
(Ord. 26-94, passed 3-7-1994)
§ 1060.06  STORAGE AREA FOR COMMERCIAL WASTE RECEPTACLES.
   (A)   No permit to construct a commercial building or multi-family dwelling
shall be issued, and no such building shall be constructed, unless such
building has sufficient storage area for refuse and garbage. If such storage
area is outside of the building, such area shall be screened by masonry walls,
redwood fencing or other suitable material to screen the same from a public
right-of-way and all contiguous properties and contain the articles and
containers placed therein.
   (B)   The proposed placement of receptacles and the enclosure thereof shall
be included in the building plans presented to the Planning Commission.
   (C)   For existing premises which presently have refuse receptacles, the
owner or operator, or his or her agent, shall have one year within which to
conform to this chapter. A certified letter shall be sent by the Building
Department to each such owner, operator or agent advising him or her of the
requirements of this chapter. Such owner, operator or agent shall not be
required to obtain Planning Commission approval. However, a sketch of placement
and screening of existing refuse receptacles shall be submitted to and approved
by the Building Commissioner.
   (D)   Whoever violates division (A) hereof shall be given a notice to comply
with division (A) hereof within a 30-day period. Thereafter, the owner shall be
deemed to be in violation of division (A) hereof and shall be subject to the
penalty provided in §
1060.99. A re-inspection fee of $100 may be charged to the owner for each
inspection made until such owner complies with division (A) hereof.
(Ord. 26-94, passed 3-7-1994; Ord. 134-10, passed 10-4-2010)
§ 1060.08  DEPOSITING COMMERCIAL REFUSE PROHIBITED.
   No refuse generated from a commercial operation shall be deposited upon the
roadside for city collection and/or at the city refuse collection facilities as
provided in §
660.03(B) of this code of ordinances.
(Ord. 26-94, passed 3-7-1994)
§ 1060.09  HOURS OF COLLECTION AND TRANSPORTATION OF SOLID WASTE.
   No person owning or driving a vehicle hauling solid waste shall cause the
collection, transportation or transfer of such waste other than between the
hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. No collection, transportation or transfer
shall occur on Saturdays after 5:00 p.m. or on Sundays. Application for
exceptions to this provision may be made to the Director of Public Service, on
a form provided by the Director. Such exceptions shall be granted only where
the applicant is able to demonstrate transportation of solid waste in areas
where there is heavy daytime vehicular and pedestrian traffic and a
concentration of commercial activity.
(Ord. 26-94, passed 3-7-1994; Ord. 134-10, passed 10-4-2010)
§ 1060.10  IMPOSITION OF HOST-COMMUNITY FEE FOR SOLID WASTE DISPOSAL.
   (A)   Pursuant to and subject to the provisions of Ohio R.C. 3734.57(C), the
city hereby levies a fee which is reflected in the current rubbish and
recycling contract.
   (B)   Collection of such fee shall commence on the thirtieth day after the
effective date of this section or the date upon which the implementation of the
Cuyahoga County Solid Waste Management District commences, whichever is later.
It shall be the duty of the operator of any solid waste disposal facility in
the city to collect such fee and forward the same to the Finance Department,
along with an appropriate accounting indicating poundage and/or cubic yards
disposed of in the solid waste facility.
(Ord. 26-94, passed 3-7-1994; Ord. 134-10, passed 10-4-2010)
§ 1060.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates a provision of this chapter shall initially be warned and
thereafter may be punished as provided in §
202.99 of these codified ordinances. The Service Department, the Building
Department and the Police Department shall have concurrent jurisdiction to
enforce this chapter.
(Ord. 26-94, passed 3-7-1994; Ord. 134-10, passed 10-4-2010)
CHAPTER 1062:  PARKS AND RECREATION AREAS
Section
1062.01   Use of recreation areas
1062.02   Tennis court fees
1062.99   Penalty
Cross references:
   Additional building permit fee for recreational purposes, see §
1448.04
   Parking and storage of camping and recreational equipment, see §
452.12
   Parks and Recreation Advisory Board, see
CHTR. Art. V, § 10(b);
Chapter 276
   Public picnic and recreation places, see
Chapter 832
   Recreation Department, see
Chapter 256
Editor’s note:
   Because of the frequency of change, fees for participation in Parks and
Recreation Department programs, membership and drop-in fees and fees for guests
accompanying residents utilizing the new indoor recreational facilities in the
city, are not codified. Copies of the latest relevant legislation may be
obtained, at cost, from the Clerk of Council.
§ 1062.01  USE OF RECREATION AREAS.
   (A)   No person shall be on the grounds comprising any recreation area in
the city between the hours of sunset to sunrise as determined by the National
Weather Service, except when utilizing the areas as stated in divisions (B) and
(C) hereof.
   (B)   When the recreation grounds are to be used by the city or other
organizations for city-sponsored recreation or for special events, and it is
anticipated that the use will continue beyond 10:00 p.m., special permission
from the Mayor or the Recreation Director must be obtained for such use. For
all such activities that are not city-sponsored, such permission shall be in
writing.
   (C)   If the lights on the tennis courts, basketball courts or baseball
fields are used incident to a city- sponsored function, such lighting
facilities may be used at any time up to and including 11:30 p.m.
(Ord. 52-99, passed 4-19-1999)
 
§ 1062.02  TENNIS COURT FEES.
   (A)   Subject to rules promulgated by the Director of Parks and Recreation,
pursuant to his or her authority under the city charter, the tennis courts
owned by the city may be reserved at such times as are permitted by the
Director of Parks and Recreation for the following fees: city resident - $5 per
two-hour reservation.
   (B)   There shall be no fee for the casual use of said tennis courts, but
individuals who have reserved the tennis courts shall have priority of use at
such times as are indicated on the reservation.
(Ord. 15-00, passed 2-22-2000)
§ 1062.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 1064:  ALARM SYSTEMS
Section
1064.01   False alarm defined
1064.02   Assessment for excessive false alarms
1064.03   Notice of assessment
Cross-reference:
   Card-activated 911 access at automated teller machines, see
Chapter 1308
   Making false alarms, see §§
648.07,
648.08
   Noise regulation, see §§
648.09,
648.095
   Theft alarms, see §
438.20
§ 1064.01  FALSE ALARM DEFINED.
   “Fire alarm,” as used in this chapter, includes any alarm or report of an
alarm received by the Police or Fire Department of the city that has resulted
from either the mechanical malfunction of an alarm system located within the
municipality and/or the negligence of the owner of property within the
municipality and/or his or her agents and/or employees in the setting of the
alarm system, including, but not limited to, those which proximately cause the
alarm to register and be received by the Police or Fire Department. Whether or
not an alarm or a report of an alarm received by the City Police or Fire
Department qualifies as a false alarm is a decision to be made by the Chief of
Police or Fire Chief of the city, after proper investigation of the
circumstances surrounding said alarm receipt has been completed by said
municipal officer.
(Ord. 67-91, passed 9-3-1991)
§ 1064.02  ASSESSMENT FOR EXCESSIVE FALSE ALARMS.
   In the event the Police or Fire Department of the city has received in
excess of two false alarms, as more fully defined in §
1064.01, within any 30-day period from and after the effective date of this
section, the owner of the property upon which the alarm system is located shall
be charged the sum of $50 per false alarm for each and every false alarm in
excess of two for said 30-day period.
(Ord. 67-91, passed 9-3-1991)
§ 1064.03  NOTICE OF ASSESSMENT.
   The Finance Director of the city shall, upon notification of the Police
Chief or Fire Chief, give five days’ notice by regular mail to the owner of the
property upon which the alarm system is located, at his or her last known
address, to pay the $50 per alarm assessment. In the event the same is not paid
within 30 days  after the mailing of said notice, then said amount shall be
determined to be delinquent and shall be collected in a manner as is authorized
by law.
(Ord. 67-91, passed 9-3-1991)
PART XII: PLANNING AND ZONING
TITLE TWO - PLANNING
   
CHAP. 1220.  PLANNING COMMISSION
   
CHAP. 1222.  MASTER PLAN
TITLE FOUR - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
   
CHAP. 1240.   GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
   
CHAP. 1242.   ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY
   
CHAP. 1244.   PROCEDURES
   
CHAP. 1246.   PLANNING PRINCIPLES
   
CHAP. 1248.   LAND IMPROVEMENTS
   
CHAP. 1250.   PLANS AND PLATS
   
CHAP. 1252.   STREET LIGHTING
   
APPENDIX I.   DEVELOPER/BUILDER PROCEDURAL OUTLINE
   
APPENDIX II.   FORMS FOR FINAL PLAT CERTIFICATION
   
APPENDIX III.   DEVELOPER’S AGREEMENT TO SECURE PERFORMANCE OF DEVELOPMENT
PLANS
   
APPENDIX IV.   CUL-DE-SAC SPECIFICATIONS
TITLE SIX - ZONING
   
CHAP. 1260.   GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
   
CHAP. 1262.   ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY
   
CHAP. 1264.   DISTRICTS GENERALLY AND ZONE MAP
   
CHAP. 1266.   CLASSIFICATION OF USES
   
CHAP. 1268.   CLASS A DISTRICTS
   
CHAP. 1270.   CLASS B-1 DISTRICTS
   
CHAP. 1271.   CLASS B-2 DISTRICTS
   
CHAP. 1272.   CLASS B-3 DISTRICTS
   
CHAP. 1275.   CLASS B-5 DISTRICTS
   
CHAP. 1276.   BUSINESS DISTRICTS
   
CHAP. 1277.   C-4 SHOPPING CENTER DISTRICTS
   
CHAP. 1278.   CLASS D-1 DISTRICTS
   
CHAP. 1279.   C-5 INTERSTATE HIGHWAY SHOPPING CENTER DISTRICT
   
CHAP. 1280.   CLASS E DISTRICTS
   
CHAP. 1281.   RENTAL PROPERTIES
   
CHAP. 1282.   NONCONFORMING USES
   
CHAP. 1283.   TOWN CENTER SPECIAL PLANNING DISTRICT #1
   
CHAP. 1284.   OFF-STREET PARKING
   
CHAP. 1286.   DETENTION AND RETENTION BASIN DESIGN
   
CHAP. 1287.   EXISTING OIL/GAS WELLS
   
CHAP. 1288.   MEDICAL MARIJUANA
   
APPENDIX I.   PARKING AREA BUFFERS
TITLE EIGHT - MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
   
CHAP. 1300.   RESIDENTIAL ARCHITECTURE
   
CHAP. 1302.   MUNICIPAL ARCHITECT
   
CHAP. 1304.   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMITS
   
CHAP. 1305.   USE OF PUBLIC WAYS FOR SMALL CELL WIRELESS FACILITIES AND
WIRELESS SUPPORT FACILITIES
   
CHAP. 1306.   TELECOMMUNICATIONS UNDERGROUND SERVICE LINES
   
CHAP. 1308.   AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINES
   
CHAP. 1310.   EXTERIOR MASONRY SURFACES
   
CHAP. 1312.   FENCES
   
CHAP. 1314.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
   
CHAP. 1316.   GRADE LEVELS
   
CHAP. 1318.   MOVING OF BUILDINGS
   
CHAP. 1320.   REMOVAL OF LOAM OR TOPSOIL
   
CHAP. 1322.   ROADWAY DITCH LINES
   
CHAP. 1324.   RURAL MAILBOXES
   
CHAP. 1326.   SATELLITE SIGNAL-RECEIVING EARTH STATIONS
   
CHAP. 1328.   SIGNS
   
CHAP. 1330.   STREET LIGHTING
   
CHAP. 1332.   SWIMMING AND WADING POOLS
   
CHAP. 1334.   STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN
   
CHAP. 1336.   TEMPORARY DRIVEWAYS AND PROTECTIVE PLANKINGS
   
CHAP. 1338.   UNSAFE BUILDINGS
   
CHAP. 1340.   SAFETY FORCES RADIO SIGNAL COMMUNICATION REQUIREMENTS
   
CHAP. 1342.   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANTS
   
CHAP. 1344.   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
   
CHAP. 1345.   SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS
   
CHAP. 1346.   CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES
   
CHAP. 1348.   INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
   
CHAP. 1350.   DONATION BOXES
TITLE TWO:  PLANNING
   
CHAP. 1220.  PLANNING COMMISSION
   
CHAP. 1222.  MASTER PLAN
CHAPTER 1220:  PLANNING COMMISSION
Section
1220.01   Vice-Chairperson
1220.02   Fees for subdivision and development plan approvals
1220.03   Notification to current residents located within 500 feet of any new
development(s)
1220.04   Notification to current residents located within a 1,000-foot radius
of any city participation oil/gas well head; or any new wind turbine system
location installation(s)
Cross-reference:
   Determination of similar uses, see §
1262.06
   Mandatory referral of legislation, see
CHTR. Art. V, § 7(e),
Art. IX, § 3
   Planning Commission, see
CHTR. Art. V, § 7
   Strategic Plan Advisory Committee, see
Chapter 283
   Subdivision procedures, see
Chapter 1244
Statutory reference:
   City Planning Commissions, see Ohio R.C. 713.01 et seq.
§ 1220.01  VICE-CHAIRPERSON.
   (A)   The position of Vice-Chairperson of the Planning Commission is hereby
established.
   (B)   The Vice-Chairperson shall be elected by the Commission from among its
appointed members.
   (C)   The Vice-Chairperson shall perform the duties of Chairperson in the
temporary absence of the Chairperson of the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 88-147, passed 9-6-1988)
§ 1220.02  FEES FOR SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT PLAN APPROVALS.
   (A)   See §
1449.02, Fee Schedule, of the Building and Housing Code.
   (B)   All fees for subdivision and development plan approvals required by
this section shall be paid in full prior to the issuance of a building permit
as otherwise specified in this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 13-97, passed 2-3-1997; Ord. 152-02, passed 10-21-2002)
§ 1220.03  NOTIFICATION TO CURRENT RESIDENTS LOCATED WITHIN 500 FEET OF ANY NEW
DEVELOPMENT(S).
   Notification to current residents located within 500 feet of any new
development(s) shall be made by the Building Department, by regular mail, prior
to the first Planning Commission meeting regarding said development(s)
informing said residents that such development is scheduled to be considered
for approval and advising the notified residents of the right to comment at the
Planning Commission meeting. As used herein, the term “developments” includes
all development projects, whether residential or nonresidential.
(Ord. 06-03, passed 1-6-2003)
§ 1220.04  NOTIFICATION TO CURRENT RESIDENTS LOCATED WITHIN A 1,000-FOOT RADIUS
OF ANY CITY PARTICIPATION OIL/GAS WELL HEAD; OR ANY NEW WIND TURBINE SYSTEM
LOCATION INSTALLATION(S).
   Notification to current residents located within a 1,000-foot radius of any
well head in which the city participation on an oil/gas well new lease or
current residents located within a 1,000-foot radius of any new wind turbine
system(s) location shall be made by the Building Department, by regular mail,
prior to the first Planning Commission meeting regarding said project(s)
informing said residents that such project is scheduled to be considered for
approval and advising the notified residents of the right to comment at the
Planning Commission meeting.
(Ord. 03-10, passed 1-4-2010)
CHAPTER 1222:  MASTER PLAN
Section
Cross-reference:
   Master Street Tree Plan, see §
288.06
   Planning Commission, see
Chapter 1220;
CHTR. Art. V, § 7
   Planning principles, see
Chapter 1246
Editor’s note:
   Ordinance No. 107-10, passed September 7, 2010 adopted the Master Plan for
the city.  Copies of the Plan and of all amendments thereof are on file in the
office of the Clerk of Council and may be obtained, at cost, from the Clerk of
Council.
   There are no sections in Chapter 1222.  This chapter has been established to
provide a place for cross-references and any future legislation.
TITLE FOUR:  SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
   
CHAP. 1240.   GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
   
CHAP. 1242.   ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY
   
CHAP. 1244.   PROCEDURES
   
CHAP. 1246.   PLANNING PRINCIPLES
   
CHAP. 1248.   LAND IMPROVEMENTS
   
CHAP. 1250.   PLANS AND PLATS
   
CHAP. 1252.   STREET LIGHTING
   
APPENDIX I.   DEVELOPER/BUILDER PROCEDURAL OUTLINE
   
APPENDIX II.   FORMS FOR FINAL PLAT CERTIFICATION
   
APPENDIX III.   DEVELOPER’S AGREEMENT TO SECURE PERFORMANCE OF DEVELOPMENT
PLANS
   
APPENDIX IV.   CUL-DE-SAC SPECIFICATIONS
CHAPTER 1240: GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
Section
1240.01   Title
1240.02   Purpose
1240.03   Objectives
1240.04   Definitions
1240.05   Intent; interpretation
1240.06   Amendments
1240.07   Separability
1240.08   Effective date; application; certified copy
Cross-reference:
   Planning Commission, see
Chapter 1220
Statutory reference:
   Adoption of subdivision regulations, see Ohio R.C. 711.101
   Effective date of subdivision regulations, see Ohio R.C. 711.132
§ 1240.01  TITLE.
   The provisions of this Title Four of Part Twelve of this Code of Ordinances,
which regulate the planning, subdivision and development of land within the
city, including procedures for the application and administration of the same,
and penalties for the violation of or noncompliance with the same, shall be
known, cited and referred to as the land planning and subdivision regulations
of the city, or just the subdivision regulations.  References throughout this
Title Four to “these regulations” refer to this Title Four only.
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963)
§ 1240.02  PURPOSE.
   The general purpose of these regulations is to guide and regulate the
planning, subdivision and development of land in order to promote and protect
the public health, safety, convenience, comfort, prosperity and general
welfare.
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963)
§ 1240.03  OBJECTIVES.
   It is intended that the provisions of these regulations shall be applied to
achieve the following objectives:
   (A)   Orderly development of land to obtain harmonious and stable
neighborhoods;
   (B)   Safe and convenient vehicular and pedestrian circulation;
   (C)   Adequate and economical provisions for utilities and public services
to conserve public funds;
   (D)   Ample public open space for schools and recreational and other public
purposes;
   (E)   Accurate surveying of land and preparing and recording of plats;
   (F)   Discouraging premature, uneconomical or scattered subdivisions; and
   (G)   Coordination of land development in accordance with the Zoning Code,
the Thoroughfare Plan, the Comprehensive Plan and other plans of the city.
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963)
§ 1240.04  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   “Building line.” Means a line established by the Zoning Code (which may be
included on a subdivision plat) defining the limits of the front yard in which
no structure may be located.
   “Commission.” Means the Planning Commission of the city.
   “Comprehensive Plan.” Means a composite of the mapped and written proposals
for the future development of the municipality, duly adopted by the Commission
and/or Council, indicating its recommendations for the uses of private land,
public open spaces and buildings and the general street system.
   “Developer.” Means an individual, firm, association, corporation, trust or
any other legal entity, including his or her or its agents, commencing
proceedings under these regulations to effect a subdivision of land for himself
or itself or for another.
   “Drainage way.” Means the land required for construction of storm water
sewers or drainage ditches, or required along a natural stream or watercourse.
   “Easement.” Means a grant by a property owner of the use, for a specific
purpose, of land by the general public, a corporation or another person.
   “Final plat.” Means the final map of all or a portion of a subdivision and
which, if approved, may be recorded.
   “Gross floor area.” Means the floor area within the perimeter of the outside
walls of the building, without deduction for hallways, stairs, closets,
thickness of walls, columns or other features.
   “Half-story.” Means the portion of a building between the top floor and a
sloping roof, with at least two opposite exterior walls meeting the sloping
roof not over four and one-half feet above that floor level.
   “Lot” or “parcel.” Means a division of land separated from other divisions
by description on a recorded subdivision plat or a recorded survey map or by
metes and bounds, for purposes of sale, lease or separate use.
   “Map.” Means a drawing showing geographic, topographic or other physical
features of land.
   “Park and Recreation Plan.” Means a map showing the location and size of
existing and proposed parks, playgrounds and other open public grounds of the
municipality, duly adopted by the Commission and/or Council and which may be
part of the Comprehensive Plan.
   “Pedestrian way.” Means a dedicated public right-of-way limited to
pedestrian traffic.
   “Plan.” Means a drawing of a proposed design or of work to be performed.
   “Plat.” Means a map of a lot, tract or subdivision on which the lines of
each element are shown by accurate distances and bearings.
   “Preliminary plan.” Means a drawing for the purpose of study of a major
subdivision and which, if approved, permits proceeding with the preparation of
the final plat.
   “Sketch plan.” Means a sketch for the purpose of study and approval of minor
subdivisions.
   “Story.” Means that portion of a building included between the upper surface
of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the
topmost story shall be that habitable portion of a building included between
the upper surface of the topmost floor and ceiling or roof above.
   “Story above grade.” Means any story having its finished floor surface
entirely above grade, except that a basement shall be considered as a story
above grade when the finished surface of the floor above the basement is:
      (1)   More than six feet above grade plane;
      (2)   More than six feet above the finished ground level for more than
50% of the total building perimeter; or
      (3)   More than 12 feet above the finished ground level at any point.
   “Street.” Means an avenue, highway, road, thoroughfare, boulevard, parkway,
alley or other way proposed for vehicular traffic, and any existing state,
county, township or city street or way shown upon a plat heretofore duly
approved, filed and recorded in the office of the County Recorder. Included is
the land between the street right-of-way lines, whether improved or unimproved,
which may comprise the pavement, shoulders, gutters, sidewalks, division strips
or other areas within the street lines. Streets shall be classified as follows:
      (1)   “Limited-access highway (freeway).” Means a strip of public land
devoted to movement of traffic but not providing access to the abutting
properties.
      (2)   “Local street.” Means a street primarily for access to abutting
residential properties and to serve local needs.
      (3)   “Major street” or “thoroughfare.” Means a street which is primarily
for fast moving or heavy traffic between large or intensively developed
districts.
      (4)   “Parkway.” Means a roadway running through a strip of public park
land to which right of access may or may not be permitted.
      (5)   “Private street.” Means a strip of private land providing access to
abutting properties.
      (6)   “Right-of-way.” Means a strip of land measured between property
lines, dedicated for use by the public.
         (a)   “Roadway.” Means the portion of a street available for vehicular
traffic, including parking lanes.
           (b)   “Tree lawn.” Means the portion of a street between the edge of
the pavement or curb and the public sidewalk or property line.
      (7)   “Secondary street” or “collector street.” Means a street
supplementary to and connecting major streets to local streets and to district
centers.
   “Subdivision.” Means a division of a parcel of land, shown as a unit or as
contiguous units in the current records of the County Recorder, into two or
more lots, parcels, sites or other divisions of land, any one of which is five
acres or less, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of transfer of
ownership, including a division or allocation of land for the opening, widening
or extension of any street, or as open spaces for common use, or as easements
for the extension and maintenance of public sewer, water, storm drainage or
other public facilities in connection with the improvement of one or more
parcels of land for a residential, commercial or industrial development, and
including resubdivision and replatting and, where appropriate to the context,
the process of subdividing or the land divided. However, a division of land
into parcels of more than five acres for agricultural purposes not involving
new streets or easements of access, or a division, sale or change of parcels
between adjoining lot owners, where such exchange does not create additional
building sites, shall not be considered a “subdivision”.
   “Thoroughfare Plan.” Means a map showing the location and width of existing
and proposed streets of the municipality, duly adopted by the Commission and/or
Council and which may be part of the Comprehensive Plan.
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963; Ord. 60-98, passed 4-6-1998)
§ 1240.05  INTENT; INTERPRETATION.
   These regulations shall be considered minimum requirements for the
protection of the public health, safety, comfort, property and general welfare,
pursuant to the authority of Ohio R.C. Chapter 711, or such statutes
hereinafter enacted, and shall be construed most favorably to the municipality
as encouraging standards of planning and development exceeding these basic and
minimum regulations.
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963)
§ 1240.06  AMENDMENTS.
   Amendments to these regulations may be initiated by the Planning Commission
or Council. If initiated by Council, they shall be referred to the Commission.
After receiving recommendations thereon, the Commission shall hold a public
hearing. If the amendment is approved by the Commission, Council may adopt the
ordinance by a majority vote. If such amendment is not approved by the
Commission, such ordinance may be adopted only by the affirmative vote of at
least six members of Council.
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963; Ord. 122-98, passed 6-15-1998)
§ 1240.07  SEPARABILITY.
   If any section, division, sentence, clause or phrase of these regulations is
for any reason held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such
decision shall not affect the remaining portion of these regulations.
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963)
§ 1240.08  EFFECTIVE DATE; APPLICATION; CERTIFIED COPY.
   (A)   These regulations shall take effect and be in force 30 days after
adoption. These regulations shall not be construed to require the preparation
and recording of a final plat of a subdivision which has been staked out and
for which sales or contracts of sales have been lawfully made, or for property
sold or contracted for sale according to the description by which it was
acquired or according to an unrecorded plat lawfully used prior to the above
date.
   (B)   A copy of these regulations shall be certified by the Planning
Commission to the County Recorder.
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963)
CHAPTER 1242:  ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY
Section
1242.01   Modifications
1242.02   Appeals
1242.03   Unsubdivided areas
1242.04   Fees
1242.05   Interest of officials and employees
1242.06   Installation or guarantee of required improvements required
1242.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Fees for subdivision and development plan approvals, see §
1220.02
   Having an unlawful interest in a public contract, see §
606.17
   Planning Commission, see
Chapter 1220
Statutory reference:
   Adoption of subdivision regulations, see Ohio R.C. 711.101
   Transfer of land before recording; forfeiture, see Ohio R.C. 711.13
   Violation of subdivision regulations, see Ohio R.C. 711.102
§ 1242.01  MODIFICATIONS.
   Where the Planning Commission finds that the land involved in a subdivision
is of such size or shape, is subject to such title limitations, is affected by
such topographical conditions or is to be devoted to such usage that it is
impossible or impractical in the particular proposal for the developer to
conform fully to a provision of these subdivision regulations, the Commission
may accept such modification as is reasonable if it is within the general
intent and purpose of these regulations.
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963)
§ 1242.02  APPEALS.
   A developer aggrieved by an action of the Planning Commission in regard to
refusal to approve a subdivision may, within 60 days after such refusal, appeal
to the appropriate court to correct errors of law and/or resolve questions of
fact.
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963)
§ 1242.03  UNSUBDIVIDED AREAS.
   The Planning Commission may prepare plans of unsubdivided or improperly
subdivided areas showing a pattern of future streets and public open spaces.
After the proper public hearing, such plans, or parts thereof, may be adopted
by the Commission and recorded, and thereafter no subdivision may be approved
and no street accepted or improved unless it conforms substantially to such
recorded plan; further, no application for a permit to construct a building on
land shown within the right-of-way of a planned street shall be issued until
such land has been acquired or reserved for street purposes, but such permit
shall not be withheld for a period exceeding 90 days.
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963)
§ 1242.04  FEES.
   (A)   See §
1449.02, Fee Schedule, of the Building and Housing Code.
   (B)   All fees for subdivision and development plan approvals required by
this section shall be paid in full prior to the issuance of a building permit
as otherwise specified in this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963; Ord. 09-16, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1242.05  INTEREST OF OFFICIALS AND EMPLOYEES.
   Officials and employees of the city shall not be employed by or receive
compensation from any developer for planning or seeking approval of any
subdivision or development within the jurisdiction of these subdivision
regulations. Officials and employees may make suggestions and recommendations
for improvements to sketches and plans submitted as part of their official
duties.
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963; Ord. 09-16, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1242.06  INSTALLATION OR GUARANTEE OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED.
   The public utilities and other required improvements deemed necessary in the
public interest and essential for appropriate services and access to lots shall
have been installed or their installation guaranteed in conformity with the
provisions of §
1248.13 of these subdivision regulations before the issuance of a permit to
construct a building upon a lot and before the sale or lease of a lot.
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963; Ord. 09-16, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1242.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Violations Generally. Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of
the provisions of these subdivision regulations, or any order issued pursuant
thereto, shall be punished as provided in §
202.99  of this Code of Ordinances.
   (B)   Transfer of Land Before Recording.
      (1)   Whoever, being the owner or agent of the owner of any land located
within the jurisdiction of these regulations, willfully transfers any lot or
parcel of land from or in accordance with a plat of a subdivision before such
plat has been recorded, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the third degree and
shall be punished as provided in §
202.99(A) of this Code of Ordinances for each lot or parcel of land sold. The
description of such lot or parcel by metes and bounds in the deed of transfer
shall not serve to exempt the seller from the penalty herein provided for. The
city may enjoin such sale or agreement by a civil action in any court of
competent jurisdiction.
      (2)   The sale of lots or parcels from a plat of a subdivision on which
any and all areas indicated as streets or as open ground are expressly
indicated as for the exclusive use of the abutting or other owners in such
subdivision and not as public streets, ways or grounds shall not serve to
exempt the seller from the requirements of these regulations or from the
penalty herein provided for.
(Ord. 09-16, passed 3-7-2016)
CHAPTER 1244:  PROCEDURES
Section
1244.01   Intent
1244.02   Pre-application and application
1244.03   Minor subdivision; sketch plan
1244.04   Minor subdivision; certification; recording
1244.05   Major subdivision; preliminary plan
1244.06   Major subdivision; final plat
1244.07   Lands for public use
1244.08   Multi-family and other developments
1244.09   City map
1244.10   Resubdividing or vacating
Statutory reference:
   Approval by planning authority without plat, see Ohio R.C. 711.131
   Forfeiture of wrongfully recorded plats, see Ohio R.C. 711.15
   Plats, see Ohio R.C. 711.01 et seq.
   Tentative approval by Planning Commission; recording of plat, see Ohio R.C.
711.103
   Vacating of plats, see Ohio R.C. 711.17 et seq.
§ 1244.01  INTENT.
   (A)   The procedures established in this chapter are intended to define the
steps by which a developer may design, make an application, record plats and
construct improvements, and by which Council and the Planning Commission may
review, make recommendations, approve the plans and otherwise administer these
regulations.
   (B)   For those subdivisions hereinafter classified as minor subdivisions, a
sketch plan and abbreviated procedure is established. For all others, which are
classified as major subdivisions, a preliminary plan and final plat procedure
is established. For an outline of procedures, see
Appendix I following these regulations.
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963)
§ 1244.02  PRE-APPLICATION AND APPLICATION.
   The city shall furnish to developers, for a fee, a Developer/Builder
Procedural Outline application with attachments, copies of these regulations,
the Zoning Code, the Thoroughfare Plan and other adopted plans, street maps and
other information which may affect the development of the property under
consideration, such fees to be set by Council. Except for minor subdivisions,
applications for approval of a subdivision shall  be in accord with
Appendix I of these regulations, the Developer/Builder Procedural Outline,
other codes and plans, as adopted, and other information furnished.
(Ord. 52-90, passed 5-7-1990; Ord. 10-16, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1244.03  MINOR SUBDIVISION; SKETCH PLAN.
   (A)   Classification. A proposed division of a parcel of land which adjoins
an existing public street and does not involve the opening, widening, extension
or improvement of any street or the installation of any public utility, and
does not involve more than three lots which include all the contiguous land
under one ownership, shall be classified as a minor subdivision.
   (B)   Application.
      (1)   A sketch plan in duplicate complying with the requirements set
forth in §
1250.02 shall be prepared for each minor subdivision and an application for
approval shall be submitted to the Building Commissioner. If the sketch plan
qualifies as a minor subdivision, the Building Commissioner shall refer it to
the Secretary of the Planning Commission. The purposes of a sketch plan layout
are to furnish sufficient information to determine if it qualifies as a minor
subdivision and if it is properly integrated with the neighborhood and in
compliance with other city codes.
      (2)   The Commission shall consider the sketch plan at the next regularly
scheduled meeting after receipt of an application and all required maps,
sketches and information, and shall approve or disapprove at the following
regular meeting.
   (C)   Approval. If the Commission determines that the proposed division of
land is a minor subdivision and that:
      (1)   All the contiguous land owned by the developer will therein be
completely subdivided;
      (2)   It is properly integrated with adjoining subdivisions or could be
properly coordinated with the subdivision;
      (3)   It complies with the planning principles and other sections of
these regulations, the Zoning Code and other codes and plans of the city; and
      (4)   The layout is satisfactory, then the minor subdivision shall be
approved. A notation to that effect shall be made on the sketch plan by the
Chairperson and Secretary of the Commission and one copy shall be returned to
the developer. The developer shall be informed if a metes and bounds deed
description or a plat map will be required. The Secretary of the Planning
Commission shall refer the second copy of the sketch to the City Engineer.
   (D)   Rejection. If the Commission determines that it is a major
subdivision, or the sketch plan is not approved for other reasons, the
Commission shall state the conditions to be complied with before it will be
approved and return the sketch to the developer with reasons specified.
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963; Ord. 10-16, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1244.04  MINOR SUBDIVISION; CERTIFICATION; RECORDING.
   (A)   After approval of a sketch plan, the developer shall submit either a
metes and bounds deed description or plat map, as required, to the City
Engineer for review and, if found to conform to the approved sketch plan and
otherwise satisfactory, the Engineer shall so certify the approval thereon
within seven working days after receipt.
   (B)   No plat or subdivision shall be entitled to be recorded with the
County Recorder or have any validity until it has been approved by the city as
provided in this chapter. The Planning Commission Secretary shall have the City
Engineer record the approved final plat after being reimbursed by the owner for
expenses to be incurred. If any such unapproved plat is recorded, it shall be
considered invalid and the Planning Commission may institute proceedings to
have the plat stricken from the records of the County Recorder.
(Ord. 90-98, passed 7-27-1998)
§ 1244.05  MAJOR SUBDIVISION; PRELIMINARY PLAN.
   (A)   Application.  A written application for approval of a preliminary plan
designed by a professional city planner, civil engineer or landscape architect,
complying with the requirements set forth in §§
1244.02  and
1250.03 , shall be submitted for each proposed major subdivision.  The purposes
of the preliminary plan are to explore the best design for the subdivision and
the best relationship to adjoining subdivisions or undeveloped land, to outline
a program of improvements, avoidance of environmental sensitive areas, wetland
areas, streams and to obtain the advice, suggestions and requirements of the
Planning Commission and departments of the city and Council before the plan
becomes rigid as in a detail drawing.
   (B)   Effect of Approval.  The approval of the preliminary plan by Council
shall assure the developer for a one-year period from the date of approval, or,
for such additional period as extended by approval of Council pursuant to §
1448.09  of the Building and Housing Code, that:
      (1)   The general layout of streets, lots and other features is approved
and it shall be the basis for the preparation of the final plat;
      (2)   The general terms and any special conditions under which the
approval of the plan was granted will not be changed unless resubmitted to the
Planning Commission and Council; and
      (3)   The developer may submit drawings and specifications for
improvements and a final plat for the whole or part of the subdivision.
(Ord. 52-90, passed 5-7-1990; Ord. 92-97, passed 6-23-1997; Ord. 10-16, passed
3-7-2016)
§ 1244.06  MAJOR SUBDIVISION; FINAL PLAT.
   (A)   Application.
      (1)   A final plat shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Planning
Commission and the Project Head who shall review the plat and refer the same to
the Planning Commission.  The application shall include the original tracing of
the final plat, three black-on-white prints of the drawings for the required
improvements, three sets of specifications and other maps and data and
certificates as set forth in §
1250.04.
      (2)   The developer may apply for final plat approval of only that
section of an approved preliminary plan for a subdivision which he or she
proposes to develop and/or record as the first stage.  However, the preliminary
approval of any section shall become null and void if an application for final
plat approval is not submitted within one year after approval of the
preliminary plan, unless an extension of time is granted by Council, for good
cause shown.
   (B)   Review by City Engineer.  The Secretary of the Commission shall
transmit two prints of each drawing and the specifications to the City Engineer
to determine:
      (1)   The conformity of the final plat to the approved preliminary plans
and any special condition or modification stipulated, and the correctness of
mathematical data and computations; and
      (2)   The conformity of the designs and details of the required
improvements, as shown on the drawings and specifications, with any plans for
streets and utilities and the construction standards in effect in the city. One
copy of each shall be returned to the Commission by the Engineer indicating his
or her determinations.
   (C)   Wetland Study.  No final plat shall be approved by the City Engineer
unless and until the applicant has provided a wetland study prepared by a
Professional Wetland Scientist (PWS) to the Planning Commission and City
Council pursuant to the Developer/Builder Procedural Outline of the city.  Said
study shall be reviewed by the City Engineer to assure the city that there is
no violation of any law regulating development on wetlands.  Said expert report
shall be prepared by a company which is acceptable to the United States Army
Corps of Engineers and shall contain verification that said company shall be
fully responsible to the city and the developer for the accuracy of the report
and opinion contained therein.  At the city’s discretion, this requirement
shall not be applicable to projects involving the expansion of existing
commercial development. 
   (D)   Action by the Planning Commission.
      (1)   If the Engineer finds that the final plat, drawings and
specifications are satisfactory in regard to the aforesaid provisions and if
the subdivision complies with all other applicable provisions of these
regulations, the Commission shall approve it and return it to Council
recommending favorable consideration.  Action by the Commission shall be taken
within 60 days from the date of referral for approval, on which date all
required plats, maps and data were submitted to the Commission or within a
mutually agreed upon extension.
      (2)   Council shall act upon the final plat, maps and data and/or
drawings and specifications, either separately or concurrently, but in no event
shall it approve the final plat for recording until the construction of
improvements is guaranteed as provided in §
1248.13.
   (E)   Form of Approval.
      (1)   The approval of the final plat shall be indicated by a
certification to that effect on the original tracing of the plat with the
signature of the Chairperson and Secretary of the Planning Commission, the
Clerk and the President of Council.  Council shall obtain one duplicate tracing
thereof at the developer’s expense before returning the tracing to him or her. 
The reason for disapproval of a plat shall be stated in the minutes of Council.
      (2)   In addition to the plat, drawings and specifications for the
required improvements shall be indicated by a certificate to that effect on the
original drawings and specifications with the signature of the City Engineer. 
Approval of the improvements as constructed shall likewise be certified by the
signature of the Engineer.
      (3)   Only when final or revised final plans are acceptable to Council,
having first received the recommendation of the Planning Commission, shall
final approval be given.  In the event that the Planning Commission recommends
that said final or revised plans should not be accepted by Council, said plans
shall only be approved upon the concurrence of two-thirds of the members of
Council.
   (F)   Recording.  No plat or subdivision shall be entitled to be recorded
with the County Recorder or have any validity until it has been approved by the
city as provided in this chapter.  The Planning Commission Secretary shall have
the City Engineer record the approved final plat after being reimbursed by the
owner for expenses to be incurred.  If any such unapproved plat is recorded it
shall be considered invalid and the Planning Commission may institute
proceedings to have the plat stricken from the records of the County Recorder.
   (G)   Effect of Approval and Recording. 
      (1)   When drawings and specifications for improvements are approved and
the construction is guaranteed, as provided in §
1248.13, the final plat may be approved and recorded, construction of
improvements started, building permits issued and lots sold, leased or
transferred.
      (2)   Occupancy permits for a building shall not be issued until streets
and utilities are accepted by the city for public use.  However, a temporary
certificate may be issued upon the condition that the developer assumes all
responsibility and posts a sufficient performance guarantee for maintenance of
the streets and utilities until they are officially accepted by the city.
   (H)   Developers Agreement Required.  Prior to the issuance of a permit to
construct a major subdivision, but subsequent to all other necessary approvals
delineated in this Code of Ordinances, every developer of a major subdivision
within the city shall execute a Developer’s Agreement to Secure Performance of
Development Plans as outlined in
Appendix III  following the text of these subdivision regulations.
Ord. 52-90, passed 5-7-1990; Ord. 31-91, passed 5-6-1991; Ord. 80-92, passed 9-
21-1992;  Ord. 90-98, passed 7-27-1998;  Ord. 189-98, passed 3-15-1999;  Ord.
220-98, passed 3-15-1999; Ord. 10-16, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1244.07  LANDS FOR PUBLIC USE.
   (A)   Dedication for Public Use.  If the final plat indicates land for
public use, the plat shall be submitted to Council for acceptance of dedication
of any public land, and acceptance of any easement, before it is recorded.  The
acceptance of any street or utility for public use and maintenance shall be by
separate action of Council.
   (B)   Land Reserved for Public Use.
      (1)   The city may request, by resolution, a developer to set aside,
reserve or offer for sale, land for streets, parks, playgrounds or other public
uses shown upon a duly approved Thoroughfare, Park and Recreation or
Comprehensive Plan for a period of 90 days after the application for approval
of a preliminary plan, or for a longer period as may be mutually agreed, to
allow the city time to acquire such land. During such period, no structure
shall be erected, no tree or topsoil shall be removed or destroyed, no grading
shall be done and no land so reserved shall be put to any use except with the
written approval of Council.
      (2)   If no site for a recreational use is shown within a proposed
subdivision on such an approved plan, the developer shall be requested to
contribute a pro rata fee to a land acquisition fund for recreation use in
accordance with standards established for the neighborhood to be served.
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963; Ord. 10-16, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1244.08  MULTI-FAMILY AND OTHER DEVELOPMENTS.
   (A)   An application and preliminary plan shall be submitted by the
developer to Council for all proposals for multi-family, business and
industrial developments or subdivisions involving open spaces for common use or
extensions of public facilities. The application and plan shall be referred to
the Planning Commission for its recommendation. All procedures, maps, plans and
other data required by these regulations for preliminary plans, as set forth in
§
1250.03, shall be complied with and furnished if determined to be applicable by
Council.
   (B)   Where streets or other areas are intended to be used by the public,
and public utilities are to be constructed, all procedures, maps and other data
required by these regulations for final plats, as set forth in §
1250.04, shall be complied with and furnished if determined to be applicable by
Council. The recording of a site or development plan or final plat may be
required.
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963)
§ 1244.09  CITY MAP.
   In order that proposed subdivisions may be properly planned and reviewed, a
map of the city showing all streets and lot lines shall be kept current by the
City Engineer. Preliminary plans, when approved, shall be indicated on a print
of the City Map, and every final plat or deed, when recorded, shall be added to
the tracings.
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963; Ord. 10-16, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1244.10  RESUBDIVIDING OR VACATING.
   An application for resubdividing, replatting or vacating of a subdivision
shall be made by the owner or owners thereof to Planning Commission in the same
form as for an original subdivision along with all required maps and other
information. The original lots shall be shown by dotted lines and lot numbers
and other references made to previously recorded subdivisions. If approved by
Planning Commission, those types of replatting and vacating actions as required
by the provisions of Ohio (Ord. 5711.17 to 711.31, inclusive), shall be
submitted to the Clerk of the Court of Common Pleas.
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963; Ord. 10-16, passed 3-7-2016)
CHAPTER 1246:  PLANNING PRINCIPLES
Section
1246.01   Intent
1246.02   Topography
1246.03   Street planning
1246.04   Block planning
1246.05   Lot design
1246.06   Public uses
Cross-reference:
   Grade levels, see
Chapter 1316
   Land improvements, see
Chapter 1248
   Removal of loam or topsoil, see
Chapter 1320
Statutory reference:
   Inspection of construction, see Ohio R.C. 711.091
§ 1246.01  INTENT.
   (A)   The planning principles established in this chapter are intended to be
fundamental principles to be applied with professional skill in the planning of
land so as to produce attractive and harmonious neighborhoods, convenient and
safe streets and economical layouts of residential and other land development.
   (B)   Since these provisions are principles instead of specific regulations,
as set forth in other chapters, it may not be possible to incorporate all the
principles in each subdivision, especially in small developments. However, the
Planning Commission shall determine if certain principles are not applicable.
Alternate designs should be thoroughly studied to obtain the best plan to
assure stable and high value neighborhoods.
   (C)   If a Comprehensive Plan, Thoroughfare Plan or plan for the parks and
other open areas has been adopted, the streets, school sites, public parks and
all other land uses shown thereon shall be incorporated in the subdivision
plan.
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963)
§ 1246.02  TOPOGRAPHY.
   Subdivisions shall be planned to take advantage of the topography of the
land in order to utilize the natural contours and economize in the construction
of drainage facilities, to reduce the amount of grading and to minimize
destruction of trees and topsoil. The natural features and other distinctive
characteristics of the site shall be integrated into the plan to create
functional variations in the neighborhoods. Topographic maps shall be utilized
in land planning.
   (A)   Streets and Topography. Land shall be planned so that the streets
follow the natural drainage courses and as many lots as possible shall be above
the street grade. Where it may be necessary, because of limitations of site
dimensions, to plan streets approximately perpendicular to the contour lines,
more extensive grading shall be required.
   (B)   Natural Drainage. Subdivisions shall be designed, particularly land of
very gentle slopes, to take every advantage of natural grades so that all the
land can be drained without excessive grading. Unless watercourses or drainage
ways are enclosed, the plan shall be adjusted so that rear lot lines are
approximately parallel to the natural or straightened course, and only where
such a plan is not possible may side lot lines be arranged parallel to an open
drainage course. Easements for drainage ways and low lying land which is
subject to flooding may be included as part of a lot but shall not be used as a
building site but may be included in calculating the required lot area or
width.
   (C)   Natural Features. Natural features, irregularities, changes in the
level of  brooks, lakes, hilltops and other focal points within the sate, and
distant views outside the subdivision, shall be integrated in the design to
obtain natural variations and interest in each neighborhood and more attractive
building sites. Trees, topsoil and other natural resources shall be preserved
and utilized in the development of the subdivision.
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963)
§ 1246.03  STREET PLANNING.
   In addition to relating streets to topography, as provided in division (A)
hereof, streets shall be designed according to the function served, the use of
abutting land and standards of width, intersections, maximum grades and
curvatures, as set forth in this section.
   (A)   Major Streets.
      (1)   These streets function primarily for the movement of fast traffic
between points of heavy traffic generation. Unless shown otherwise on the
Thoroughfare Plan, they shall be planned for continuation of existing streets
in the system at the same or greater width in accordance with adopted city
standards. Major streets shall contain as few intersections as possible.
      (2)   Where a subdivision of one-family dwellings adjoins a major street,
the Commission shall require the developer to prepare sketches and estimates of
a plan based on marginal access streets, or some other treatment, such as the
fronting of lots on perpendicular local streets, in order to protect the
residential property from the movement of heavy traffic and to eliminate
driveways cutting into a major street, and it may require a plan wherein lots
do not have direct access onto the major street or it may require a setback of
such depth that marginal streets can be constructed in the future.
   (B)   Secondary Streets. These streets function to collect traffic from
local streets and to distribute it onto major streets. As such they will
normally contain a relatively large number of intersections with local streets
and few intersections with main streets. Unless shown otherwise on the
Thoroughfare Plan, a secondary street system may be required wherever a
residential neighborhood surrounded by major streets is over 150 acres in area
or where the local street pattern is so designed as to converge and serve over
500 one-family dwellings, and for any multi-family development. Secondary
streets shall be planned for continuity and to lead more or less directly to
one or more focal points or centers of traffic generation and may become bus
routes.
   (C)   Local Streets.
      (1)   These streets provide direct and full access to each lot. They
shall be planned for convenient circulation toward the principal directions of
travel, bus routes, schools and playgrounds. The layout shall be related to the
topography and natural features. The street pattern shall be indirect and yet
continuous to prevent through traffic, formed of straight, moderately winding,
curved, loop, angular or ell streets. Tee- intersections shall predominate;
cross-intersections shall be avoided. There shall be an underlying systematic
neighborhood pattern. However, gridiron and other rigid geometrical patterns
shall be avoided. The street pattern shall include extensions to the boundaries
of the development to provide circulation between adjoining neighborhoods.
      (2)   Cul-de-sac or permanent dead-end streets are permitted only where
parcels are isolated by surrounding allotments, where continuous streets would
require excessive grading because of very irregular or unusual topography, such
as a promontory or terrace land formation, for more effective utilization of
land or where other types of non-through streets would not provide sufficient
discouragement of through traffic. If the cul-de-sac is not open in the
direction of schools or playgrounds, a pedestrian-way shall be provided.
   (D)   Extension of Streets. Where a subdivision adjoins unsubdivided land,
certain streets shall be planned to extend to the boundary lines so that all
parcels may be subdivided and a coordinated street system obtained. A temporary
turnaround, or back-around, shall be provided for each such street extension if
it is more than 200 feet in length and if lots front thereon. Provisions shall
be made for future extension of the street and utilities and so noted on the
final plat.
   (E)   Nonconforming Widths. Where property abuts a street which does not
conform to the width required by thoroughfare plans of the city, county or
State Transportation Department or these regulations, the additional width
shall be dedicated when such land is subdivided. Streets of less than the
required width shall not be permitted except where the Commission finds that
such a street will be adequate to serve the partial development until all
abutting property is subdivided.
   (F)   Reserve Strips Adjoining Streets. These strips, or other provisions to
control access or extensions to pavement and/or utilities to a nearby property,
shall not be permitted except where the control and disposal of land comprising
such strips has been assigned to the city under conditions approved by the
Commission.
   (G)   Streets for Multi-Family Developments. These streets shall be planned
to connect with major or secondary streets so as not to generate large volumes
of traffic on local residential streets. Vehicular and pedestrian access shall
be planned so that a street, service drive parking area or delivery area will
be located not more than 100 feet from every main or service entrance of a
building and available for each dwelling unit. All other applicable planning
principles shall apply to the design of multi-family developments.
   (H)   Streets for Business and Industrial Developments. These streets shall
be planned to connect with major streets so as not to generate traffic on local
residential streets. The intersection of service streets, or access driveways
to parking areas, with major streets, shall be located so as to cause the least
possible interference with the movement of traffic on the major streets. Access
driveways (measured on the centerline) shall be located not less than 50 feet
from the right-of-way line of the nearest intersecting street and spaced at not
less than 130-feet intervals. Parking areas serving adjoining business
establishments shall be interconnected by drives. The Commission may require
the dedication and improvement of marginal service roads along major streets
abutting such developments.
   (I)   Intersections. Streets shall be designed to intersect as nearly at 90
degrees as possible and no street shall intersect another at less than 60
degrees. The intersection of more than two streets at a point or with
centerline offsets of less than 125 feet is not permitted. Property lines at
street intersections shall be rounded with a radius of not less than 30 feet
for major streets and 20 feet for secondary and local streets.
   (J)   Right-of-Way Widths.
      (1)   Local Streets. Right-of-way widths shall be not less than:
         (a)   Non-through streets of less than 1,500 feet in length, 60 feet;
         (b)   Through streets or non-through streets longer than 1,500 feet,
and where extra width is necessary for grading or placement of utilities, 60
feet;
         (c)   Cul-de-sacs of less than 1,000 feet in length, 60 feet;
         (d)   Turn-arounds, 80 feet pavement diameter and 120 feet property
line diameter; “T” or “Y” turn-arounds may be approved by the Commission in
unusual locations; and
         (e)   Marginal access streets, 40 feet.
      (2)   Multi-Family, Business and Industrial Streets. The right-of-way
shall be determined for each development. Each street shall be of sufficient
width to safely accommodate the maximum traffic, parking and loading needs and
access for fire protection equipment.
      (3)   Secondary Streets. The right-of-way shall be in accord with the
thoroughfare plans and standards and may vary from 60 to 80 feet.
      (4)   Major Streets. The right-of-way shall be in accord with State
Transportation Department, county or city thoroughfare plans and standards and
may vary from 80 to 120 feet.
   (K)   Grades of Streets (Vertical Alignment). The street grade shall not
exceed 10% for local streets, 7% for secondary streets and 6% for major
streets. Street grades shall be not less than 0.5% in order to provide adequate
surface drainage.
   (L)   Curvature of Streets (Horizontal Alignment).  Angles in the alignment
of street lines shall be connected by a curve with a radius on the centerline
of not less than 200 feet for local streets, 300 feet for secondary streets and
500 feet for major streets.  Between reverse curves there shall be a tangent at
least 1,000 feet long on major and secondary streets and 50 feet long on local
streets.
   (M)   Street Names.  A street name shall be selected which will not
duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets in the county
irrespective of modifying terms such as street, avenue, boulevard, and the
like. Streets that are or will eventually be continuations of existing or
platted streets shall be named the same.  Street names shall be subject to the
approval of the Commission.
   (N)   Cul-de-sacs.
      (1)   All cul-de-sacs, as defined in §
1240.04, whether public or private, shall have a diameter of not less than 110
feet out to out (Refer to
Appendix IV). The pavement around the circle will be the same width as the
street pavement.  All cul-de-sacs will include an interior circle which will
not be pavement.  The remaining of the interior circle will be grass, mulch or
low maintenance vetch.  Low maintenance trees are permitted and suggested.  The
inner circle of the cul-de-sac shall have a curb.
      (2)   The maintenance responsibility for trees and/or shrubs in the cul-
de-sac will be that of the homeowners association, if any, in the development
in question.
      (3)   No half cul-de-sacs at curves will be accepted. A smooth radius
around all curves maintaining the same pavement width shall be required.
      (4)   The developer shall be responsible for establishing varying
building setbacks at cul-de-sacs and presenting the same for approval by the
Planning Commission and Council.
      (5)   Cul-de-sac specifications shall be in conformity with the
provisions of this division (N).  See
Appendix IV following the text of these subdivision regulations.
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963; Ord. 64-96, passed 6-3-1996; Ord. 220-98, passed
3-15-1999; Ord. 11-16, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1246.04  BLOCK PLANNING.
   Blocks shall be designed to accommodate lots of the sire required for the
district as set forth in the Zoning Code and to provide for convenient
circulation, service and safety on the bounding streets. The lines and
boundaries of blocks shall be adjusted to conform to the topography and natural
features, such as streams and lakes, and so that rear lot lines will coincide
with drainage courses, railroads, division in land uses and corporation fines.
   (A)   Block Lengths (One-Family Subdivision). Block lengths shall be planned
to average 1,500 feet and shall not exceed 1,800 feet or be less than 800 feet
unless approved by the Planning Commission. A cul-de- sac street shall not
exceed 500 feet in length. However, the Commission may permit a length not
exceeding 1,000 feet if the parcel cannot be subdivided otherwise and if the
right-of-way and pavement widths are increased in accordance with the standards
set forth in §
1246.03 (J).
   (B)   Block Widths (One-Family Subdivision). Block widths shall be planned
to accommodate two tiers of lots. However, a single tier of lots may be
required by the Commission to separate residential development from major
streets, adjoining nonresidential land uses or unusual topographic or natural
features. A planting screen of at least ten feet with no right of access is
required along the lots abutting such a major street or nonresidential land
use.
   (C)   Blocks for Multi-Family, Business or Industrial Subdivisions. These
blocks shall be adequate to accommodate the building sites and provide the
yards, service drives, off-street parking and other required facilities and
shall be designed for group development and not according to the typical lot
and street pattern.
   (D)   Partial Blocks. If the site of a proposed subdivision is of such
limited dimensions as not to comprise an element of a neighborhood pattern and
would result in a partial block with some fractional or odd-shaped lots, the
Commission may plan the neighborhood and request the developer to incorporate
the subdivision into the neighborhood plan, and all lots that cannot be
conforming as to depth or other regulations shall be retained by the developer
in the original parcel and not be approved as a building site or recorded as a
separate lot.
   (E)   Pedestrian Ways. Ways of not less than 25 feet right-of-way and in a
straight line may be required across blocks exceeding 1,500 feet in length or
at the end of cul-de-sac streets for access to schools, playgrounds, bus stops
or other public facilities where convenient pedestrian circulation has not been
provided by streets.
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963)
§ 1246.05  LOT DESIGN.
   Each lot shall be designed to form a good site for the type of building to
be developed and the lot lines shall not be considered as merely forming a
geometric shape which encloses the minimum area permitted. The lots shall be
more or less rectangular in form. Triangular lots or those with acute angles,
broken boundaries or other shapes that restrict their use as building sites
shall be avoided.
   (A)   Area and Width of Lots (One-Family Subdivision). The area and width
shall be not less than required by the Zoning Code and shall be appropriate for
the neighborhood and type of development proposed. Easements for drainage ways
and land subject to flooding may be included in the determination of lot area
or width. The width of a lot shall be not less than required at the front yard
building line. On curved streets the front lot line or rear lot line may be
less but the chord shall be not less than 55% of the required width at the
building line.
   (B)   Depth of Lots on Local Streets (One-Family Subdivision). The depth
shall be not less than one and one-half times its width nor exceed three and
one-half times its width. This ratio shall be increased when the rear line of
such lot abuts a freeway, railroad or other incompatible nonresidential land
use and the area of the lot shall be increased accordingly. The depth shall be
the mean depth.
   (C)   Depth of Lots on Other Streets.  Lots abutting major streets (one-
family subdivision) shall exceed the aforesaid depth ratio (three and one-half
to one) in order to increase the safety and privacy thereon.  However, the
depth shall not exceed five times the width.  Such roadside subdivisions shall
be planned to achieve uniform rear lot lines and the mean depth shall not
exceed 500 feet for lots of five acres or less. The depth of lots abutting on
secondary streets shall also be increased in depth proportionate to the
increased setback. The city may prepare local street plans of partially
subdivided areas and reserve openings at intervals along the major roads for
future local streets to serve the interior areas when subdivided.
   (D)   Corner Lots (One-Family Subdivision).  These lots shall be at least
120 feet wide in order to obtain the required side yards and building setback
from, and appropriate orientation to, both streets as may be required by the
Zoning Code.
   (E)   Side Lot Lines.  These lot lines shall be designed to be at right
angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines except as such
lines may be modified to accommodate topography or natural features.  At a tee-
intersection the side lot lines shall be adjusted so that a dwelling site will
not be directly on the projected line of the street which terminates.
   (F)   Future Resubdivision.  Where a subdivision is located in a district
not served with public sewers and/or water service, and a relatively large lot
is required by the Zoning Code, the lots may be designed with extra width and
the dwellings located thereon so that the lots may be resubdivided at such
future time as the utilities may be installed.
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963; Ord. 220-98, passed 3-15-1999; Ord. 11-16,
passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1246.06  PUBLIC USES.
   (A)   Utility Easements. Where utilities are not located in the street,
easements at least ten feet wide shall be located on each side of the center of
rear lot lines and on side lot lines only where necessary (20 feet total).
   (B)   Drainage Ways. Where a subdivision is traversed by a drainage way,
channel or stream, a storm water easement or drainage right-of-way conforming
substantially with the lines of such watercourse shall be provided. The
easement shall be 20 feet wide or of such further width as is adequate for the
purpose and generally parallel with rear lot lines.
   (C)   Sites for Public Use. A park, playground, school or other public use,
if shown on a Park and Recreation Plan or Comprehensive Plan adopted by the
Commission and located in whole or in part in a proposed subdivision, shall be
incorporated in the plan and reserved for such purpose. Drainage courses,
ponds, lakes or isolated parcels shall not be accepted unless they become a
component of a public land plan.
   (D)   Community Facilities. Facilities for multi-family and other large
scale developments may require the reservation or dedication of additional
sites of a character, extent and location suitable for needs for extra
community facilities created by the particular developments.
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963)
CHAPTER 1248:  LAND IMPROVEMENTS
Section
1248.01   Intent
1248.02   Improvements required
1248.03   Grading
1248.04   Drainage facilities
1248.05   Sanitary facilities
1248.06   Water supply
1248.07   Street improvements
1248.08   Monuments
1248.09   Street trees
1248.10   Street name signs
1248.11   Extra-size and off-site improvements
1248.12   Design standards
1248.13   Performance guarantee
1248.14   Street maintenance
1248.15   Insurance
1248.16   Failure to complete improvements
1248.17   Building construction and occupancy
1248.18   Utilities to be placed underground
1248.19   Dedications; acceptance by city
Cross-reference:
   Excavations, see
Chapter 1022
   Fee for tree planting, see §
1448.03
   Sidewalks, see
Chapter 1024
   Street improvements, see
Chapter 1020
   Street lighting, see
Chapter 1330
   Trees, see
Chapter 1026
   Utilities, see
Chapter 1040 et seq.
Statutory reference:
   Inspection of construction; acceptance by city, see Ohio R.C. 711.09
§ 1248.01  INTENT.
   (A)   The land improvements which are hereby required shall be designed,
furnished and installed by the developer in accordance with the provisions of
these regulations and other codes of the city. They shall be installed before
the final plat is approved or, in lieu thereof, agreements to install shall be
approved concurrent with the approval of the final plat.
   (B)   It is intended that the developer shall dedicate all land required for
rights-of-way within the subdivision and furnish and install all improvements
to provide a complete and coordinated system of streets and utilities for the
neighborhood, in accord with the Thoroughfare Plan and water and sewer plans
adopted.
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963; Ord. 12-16, passed 2-22-2016)
§ 1248.02  IMPROVEMENTS REQUIRED.
   The land improvements required of the developer of a subdivision, as set
forth in this chapter, are determined according to the type and size of lots,
the accessibility of a sewer and water system and the relationship to existing
and planned streets.
   (A)   Land.  Land for the right-of-way for the opening or extension of any
street within or on the boundary of the subdivision shall be dedicated by the
developer and all easements for the extension of utilities shall be provided.
   (B)   Improvements.
      (1)   Improvements such as utilities, pavements, walks and other land
improvements as required by the schedules set forth in this chapter shall be
designed, furnished and installed as hereinafter set forth or required by other
codes of the city. The improvements shall be of such sizes and capacities as
are required for the development of the proposed subdivision and of extra sizes
as may be necessary to serve nearby land which is an integral part of the
neighborhood service or drainage areas.
      (2)   The developer shall be required to extend the improvements to serve
adjoining unsubdivided land. If streets or utilities are not available at the
boundary of a proposed subdivision, the Commission may require the developer to
construct off-site extensions of the improvements. Procedures for providing any
necessary extra-size and off-site improvements and general standards for
prorating costs are set forth in §
1248.11.
   (C)   Schedule of Improvements. The developer shall provide and install
within the proposed subdivision land improvements not less than set forth for
one-family, multi-family and business districts in the following schedule:
 
Required Improvements One-Family            Multi-Family Residential and
                      Residential Districts Business Districts
Drainage facilities Sewer system             Sewer system
Grading             Streets, blocks and lots Streets and blocks
Monuments           Required                 Required
Sanitary facilities Sewer system             Sewer system
Streets             Pavement and curb        Pavement and curb
Trees               Required                 Required
Walks               Both sides               Both sides
Water supply        Public supply            Public supply
 
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963; Ord. 12-16, passed 2-22-2016)
§ 1248.03  GRADING.
   The developer shall grade each subdivision in order to establish street
grades, floor elevations of buildings and lot grades in proper relation to each
other and to existing topography as follows.
   (A)   Grading Plan.  Subdivisions shall be planned to take advantage of the
natural topography so as to minimize grading as set forth in §
1246.02 . A grading plan shall be prepared for the street areas along with the
street improvement details. Before buildings may be constructed, a detailed
land development plan shall be prepared showing the buildings and paved areas
on each lot and the grading of each block and lot.
   (B)   Block Grading.
      (1)   The grading of blocks and lots shall be in accord with the
standards established by the Regional Planning Commission or the Federal
Housing Administration Land Planning Bulletin No. 3, data sheet No. 72, or
standards of the city. The plans may be based on any of the following grading
systems:
         (a)   Where there is a ridge along rear lot lines and the lots drain
to the streets;
         (b)   Where parts of all lots drain to a swale or ditch along rear lot
lines;
         (c)   Where there is a gentle or a steep cross slope and drainage onto
adjoining properties must be skillfully controlled;
         (d)   Where the land is relatively flat and adequate drainage must be
formed; or
         (e)   A variation of the above conditions.
      (2)   The grading of the roadway shall extend the full width of the
right-of-way. Tree lawns shall be graded at a gradient of not less than 2% or
more than 3% upward from the curb to the sidewalk or property line.
   (C)   Lot Grading. The floor elevation of each building shall be set in
relation to the driveway and the street. The lot shall be graded so that water
drains away from each building at a minimum grade of 2%. Surface drainage
swales with a minimum grade of 0.5% shall be designed so that surface water
will drain onto a driveway, street gutter, storm sewer, drain inlet or natural
drainage way. The minimum grade of driveways shall be 0.4%, and the maximum
12%. Grading shall be adjusted so that there will be no abrupt grades in the
front yards and along side lot lines. The grades of earth terraces shall not
exceed two and one- half to one. Masonry retaining walls shall have a hedge,
fence or railing if they exceed three feet in height.
   (D)   Topsoil and Trees.
      (1)   The Commission shall require that topsoil shall be stripped from
the roadway and construction areas, piled separately but not removed from the
site or used as spoil. It shall also require that as many trees as can be
reasonably utilized in the final development plan be retained, and the grading
be adjusted to the existing grade at the trees.
      (2)   Notwithstanding any other provision contained in this division, all
trees shall be removed from any swale area indicated on a topographical drawing
and/or on a site plot plan development drawing approved in connection with the
project.  In the event that a storm sewer is installed to convey water in lieu
of a swale, trees need not be removed. 
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963; Ord. 108-92, passed 10-19-1992; Ord. 12-16,
passed 2-22-2016)
§ 1248.04  DRAINAGE FACILITIES.
   A drainage system shall be designed and constructed by the developer or the
city as required under §
1248.11(A), as required for the district in which the proposed subdivision is
located, for the proper drainage of the surface water of the subdivision and
each lot as follows.
   (A)   An enclosed storm sewer system shall be provided where a tile inlet or
an outlet with a capacity to receive the discharge is available within 1,000
feet of the subdivision or where it is determined by the Commission that storm
sewers shall be provided and connected to a drainage ditch or other waterway.
The system shall have a capacity to serve the subdivision and drainage area of
which it is a part. The system shall include pipes, culverts, manholes, catch
basins, drain inlets and a connection for each lot.
   (B)   An open drainage system may be permitted when inlets or outlets are
not available within 1,000 feet or when the size of the outlet is not adequate
to receive the discharge, as determined by the Commission. The developer may be
required to deed in fee, dedicate or grant an easement to the city for a
drainage channel not less in width than required by a plan or standards adopted
by the city or by the existing topography along the watercourse. The developer
may rechannel any watercourse through his or her property in order to contain
the storm drain flow within a lesser width. The developer shall be responsible
for clearing the drainage way of all debris as a condition of acceptance.
   (C)   The drainage system shall be designed in accordance with The Uniform
Standards for Sewerage Improvements as approved by the Municipal Engineers
Association of Northeast Ohio, provided that said uniform standards shall be
modified to require that drainage systems constructed shall be designed to
withstand a minimum 50-year storm intensity. The developer shall construct and
pay for all sewers required under this regulation if said sewers traverse his
or her subdivision and are necessary to serve a drainage area of which they are
a part. If extra-size or off-site storm sewers are required, standards for
prorating costs are set forth in §
1248.11.
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963; Ord. 88-4, passed 1-4-1988; Ord. 158-03, passed
11-3-2003; Ord. 102-06, passed 7-17-2006; Ord. 12-16, passed 2-22-2016)
§ 1248.05  SANITARY FACILITIES.
   Sanitary facilities shall be designed and constructed by the developer as
required for the district in which the proposed subdivision is located for the
proper disposal of wastes for each lot as follows.
   (A)   Public System. Where the  proposed subdivision is located in a
district requiring sanitary sewers and such a sewer outlet is accessible within
the allowed limits described elsewhere, a public sanitary sewerage system and a
house connection shall be provided for each lot.
   (B)   Independent System. Where a subdivision is located in a district
requiring sanitary sewers but such a sewer outlet is not within the limits
given in the following table, the Commission may permit the design and
construction of an independent sanitary system, including a primary and
secondary treatment plant and a house connection for each lot, provided that
such a system is designed and the plant located so that it can be integrated
into the Regional Sewer and Water Plan of Cuyahoga County and the temporary
treatment plant abandoned when public trunk sewers are installed.
 
Number of Units               Limit of Sewer Outlet (Ft.)
More than 3 but less than 20  500
20 or more but less than 40   1,000
40 or more but less than 60   2,000
60 or more but less than 100  3,000
100 or more but less than 200 5,000
200 or more                   10,000
 
   (C)   Septic Tanks. Where a minor subdivision is located in a district
permitting septic tanks or located in a district planned for a sanitary
sewerage system but an outlet is not accessible within 500 feet, individual
septic tanks may be installed on lots of the size required by the Zoning Code.
In addition, the Commission may require the construction of sanitary sewers and
laterals for house connections, all of which are to be capped, if the
construction of a trunk sewer is planned or programmed for the area.
   (D)   Design Standards. The sanitary sewerage and independent treatment
system shall be designed and constructed in accordance with the standards and
plans of the city or the County Sanitary Engineer, where he or she may have
jurisdiction; trunk sewers in accordance with the Regional Sewer and Water
Plan; and septic tanks in accordance with regulations of the County Board of
Health. The developer shall construct and pay for all sanitary sewers up to and
including 18 inches in diameter if they traverse his or her subdivision and are
necessary to serve the tributary area of which they are a part. If extra-size
or off-site sewers are required, standards for prorating costs are set forth in
§
1248.11 .
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963; Ord. 12-16, passed 2-22-2016)
§ 1248.06  WATER SUPPLY.
   (A)   A water system shall be designed and constructed by the developer as
required for the district in which the subdivision is located and a supply
provided for each lot as follows.
      (1)   Public Supply. Where a subdivision is located in a district
requiring a public water supply and a main is within 1,000 feet of the
subdivision, a public water system shall be provided for fire protection and a
house connection for domestic use to serve each lot.
      (2)   Wells. Where a subdivision is located in a district permitting
private wells, and a public main is not within 1,000 feet, a well shall be
provided for each lot.
      (3)   Design Standard. Private wells shall be designed and constructed in
accordance with the standards of the County Board of Health.
   (B)   The developer shall construct and pay for all water mains up to and
including 12 inches in diameter if they traverse his or her subdivision and are
necessary for the service area of which they are a part. If extra-size or off-
site water lines are required, standards for prorating costs are set forth in §
1248.11. The developer shall provide a temporary easement if the streets are
not dedicated prior to installation of the water line.
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963)
§ 1248.07  STREET IMPROVEMENTS.
   (A)   Schedule of Pavement Composition Standards.
      (1)   Residential Areas.
         (a)   Width.  Standard minimum width shall be 26 feet for local
streets and 27 feet for secondary streets as measured from back of curb to back
of curb, unless modified by Planning Commission as a part of a Comprehensive
Development Plan.
         (b)   Asphalt with Concrete Curb and Gutter Section.
            1.   Nine-inch cement stabilized subgrade (Item 804);
            2.   Three-inch limestone base (Item 304);
            3.   Four-inch bituminous aggregate base (Item 301);
            4.   One and one-half-inch asphalt (Item 402); and
            5.   One and one-half-inch asphalt surface (Item 404).
         (c)   Concrete Section.
            1.   Eight-inch stabilized subgrade (Item 804);
            2.   Two-inch limestone base (Item 411); and
            3.   Six-inch concrete pavement (Item 452).
      (2)   Nonresidential Areas.
         (a)   Width.  Standard minimum width shall be 28 feet for local
streets and 36 feet for secondary streets as measured from back of curb to back
of curb.
         (b)   Asphalt with Concrete Curb and Gutter Section.
            1.   Nine-inch cement stabilized subgrade (Item 804);
            2.   Three-inch limestone base (Item 304);
            3.   Five-inch bituminous aggregate base (Item 301);
            4.   Two-inch asphalt (Item 402); and
            5.   One and one-half-inch asphalt surface (Item 404).
         (c)   Concrete Section.
            1.   Eight-inch stabilized subgrade (Item 804);
            2.   Three-inch limestone base (Item 411); and
            3.   Seven-inch concrete pavement (Item 452).
   (B)   Pavements. The width of the pavement shall be measured between the
vertical faces of straight curbs. The Commission may require higher standards
and/or greater widths than set forth above because of extraordinary traffic
loads or unusual soil conditions in specific locations.
      (1)   The preparation of subgrade, the materials and the construction of
pavement shall be in accordance with the standards of the city, the County
Engineer or the Construction and Material Specifications of the Ohio Department
of Transportation, whichever is applicable or has jurisdiction.
      (2)   After the underground utilities and house connections are
installed, and rough grading complete, the roadway subgrade shall be shaped,
rolled and compacted. The developer may construct the final pavement of
reinforced concrete with integral curbs or may request permission to construct
a temporary pavement of slag or stone for use during the building construction
period. He or she shall furnish a bond in the amount required, guaranteeing
that all pavements shall be maintained in a passable and reasonable condition,
without expense to the city, until acceptance of the final pavement for
maintenance and use by the city.
   (C)   Curbs and Gutters. Rolled concrete curbs and gutters or concrete
gutters integral with the pavement shall be provided as required in the
district where the subdivision is located. Rolled curbs and gutters shall be
not less than 24 inches wide and rolled on a 17-inch radius.
   (D)   Public Sidewalks.
      (1)   The developer of a subdivision shall be responsible for installing
or providing for the installation of sidewalks in such subdivision for all
buildable and unbuildable lots in such subdivision, as required by this
chapter.
      (2)   A builder of a structure in any subdivision shall be jointly and
severally responsible with the developer for installing sidewalks for all
structures built by such builder in such subdivision, as required by this
chapter.
      (3)   A developer will commence and diligently complete the construction
of sidewalks for all then-undeveloped lots in a subdivision, as provided in
this chapter, within 18 months of the issuance of the building permit for the
subdivision improvement, unless existing construction is being performed on the
lots in question and such construction shall result in the installation of
sidewalks.
      (4)   All sidewalk installations shall conform to the requirements of
Chapter 1024 of the Streets, Utilities and Public Services Code to the extent
that the same may be applicable.
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963; Ord. 7-67, passed 4-3-1967; Ord. 43-69, passed
7-21-1969; Ord. 88-3, passed 1-4-1988; Ord. 89-87, passed 7-17-1989; Ord. 22-
90, passed 3-5-1990; Ord. 14-90, passed 3-19-1990; Ord. 106-92, passed 12-7-
1992; Ord. 48-02, passed 3-18-2002; Ord. 12-16, passed 2-22-2016)
§ 1248.08  MONUMENTS.
   A monument shall be accurately placed at each corner and at changes in
direction of the boundary, at each street intersection, at points of curves of
streets and at intermediate points as may be required by the City Engineer. The
monuments shall be concrete six inches by six inches by 30 inches long with an
iron pin in the center or metal monuments as approved by the City Engineer. The
top of the monument shall be set at the finished grade upon the completion of
the grading of the streets and the lots.
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963; Ord. 12-16, passed 2-22-2016)
§ 1248.09  STREET TREES.
   Planting, maintenance and regulation of trees within the limits of the city
shall be in accordance with
Chapter 1026 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963)
§ 1248.10  STREET NAME SIGNS.
   Street name signs shall be furnished and installed by the city and the cost
charged to the developer. The letters and numerals shall be either three or
four inches set on a reflecting material. The signs shall be mounted at a
height of approximately seven feet above the top of the curia. Placement of the
signs shall be in accordance with the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices, on diagonally opposite corners, on the far right-hand side of the
intersection for traffic on the more important street and as close to the
corner as possible.
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963; Ord. 12-16, passed 2-22-2016)
§ 1248.11  EXTRA-SIZE AND OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS.
   The utilities, pavements and other land improvements required and set forth
in this chapter shall be designed and of such sizes and capacities as required
for the development of the proposed subdivision and of extra sizes and/or
extensions as may be necessary to serve nearby land which is an integral part
of the neighborhood service or drainage area.
   (A)   Extra-Size Improvements. The developer shall be required to pay a
part, but shall not be required to pay for that part of the materials or
construction of the pavements of major streets, trunk sewers or water mains
which is determined by the Commission, according to standards set forth in this
chapter, to be in excess of the size required for the development of the
subdivision and the integral neighborhood, service or drainage area. If a storm
sewer in excess of 84 inches or a sanitary sewer in excess of 18 inches or a
water main in excess of 12 inches is required, but each is less in size than
the sewer trunk lines or water mains which are to be constructed and financed
on a regional basis, the city shall construct the extra size utility and
require a deposit in advance from the developer for the estimated cost of the
utility his or her development requires and his or her portion of other costs
which the city may assess against the benefitted property owners of the service
or drainage area.
   (B)   Extensions to Boundaries. The developer shall be required to extend
the improvements to the boundary of the proposed subdivision to serve adjoining
unsubdivided land.
   (C)   Off-Site Extensions. If streets or utilities are not available at the
boundary of a proposed subdivision, the Commission may require as a precedence
to approval of a preliminary plan and final plat, assurances that such
improvement extensions shall be provided as follows:
      (1)   If the Commission finds the extensions across undeveloped areas
would not be warranted as a special assessment to the intervening properties or
a city expense until some future time, the developer may be required, if he or
she wishes to proceed with the development, to obtain necessary easements or
rights-of- way and construct and pay for extensions. Such improvements shall be
available for connections by developers of adjoining land.
      (2)   The city may construct and pay for the extensions and assess the
costs to the owners benefitted and require a deposit from the developer as
described in division (A) above. The city may establish a rotary fund to pay
for such development costs and not collect the assessments on the intervening
land until it is developed.
   (D)   Prorating Costs. In making determinations for prorating costs for the
construction of off-site extensions or extra-size improvements, the Commission
and the Assessment Equalization Board shall consider, in addition to the
standards set forth in this chapter and other regulations of the city, the
following conditions:
      (1)   The relative location and size of the proposed subdivision;
      (2)   The traffic estimated to be generated by the development in
relation to present streets;
      (3)   The natural drainage area for sewers and the service area for
water;
      (4)   The development benefits that will accrue to the subdivision;
      (5)   The sequence of land and utility developments in the vicinity; and
      (6)   Any other condition it may find pertinent.
   (E)   Detention and Retention Basins. Whenever the City Engineer determines
that it is necessary to provide for a detention or a retention basin with
respect to a certain development, the following regulations shall be observed.
      (1)   If deemed applicable, the city may require the developer to convey
to the city, by appropriate deed, the land reserved for use as a detention or
retention basin with a reservation therein permitting a homeowners association,
consisting of property owners of the subdivision, if properly incorporated and
acting upon approval of Council, to use the area designated as a detention or
retention basin for recreational purposes at all times, except those times
when, because of rainfall, melting snow or otherwise, the area contains water.
      (2)   The developer shall grant to the city an easement from a street in
the subdivision for access to such storm water detention or retention basin for
cleaning, maintenance or other purpose necessary to preserve such detention or
retention basin, unless no easement is necessary because such detention or
retention basin is contiguous to a street or other public right-of-way.
      (3)   The city may require the developer to erect a six-foot high, chain
link, green vinyl-clad fence around the entire perimeter of the detention or
retention basin, unless the requirement of all or part of the perimeter fence
is waived by Council, upon request of the owner of the subdivision, after
recommendation by the Planning Commission prior to the issuance of building
permits for homes in the subdivision.
      (4)   The city may require the developer to erect a four-foot high, chain
link, green vinyl-clad fence around any control structure in excess of three
feet in height if the control structure is not inside the perimeter of the six-
foot fence.
      (5)   The city may require the developer to erect buffering if the
detention or retention basin will be constructed adjacent to existing
residential homes and if construction of the detention or retention basin
requires the removal of existing woods, unless the requirement of all or part
of the buffering is waived by Council, upon the request of the owner of the
subdivision, after recommendation by the Planning Commission prior to the
issuance of building permits for homes in the subdivision. If buffering is
required, it shall consist of two staggered rows of five-foot high evergreen
trees along the berm within the fence or, if no fence is required, within the
area where the fence would be erected if so required.
      (6)   The developer shall comply in all respects with requirements of the
City Engineer regarding construction of the detention or retention basin.
Landscaping for the detention or retention basin shall be reviewed and approved
by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963; Ord. 88-4, passed 1-4-1988; Ord. 88-66, passed
5-16-1988; Ord. 137-12, passed 9-17-2012; Ord. 12-16, passed 2-22-2016)
§ 1248.12  DESIGN STANDARDS.
   (A)   The design of the water system, storm and sanitary sewerage systems
and roadways shall be in accordance with the various standards and requirements
provided in this chapter. Drawings and specifications for the improvements
shall be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer and the installation shall
be subject to his or her continuous inspection.
   (B)   At the completion of the construction and before acceptance, the
developer shall furnish the city a set of record or “as-built” drawings showing
the locations, sizes and elevations of all underground utilities.
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963; Ord. 12-16, passed 2-22-2016)
§ 1248.13  PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE.
   (A)   Performance Guarantee with Installation.  The developer further agrees
that it will furnish to the city a non-interest earning cash deposit in the
amount of 10% of the engineer’s estimated construction costs and an irrevocable
letter of credit from the bank confirming that the developer has, on deposit,
funds in an amount not less than 100% of the engineer’s estimated cost of
construction, to be used solely to finance and pay the total cost of all the
required subdivision improvements in the said subdivision and such funds shall
be placed in the name of the city subject only to the terms of this escrow
agreement.
   (B)   Performance Guarantee in Lieu of Installation.  The developer may
execute and file with the city financial guarantees in lieu of actual
installation or completion of the required improvements and/or to secure the
rehabilitation of any lands cleared for construction but not improved.  Such
guarantees shall be concurrently filed with the applications for approval of
the final plat.  Such guarantees shall be in the form of an escrow account in
the name of the city, a letter of credit, a certified check or other equivalent
security as approved by Council for the particular circumstance.
      (1)   Terms.  The terms of such guarantees shall be determined by
Council. However, they shall not be for a longer period than two years unless
Council, by resolution, extends the time.
      (2)   Amount of Guarantee.  The financial guarantees shall be in an
amount equal to the estimated total cost of materials and labor required to
install or construct the improvements. Such costs shall be recommended by the
City Engineer and approved by Council. When any portion of an improvement has,
upon inspection, been found to be satisfactorily completed, a reduction in the
guarantee or partial withdrawal of funds equal to the estimated costs of such
completed improvements may be authorized by Council upon the recommendation of
the City Engineer.
      (3)   Progressive Installation.  The developer may apply for final
approval and recording of only a portion of the entire subdivision. Under such
a progressive unit development procedure, the installation of required
improvements and sale or lease of lots may proceed only on that portion of the
subdivision which has been approved and recorded.
(Ord. 52-90, passed 5-7-1990; Ord. 80-92, passed 9-21-1992; Ord. 108-92, passed
10-19-1992; Ord. 12-16, passed 2-22-2016)
§ 1248.14  STREET MAINTENANCE.
   The developer shall guarantee the construction and materials of the street
improvements for a 24-month period after acceptance by the city and, in order
to secure the guarantee, he or she shall deposit an amount equal to 10% of the
total cost of the construction of street improvements in a maintenance fund.
(Ord. 20-86, passed 3-3-1986; Ord. 12-16, passed 2-22-2016)
§ 1248.15  INSURANCE.
   The developer shall agree to indemnify and save harmless the city against
any and all loss, cost, damage, liability and expense on account of damage to
property of, or injury to or death of, the parties hereto or a third person,
caused by, growing out of or in any way attributable to the construction of
such improvements and the use of the street delineated on the subdivision plat
during construction. The developer shall further agree, but without limiting
his or her liability to indemnify the city, to carry liability insurance
contracts with a reliable insurance company covering the period of such
construction in the sum of $1,000,000 to $2,000,000 for injury to or death of
persons, and in the sum of $100,000 for damage to or destruction of property,
which insurance contracts shall include the city as a named insured. The
developer shall agree to maintain on file with the city during the period of
such construction, certificates or memoranda of insurance evidencing that such
insurance contracts are in force.
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963; Ord. 12-16, passed 2-22-2016)
§ 1248.16  FAILURE TO COMPLETE IMPROVEMENTS.
   If the developer fails to complete the installation of all land improvements
according to the terms and conditions of the agreement, the city, upon proper
notice, may complete the same and appropriate such portion of money or
guarantee posted for the faithful performance of such work.
(Ord. 52-90, passed 5-7-1990; Ord. 12-16, passed 2-22-2016)
§ 1248.17  BUILDING CONSTRUCTION AND OCCUPANCY.
   A building permit may be issued and construction started after the
completion of the underground utilities. A temporary pavement may be
constructed. A certificate of occupancy, including a statement that the city is
not liable for maintenance of such improvements, may be issued, provided that
the developer furnishes a guarantee in an amount required by the city assuring
that all streets shall be maintained in a passable and reasonable condition
until such time as the final pavement is completed and accepted for use and
maintenance.
(Ord. 52-90, passed 5-7-1990; Ord. 12-16, passed 2-22-2016)
§ 1248.18  UTILITIES TO BE PLACED UNDERGROUND.
   In all subdivisions involving the improvement of streets to be dedicated to
the city, the developer is required to install all utilities underground,
including electric power and telephone distribution systems, in such a manner
as to conform with existing engineering standards, and approved by the City
Engineer.
(Ord. 52-90, passed 5-7-1990)
§ 1248.19  DEDICATIONS; ACCEPTANCE BY CITY.
   (A)   Any street or improvement constructed by a developer may, after 24
months from the date of completion, be dedicated to the city for public use and
maintenance.  A developer may apply to the city after such period for
acceptance of such dedication.  Such developer shall be subject to the terms of
the Developer’s Agreement to Secure Performance of Development Plans.  See
Appendix III following the text of these subdivision regulations for the form
of the Agreement.
   (B)   Prior to acceptance of any street and/or improvement for public use
and maintenance, and prior to the release of the two-year maintenance bond as
provided in §
1248.14, the City Engineer shall determine that the street and/or improvements
proposed for acceptance for public use and maintenance are in full compliance
with this Code of Ordinances, and shall further require, at that time, that the
developer flush and videotape on color film all sewers proposed for such
acceptance.
   (C)   The contractor and/or developer who is having the sewers videotaped
shall give a copy of such tape to the city.
(Ord. 89-77, passed 6-19-1989; Ord. 220-98, passed 3-15-1999)
CHAPTER 1250:  PLANS AND PLATS
Section
1250.01   Intent
1250.02   Sketch plan; minor subdivision
1250.03   Preliminary plan; major subdivision
1250.04   Final plat; major subdivision
Cross-reference:
   Subdivision procedures, see
Chapter 1244
Statutory reference:
   Lost or destroyed records, see Ohio R.C. 711.34 et seq.
   Original plats, see Ohio R.C. 711.01 et seq.
   Revision of plats, see Ohio R.C. 711.28 et seq.
   Vacating plats, see Ohio R.C. 711.17 et seq.
§ 1250.01  INTENT.
   Plans, maps, data and plats shall be prepared and furnished by the developer
as required in this chapter to assure accurate surveying, to provide adequate
information for designing and preparing plans and for reviewing, approving and
recording plats.
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963)
§ 1250.02  SKETCH PLAN; MINOR SUBDIVISION.
   The developer shall furnish with the application for approval of a sketch
plan for a minor subdivision, either separately or combined, the following:
   (A)   Maps and Data.
      (1)   A drawing or print of a city map, or a part thereof, showing the
location of the proposed subdivision;
      (2)   A drawing or print showing by scale and dimensions the parcel which
is to be subdivided and all contiguous land of the same ownership, including
locations of existing structures within 25 feet of the boundaries;
      (3)   Information on the topography and drainage of the proposed
subdivision and within 50 feet thereof;
      (4)   Information on the accessibility of required utilities; and
      (5)   The name of the owner and of adjoining property owners, including
designations of parcels according to official records.
   (B)   The Sketch Plan. The plan shall be clearly drawn on transparent paper
or cloth at a scale of not less than 50 feet to the inch showing the proposed
layout and dimensions of each lot.
(Ord. 16-63, passed 5-20-1963; Ord. 13-16, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1250.03  PRELIMINARY PLAN; MAJOR SUBDIVISION.
   The developer shall furnish with the application for approval of the
preliminary plan of a major subdivision the maps, data and plans as provided in
the Developer/Builder Procedural Outline (
Appendix I of these regulations) in force and effect at the time of the
application as required by §
1244.02.
(Ord. 52-90, passed 5-7-1990)
§ 1250.04  FINAL PLAT; MAJOR SUBDIVISION.
   The developer shall furnish with the application for approval of the final
plat of a subdivision the following plans, data and plats:
   (A)   Final Plat. The plat shall be drawn and signed on a permanent document
as required by the County Recorder in scale as required by
Appendix I  of these regulations (the Developer/Builder Procedural Outline).
The plat shall show the following:
      (1)   The control points to which all dimensions, angles and bearings are
to be referred and the nearest established street line, section line or other
established point;
      (2)   The lines and boundaries, including the centerlines and right-of-
way lines of streets, easements and other rights-of-way; natural and artificial
watercourses, streams and shorelines; corporation lines; and property lines of
all lots and parcels, with distances, radii, arcs, chords and tangents of all
curves shown to the nearest one hundredth of a foot and bearings or deflection
angles shown to the nearest second;
      (3)   The name and width of each street within the proposed subdivision
and those adjoining, and the building setback line;
      (4)   Lot and block identification, including the number or letter, in
progressive order, for each lot and block conforming with the Recorder’s
procedures;
      (5)   The dedication and acceptance, showing boundaries and, by graphic
symbols, all parcels which are to be dedicated or reserved for public use or
easements;
      (6)   The location and description of those monuments found, set or to be
set;
      (7)   The names of the recorded owners of adjoining unplatted land;
      (8)   Reference to subdivision plats of adjoining platted land by name,
volume and page of Recorder’s maps;
      (9)   Certification by the owner of acceptance of the plat and his or her
statement offering dedication of streets, rights-of-way and any sites for
public use or reserved by deed covenants for common use of all property owners;
      (10)   Certification and seal by a registered surveyor or engineer as to
preparation and details of the survey and plat;
      (11)   Protective covenants referred to or included on the plat;
      (12)   The title of the subdivision; the city, county, state and original
township section, tract or lot; and the scale, shown graphically, north arrow
and dates; and
      (13)   An approval statement for the Commission and city officials and/or
county officials, as may be required.
      (14)   The titles, certificates, statements, and the like, set forth
above shall be in accordance with the forms set forth in
Appendix I of these regulations.
   (B)   Drawings and Specifications. Drawings showing cross sections,
profiles, elevations, construction details and specifications for all required
land improvements shall be prepared in accordance with the requirements of
Chapter 1248 .
   (C)   Certification by City Engineer.  Certification shall be furnished
stating that the developer has:
      (1)   Designed and installed improvements in accordance with the
provisions of these regulations and any conditions set forth by the Commission
in its approval of the preliminary plan; and
      (2)   Posted financial guarantees in sufficient amount to assure
completion of all required improvements.
   (D)   Protective Covenants. Covenants in final form shall be furnished to be
recorded separately.
   (E)   Taxes; Assessments. A statement that there are no unpaid taxes or
special assessments against the tract shall be provided.
   (F)   Other Data. Certificates or affidavits shall be furnished as may be
required by the Commission in the enforcement of these regulations.
(Ord. 52-90, passed 5-7-1990; Ord. 13-16, passed 3-7-2016)
CHAPTER 1252:  STREET LIGHTING
Section
1252.01   Establishment of policy
1252.02   Administration
1252.03   Definitions
1252.04   Approval of plans and specifications and levying of special
assessments
Cross-reference:
   Electricity, see
Chapter 1046
   Illumination of exterior property areas, see §
1348.08
   Street lighting generally, see
Chapter 1330
Statutory reference:
   Authority to assess benefitted property owners for cost of providing
electricity, see Ohio R.C. Chapter 727
§ 1252.01  ESTABLISHMENT OF POLICY.
   It is hereby declared to be the policy of this city that the costs of
providing street lighting in housing subdivisions that are established in the
city shall, except to the extent that the city is required by law, or to the
extent that Council, by ordinance, hereafter determines, to pay all or a
portion of such costs, be paid from the proceeds of special assessments to be
levied against lots and lands that benefit from such street lighting.  In
furtherance of this policy, and in order to provide for direction to officials
of this city, to subdivision developers, and to purchasers of lots and lands in
those subdivisions, as to the implementation of this policy, Council hereby
adopts the following procedures for the installation of, and the payment of
costs for, the operation of street lighting in housing subdivisions.
(Ord. 56-92, passed 5-18-1992)
§ 1252.02  ADMINISTRATION.
   The Director of Public Service shall be the officer principally in charge of
administering the procedures adopted in §
1252.01.  In furtherance of such procedures, in cases that arise that are not
specifically covered by such procedures, the Director of Public Service may,
after consultation with the Director of Finance and the Director of Law, vary
such procedures as necessary while conforming as nearly as possible to the
spirit and intent of such prescribed procedures.
(Ord. 56-92, passed 5-18-1992)
§ 1252.03  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the following terms shall have the following
meanings, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise.
   “Appurtenances.” Means any auxiliary fixtures or attachments that are used
as part of or in connection with street lights.
   “Authorization” or “letter of authorization.” Means a document, prepared
initially by the Cleveland Electric Illuminating Company (CEI), by which the
Director authorizes the installation of street lights and appurtenances in a
subdivision and the payment of costs for their operation.
   “Board.” Means an assessment equalization board appointed pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 727.16. 
   “CEI.” Means the Cleveland Electric Illuminating Company and any successor
public utility that is authorized to and that does furnish electrical power to
subdivisions and to other consumers within the city.
   “City.” Means the City of Broadview Heights.
   “Developer.” Means one or more individuals, corporations, partnerships or
other entities, or any combination thereof, who or which own real property that
constitutes or is to become a subdivision.
   “Director.” Means the Director of Public Service of the city.
   “Engineer.” Means the City Engineer.
   “Lots” or “lots and lands.” Means units of real property within a
subdivision used or intended for use as the site of one or more dwelling units.
   “Petition.” Means a petition as provided for in Ohio R.C. 727.06.
   “Street lights.” Means poles of metal or other material installed vertically
on a base located adjacent to a street in a subdivision and containing or
having attached thereto electrical wiring, fixtures and bulbs required for the
illumination of a portion of a street and the adjacent area.
   “Subdivision.” Means a tract of land that is divided into lots and sublots
by a developer and in which are constructed or to be constructed streets,
sewers, water lines and other improvements required to serve housing units
constructed or to be constructed on those lots and sublots.  A “subdivision”
may be divided for this purpose into phases or sections, and each such phase or
section shall be treated as a separate “subdivision”.
(Ord. 56-92, passed 5-18-1992)
§ 1252.04  APPROVAL OF PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS AND LEVYING OF SPECIAL
ASSESSMENTS.
   (A)   New Subdivisions. For approving plans and specifications and levying
special assessments for the installation of street lighting in new
subdivisions, the following provisions shall apply.
      (1)   The developer shall submit to the Director, for his or her
approval, a plan for the installation of street lights and appurtenances in the
developer’s subdivision.
      (2)   The Director shall approve, modify or reject such plan, and in the
latter two cases shall return such plan to the developer with his or her
comments.
      (3)   The developer, if necessary, shall resubmit the revised plan and
repeat the steps provided in division (A)(2) hereof.
      (4)   When a plan has been approved by the Director, the developer shall
submit to the Director a petition requesting that power be furnished to street
lights and agreeing to the levying of special assessments by the city for
payment of costs for such power.
      (5)   CEI shall submit to the Director a proposed letter of
authorization.
      (6)   The Director shall submit the petition and the letter of
authorization to Council.
      (7)   The Engineer shall file the plans, specifications and estimated
assessments with the Clerk of Council.
      (8)   Council, by ordinance, shall authorize the Director to sign and
deliver the letter of authorization.
      (9)   Council shall adopt a resolution declaring the necessity of the
improvement, approving the plans and specifications and otherwise complying
with Ohio R.C. 727.12.
      (10)   Council, at the same meeting, shall pass the ordinance to proceed
and the ordinance levying the special assessments, with the latter ordinance
specifying the rate of interest to be borne for unpaid assessments.
      (11)   The Clerk of Council shall cause notice of the passage of the
assessing ordinance to be published.
      (12)   Property owners shall be permitted to pay their assessments in
full during the 30-day period following passage of the ordinance levying the
assessments.
      (13)   Unpaid special assessments shall be certified to the County
Auditor for collection.
   (B)   Fully-Developed Existing Subdivisions. As used in this division (B),
“fully developed” means that all of the building lots have been sold, and
dwelling units have been constructed on them, and that street lights and
appurtenances thereto have been installed by CEI. For approving plans and
specifications and levying special assessments for street lighting in existing
subdivisions that have been fully developed, the following provisions shall
apply.
      (1)   CEI, by July 1 of each year, shall notify the Director of the cost
of street lighting in the subdivision or subdivisions for the next succeeding
calendar year.
      (2)   The Director shall present a schedule of costs to Council.
      (3)   Council, by ordinance, shall approve payment of those costs from
the proceeds of special assessments or from moneys to be advanced and repaid
from such proceeds.
      (4)   The Engineer shall prepare and file with the Clerk of Council the
plans, specifications and estimated assessments for the proposed improvement.
      (5)   Council shall adopt a resolution declaring the necessity of the
improvement, approving the plans and specifications, directing the Clerk of
Council to give notice of the filing of the estimated assessments and otherwise
complying with Ohio R.C. 727.12.
      (6)   As authorized by Ohio R.C. 727.14, the Clerk of Council shall
publish, one time in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, a notice
to owners of lots and lands to be assessed of: (i) the adoption of the
resolution of necessity; and (ii) the filing of the estimated assessments.
However, if it appears from the estimated assessments filed as provided by Ohio
R.C. 727.12 that the assessment against a lot or parcel of land will exceed
$250, the Clerk of Council shall also provide notice to the owner of that lot
or parcel in the manner provided in Ohio R.C. 727.13 (i.e., by certified mail
addressed to such owner at his or her last known address or to the address to
which tax bills are sent, in the same manner as summons in civil cases are
served, or by a combination of the foregoing methods, or, if it appears by the
return of service or the return of the certified mail notice that the owner
cannot be found, by a separate publication of the notice to that owner once in
a newspaper of general circulation within the city), unless the owner has
waived such notice.
      (7)   Property owners who have not waived notice and the right to object
may file their objections to the estimated assessments, or to their
apportionment, with the Clerk of Council, within two weeks following completion
of the service of notice.
      (8)   If any written objections are received, Council, by resolution,
shall appoint an assessment equalization board to hear those objections and to
equalize the assessments, and Council shall fix the date, time and place of
such board’s first hearing.
      (9)   The Clerk of Council shall give notice of the date, time and place
of the first hearing of the assessment equalization board to each objecting
property owner by certified mail. Such notice shall be mailed at least five
days before the date of such hearing.
      (10)   The Board shall meet to hear and consider written objections and
shall submit a report of its recommendations to Council. If the board
recommends that assessments be levied against any lots or lands included in the
estimated assessments, or that the assessment be levied against lots or lands
of any property owner who did not file a written objection, certified mail
notice shall be given to such property owners, and they shall be given the
opportunity to be heard at another hearing at a date, time and place specified
in such notice.
      (11)   Council, by resolution, shall accept or reject the Board’s report.
If the report is rejected, Council, by resolution, shall appoint a new board
and repeat the steps provided in divisions (B)(9) and (10) hereof.
      (12)   Council shall pass an ordinance to proceed with the improvement,
shall approve the estimated assessments, with any modifications recommended by
the board, and shall agree, if applicable, to changes in costs to be paid by
the city.
      (13)   Council shall pass the ordinance levying the special assessments
and establishing the rate of interest to be borne for unpaid assessments.
      (14)   The Clerk of Council shall cause notice of the passage of the
assessing ordinance to be published.
      (15)   Property owners shall be permitted to pay their assessments in
full during the 30-day period following passage of the assessing ordinance.
      (16)   Unpaid assessments shall be certified to the County Auditor for
collection.
   (C)   Partially Developed Existing Subdivisions in Which Street Lights Have
Been Installed. For approving plans and specifications and levying special
assessments for the installation of street lighting in existing subdivisions
that have been partially developed and in which street lights have been
installed, the following provisions shall apply:
      (1)   CEI, by July 1 of each year, shall notify the Director of the cost
of street lighting in the subdivision for the next succeeding calendar year.
      (2)   The developer shall submit to the Director a petition agreeing to
the levying of special assessments by the city on the lots and lands in the
subdivision owned by the developer.
      (3)   The Director shall present the schedule of costs and the petition
to Council.
      (4)   The provisions of divisions (B)(3) through (16) hereof shall then
be followed.
(Ord. 56-92, passed 5-18-1992; Ord. 137-12, passed 9-17-2012)
APPENDIX I:  DEVELOPER/BUILDER PROCEDURAL OUTLINE
CITY OF BROADVIEW HEIGHTS, OHIO
DEVELOPER/BUILDER PROCEDURAL OUTLINE
CITY WORK #                                     PROJECT LEADER                
           
 
This information is intended to assist you in obtaining an efficient review of
your project. We recommend that you have an initial meeting with the Secretary
of the Planning Commission/Planning Coordinator. These procedural regulations
are in addition to any regulations otherwise contained in the Broadview Heights
Charter and the Code of Ordinances of the City of Broadview Heights, Ohio.
 
REQUIRED DOCUMENTS
The nature of your project will dictate the required documents and boards which
will review your project. You must supply the Secretary of the Planning
Commission/Planning Coordinator with the following;
   Site Development Plan
   Application/Fees
   20 plot plan development drawings
   10 data work sheets
   10 letters of intent
   20 overview drawings
   20 architectural preliminary drawings
   20 topographical drawings
 
Minor Subdivision
Application/Fees
Application for Minor Lot Split
18 Sketch Plans
 
Major Subdivision
Application/Fee
Major Lot Split
20 copies of preliminary plan
 
ZONING AND DATA WORK SHEET
You are required to fill out a Data Work Sheet. A copy of the City Developer/
Builder Procedural Outline, Data Work Sheet, and city’s zoning ordinances may
be obtained from the Planning Commission Secretary/Planning Coordinator.
Your data work sheet must reflect the Zoning Code requirements for the area in
which you intend to Develop/Build. Your engineering and/or architectural
drawings must reflect any restriction imposed by the City Zoning Code.
 
LETTER OF INTENT
Your Data Work Sheet should be supplemented with a letter of intent. This
letter must outline your project, indicate the project starting and completion
dates, the type and use of structure(s) (if any), the estimated cost of the
project, any unusual topography, any and all protective covenants pertaining to
the property affected by the project, and/or any other features of interest.
You should state the relationship and impact generated by your project on the
area as well as any other information you may deem appropriate.
 
SITE DEVELOPMENT PLAN DRAWING(S)
You must furnish the city with site plot plan development drawings(s) that
conform to the following regulations. The scale shall be 1’ = 20’; 1” = 30’; 1”
= 50’ on one or more sheets of paper no less that 18” x 24” or greater than 36”
x 48” (a’ = 30’ preferred). The drawings must show all 2’-0” contour lines.
They shall show all metes and bounds, directions, and distances. All buildings,
improvements, easements, roads, sidewalks or walkways (public or private),
accesses, parking, landscaping, buffers, exterior lighting, street lighting,
storm and sanitary sewers, gas, water, telephone, electrical service type and
location, cable TV, proposed sign location tower, satellite dishes, service
areas(s), A.C. units, existing structures, structures above or below ground
must be shown. All drawings shall describe the scale used and include a north
arrow, date, and the name and signature of the preparer. You must delineate in
a table form the total land area, land area used, building area, floors
(stories), parking area spaces, percentage of landscaping and the permanent
parcel number. The owner’s name must appear on all drawings.
 
MINOR SUBDIVISION SKETCH PLAN
The developer shall furnish with the application for approval of a sketch plan
for a minor subdivision, either separately or combined, the followings Maps and
Data. A drawing or print of a city map, or a part thereof, showing the location
of the proposed subdivision.  A drawing or print showing by scale and
dimensions the parcel which is to be subdivided and all contiguous land of the
same ownership, including locations of existing structures within 25 feet of
the boundaries.  Information on the topography and drainage of the proposed
subdivision and within 50 feet thereof.  Information on the accessibility of
required utilities; and the name of the owner and of adjoining property owners,
including designations of parcels according to official records. The Sketch
Plan shall be clearly drawn on transparent paper or cloth at a scale of not
less than 50 feet to the inch showing the proposed layout and dimensions of
each lot.
 
MAJOR SUBDIVISION PRELIMINARY PLAN
The developer shall furnish with the application for approval of a preliminary
plan for a major subdivision, either separately or combined, the followings
Maps and Data. A preliminary plan designed by a professional city planner,
civil engineer or landscape architect, shall be submitted for each proposed
major subdivision. The purposes of the preliminary plan are to explore the best
design for the subdivision and the best relationship to adjoining subdivisions
or undeveloped land, to outline a program of improvements, avoidance of
environmental sensitive areas, wetland areas, streams and to obtain the advice,
suggestions and requirements of the Planning Commission and departments of the
city and Council before the plan becomes rigid as in a detail drawing.
 
OVERVIEW DRAWINGS
This drawing must show your project and surrounding areas within a 500-foot
radius measured from your lot line, and must show the zoning of adjacent
parcels. This drawing must include existing structures, driveways, accesses,
parking, roads, signs and/or any other features which reflect upon the
development harmony of the general area. This drawing should be in a scale of
1” = 100’, 1” = 400’ and no smaller than 16” x 24” or larger than 36” x 42”.
NOTE: A topographical study should be furnished if the planned site shall be
radically altered. One drawing should show the site as it now exists. The
second site plot development drawing shall show, if applicable, trees removed,
ravines, slopes, swales, wetlands, creeks, lakes or streams affected, all trees
(including size and species) within swale areas, and any other drastically
affected feature of the site made by development improvements.
 
PLANNING COMMISSION - REGULAR SESSION
The Planning Commission Regular Meeting is held on the second and fourth
Wednesday of the month.
The Planning Commission shall review all drawings, reports, and studies. Your
project drawings, Data Work Sheet, and any other information should be in its
final form. If the documents are complete and ascertained for authenticity and
to the satisfaction of the Planning Commission, the Chairperson shall sign two
(2) sets of documents. One signed copy will be forwarded to Council; one will
be kept in the PC file. A written report of the findings of the Planning
Commission will be provided by the Secretary to the Mayor, Council, Zoning
Inspector, Building Commissioner, and City Engineer.
Planning Commission recommendations shall be completed and submitted to Council
within sixty (60) days of filing of all of the application paperwork required
herein unless extended by motion of Council for good cause shown.
 
BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS
The Board of Zoning Appeals is a Charter Board with jurisdiction independent of
that of City Council or the Planning Commission. The BZA meets the first
Wednesday of every month. It may be the nature of your project that a variance
from the rules of the Zoning Code must be addressed. A fee of $250 is required.
All applications must be submitted thirty (30) days prior to a scheduled
meeting.
 
BROADVIEW HEIGHTS CITY COUNCIL - WORK SESSION
Meeting dates of the Broadview Heights City Council Work Session are every
other Monday of the month at 7:30 p.m., at Broadview Heights City Hall, 9543
Broadview Heights, Ohio, in Council Chambers.
The Council will receive all reports in their entirety pertinent to your
project along with the Planning Commission report and recommendation. The
Council will review the recommendations of Planning Commission, Board of Zoning
Appeals (if applicable) and any other studies provided.
 
BROADVIEW HEIGHTS CITY COUNCIL - REGULAR MEETING
Meeting dates of the Broadview Heights City Council are every other Monday of
the month at 7:30 p.m., in the Council Chambers, City Hall, 9543 Broadview
Road, Broadview Heights, Ohio.
City Council shall approve (with or without limitations) or disapprove the
project at a Regular Council meeting. Council is the only AUTHORIZED authority
able to grant an approval to a project in order to obtain the necessary
permits.
 
BUILDING COMMISSIONER
The Building Commissioner is located in Broadview Heights City Hall, 9543
Broadview Road, Broadview Heights, Ohio 44147. Business hours are 8:30 a.m. to
4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday.
After the final approval of Council, construction drawings and site plans may
be submitted for approval. The City Architect, City Engineer and Building
Commissioner will review and approve all plans prior to the issuance of a
building permit.
I do hereby acknowledge that I have read the Developer/Builder Procedural
Outline. I hereby authorize any City Official to enter upon my property for
purposes of inspecting the same relative to my project.
PROJECT NAME:                                                                 
                         
 
                                                                              
                                                 
   Date                  Signature Owner Authorized Representative
                     Print:                                                    
                     
                     Phone:                                                    
                   
 
                                                                              
                                   
   Date                   Signature of Applicant
                     Print:                                                    
                     
                     Phone:                                                    
                   
 
                                                                              
                                         
   Date                  Signature of Applicant
                     Print:                                                    
                   
                     Phone:                                                    
                   
Please return this page with appropriate signatures along with our project
documents, data work sheet, letter of intent, and any other pertinent required
documents to the Planning Commission Secretary/Planning Coordinator, who will
retain this copy in the Planning Commission file. Copies of this document will
be sent to the Planning Commission Members.
(Ord. 74-90, passed 6-4-1990; Ord. 121-90, passed 8-20-1990; Ord. 10-91, passed
2-4-1991; Ord. 31-91, passed 5-6-1991; Ord. 108-92, passed 10-19-1992; Ord.
118-92, passed 11-2-1992; Ord. 24-97, passed 3-3-1997; Ord. 198-99, passed 11-
1-1999; Ord. 32-05, passed 3-21-2005; Ord. 137-12, passed 9-17-2012; Ord. 02-
16, passed 3-7-2016)
APPENDIX II:  FORMS FOR FINAL PLAT CERTIFICATION
Form 1 TITLE (Minor Subdivision or Major Subdivision)
Lot Split or
Lot Consolidation or
Lot Consolidation/Lot Split or
Subdivision
Part of original tract                   
City                                         
County                                     
                     Date           
 
Form 2A Owner’s Acceptance (Minor Subdivision)
I (we) the undersigned being the owner of the land shown and described hereon,
hereby assent to and adopt this Lot Split and/or Lot Consolidation and
acknowledge the same was made at our request.
Owner Signature:                                               
Owner Print Name:                                           
Witness Signature:                                             
Witness Print Name:                                         
 
Form 2B: CERTIFICATE OF OWNERSHIP AND DEDICATION (Major Subdivision)
I (we) the undersigned       (name lettered)     owner(s) of the property shown
and described here on as the                                subdivision do
hereby assent to and adopt this subdivision of the same, and acknowledge that
the same was made at our request and do hereby dedicate to public use the
streets) (easements) (parks or other public areas) designated in graphic
symbols on this plat.
Witness:                                                              
Owner Signature:                                              
Owner Print Name:                                            
Owner Signature:                                              
Owner Print Name:                                            
 
Form 3 ACKNOWLEDGMENT BY INDIVIDUAL (directly below the above certificate)
(Minor Subdivision or Major Subdivision)
State of Ohio
County of                        
Before me, a Notary Public in and for said County and State, personally
appeared the above who acknowledged that he (she or they) did sign the
foregoing instrument and that the same is his (her or their) free act and deed.
IN WITNESS whereof I have hereunto set my hand and official seal at
                                                                ,             
                                           
(City)                           (State)
This              day of                                     ,                
                           
              (Month)            (Year)
Notary Public                                                  
My commission expires                                  
 
Form3A ACKNOWLEDGMENT BY CORPORATION (Minor Subdivision or Major Subdivision)
State of Ohio
County of                        
Before me, a Notary Public, in and for said County and State, personally
appeared                 , president and                             ,
secretary, of                         , the corporation which executed the
foregoing instrument, who acknowledged that they did sign said instrument as
such president and secretary in behalf of said corporation and by authority of
its board of directors; and that said instrument is their free act and deed
individually and as such officers and the free and corporate act and deed of
said corporation.
IN WITNESS whereof I have hereunto set my hand and official seal at
                                                                ,             
                                           
(City)                           (State)
This              day of                                     ,                
                           
              (Month)            (Year)
Notary Public                                                  
My commission expires                                  
 
Form 4 CERTIFICATE OF SURVEYOR (Minor Subdivision or Major Subdivision)
I hereby certify that I have prepared this survey and plat of subdivision and
that the same is correct and accurate.
                                                                          , 20 
    .
Registered Surveyor-Ohio Serial No                              
 
FORM 5A PLANNING COMMISSION (Minor Subdivision)
This lot split and/or lot consolidation is approved by Planning Commission of
the City of Broadview Heights, Ohio adopted this            day of            
        , 20    .
                                                   
Chairperson: Printed Name
                                                   
Secretary: Printed Name
PLANNING COMMISSION (Major Subdivision)
This plat of                                            subdivision has been
approved for record purposes only by the Planning Commission of the City of
Broadview Heights this            day of               , 20    .
                                                   
Chairperson: Printed Name
                                                   
Secretary: Printed Name
 
Form 5B APPROVALS BY COUNCIL (Major Subdivision Only)
This plat of                                    subdivision has been approved
by the Council of the City of                                   , Ohio, by
Resolution No.                 , adopted                     , 20  .
                                                      date                     
     
President: Printed Name
                                                    date                       
   
Clerk: Printed Name
 
Form 6A
(Minor Subdivision)
This lot split and or lot consolidation is accepted and approved by the City
Engineer of the City of Broadview Heights, Ohio this            day of        
          , 20    .
                                                                 
City Engineer: Printed Name
CERTIFICATE OF THE APPROVAL OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS (Major Subdivision)
I hereby certify that the pavements, utilities and other required improvements
for the subdivision herein approved have been designed in accordance with the
regulations and standards in effect, that I have estimated the cost of
materials and construction, and performance guarantees in the amount of $     
   have been posted with the                      to assure completion of all
improvements in case of default.
Date                          
                                                   
City Engineer
 
Form 6B CERTIFICATE OF THE APPROVAL OF REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS (Not included on
plat)
I hereby certify that pavements, utilities and other required land improvements
for the                                                  subdivision approved
by the Council on                          have been designed in accordance
with the regulations and standards in effect, that I have inspected the
installation of the same and find all improvements have been installed in
accordance with the drawing and specifications therefore, and that the
utilities and pavements are in good repair.
Date                          
                                                   
City Engineer
 
Form 7 ACCEPTANCES OF PUBLIC LANDS BY COUNCIL (Major Subdivision)
The public streets, park, playground, easements and/or other public areas, as
noted hereon in graphic symbols were accepted for dedication by the Council of
the City of                   , Ohio, by Ordinance No.               .
Passed                                             , 20    .
                                                      date                     
     
President
                                                      date                     
     
Clerk
 
Form 8 ACCEPTANCES OF STREET AND UTILITIES FOR PUBLIC USE (Major Subdivision)
(Separate ordinance - not included on plat)
The public streets accepted heretofore for dedication and the public utilities
have been found to be constructed in accordance with the drawing,
specifications and design standards in effect and in good repair and are hereby
accepted for public use and maintenance by the Council of the City of          
          , Ohio, by Ordinance No.     .
                                                      date                     
     
President
                                                      date                     
     
Clerk
 
Form 9 COUNTY RECORDS (Major Subdivision)
Transferred this              day of                     , 20  .
County Auditor                                                      
Recorded in Plat Book                         , Page No.          .
this                day of                         , 20   
                                                                       
County Recorder
 
Form 10
UTILITY EASEMENTS (U.E.L.) (Major Subdivision)
We the undersigned owner of the within platted land, do hereby grant unto the  
                                                                            ,
all Ohio corporations, their successors and assigns (hereinafter referred to as
grantees) a permanent right-of-way and easement twelve (12) feet in width
under, over and through all lands owned by the grantor shown hereon and
parallel with and contiguous to the public thoroughfares, and also upon lands
as depicted hereon to construct, place, operate, maintain, repair, reconstruct
or relocate such underground electric, gas and communications cables, ducts,
conduits, pipes, gas pipe lines, surface or below ground mounted transformers
and pedestals, concrete pads and other facilities as are deemed necessary or
convenient by the grantees for distributing, transporting and transmitting
electricity, gas and communication signals for public and private use at such
location as the grantees may determine upon within and across said easement
premises. Said easement rights shall include the right, without liability
therefore to remove any and all facilities not contemplated in the rights
conveyed to the grantees by this easement grant within said easement not
limited to irrigation systems, electronic animal fencing, trees and
landscaping, including lawns, flowers or shrubbery and landscape lighting
within and without said easement premises which may interfere with the
installation and maintenance, repair or operation of said electric, gas and
communications facilities, the right to install, repair, augment and maintain
service cables and pipe lines outside the above described easement premises or
the right of access, ingress and egress to and from any of the within described
premises for exercising any of the purposes of this right-of-way and easement
grant.
(Ord. 03-16, passed 3-7-2016)
APPENDIX III:  DEVELOPER’S AGREEMENT TO SECURE PERFORMANCE OF DEVELOPMENT PLANS
AGREEMENT
   THIS AGREEMENT, made and entered into at Cleveland, Ohio, this          
day of                 ,             , by and between the City of Broadview
Heights, an Ohio municipal corporation, hereinafter referred to “CITY,” and    
                                                         a                    
                , hereinafter referred to as “DEVELOPER,” and                  
                                  , hereinafter referred to as “BANK.”
 
WITNESSETH
   WHEREAS, the plat of the                                              
Subdivision, hereinafter referred to as “Subdivision,” has been previously
presented to the Council of the CITY for approval; and
   WHEREAS, Sections 1244.06(G) and 1248.13(A) and (B) of the Code of
Ordinances of Broadview Heights require a guarantee of completion of all
improvements prior to the recording of a plat for record purposes; and
   WHEREAS, the DEVELOPER desires to install these required improvements and
has presented its improvement plan to the CITY, a copy of which is attached
hereto and marked Exhibit “A”; and
(A)   (Performance Guarantee with Installation) WHEREAS, the DEVELOPER has
furnished to the CITY a non-interest earning cash deposit in the amount of 10%
of the engineer’s estimated construction cost in the amount of (            )
for the improvement of the Subdivision, and the DEVELOPER has set aside funds
in an irrevocable letter of credit from the BANK confirming that the DEVELOPER
has, on deposit, funds in an amount not less than 100% of the engineer’s
estimated cost of construction contained in the amount of  (                  )
for the improvement of the Subdivision, which funds the BANK has the authority
to expend on behalf of the DEVELOPER;
(B)   (Performance Guarantee in Lieu of Installation) 
WHEREAS, the DEVELOPER has set aside funds contained in Account No.            
                 with the                                                      
                 in the amount of                                      (       
    ) for the improvement of the Subdivision, which funds the BANK has the
authority to expend on behalf of the DEVELOPER;
   NOW, THEREFORE, in partial consideration of CITY approval of the 
DEVELOPER’S project and to facilitate conformance with applicable laws, the
CITY, BANK and DEVELOPER hereby mutually promise and agree as follows:
   1.   The DEVELOPER promises and agrees that on or before the expiration of
one (1) year from the date hereof, it will construct and install, within the
areas shown and described on Exhibit “A” hereof, at its sole expense, and
without any cost, expense or liability whatsoever to the CITY, the improvements
delineated on Exhibit “A” hereof, including, but not limited to, the storm
sewer lines, storm drainage swales, storm water storage and detention
facilities, sanitary sewers, water mains, pavement and appurtenances incident
thereto. The DEVELOPER shall submit his or her proposed construction schedule,
for the project to the CITY after final approval of his or her plans has been
granted by the Engineer and at least seven days prior to the mandatory
preconstruction meeting. Once begun, work shall continue without interruption
and the Contractor shall not suspend work or abandon the site without the
written approval of the Engineer and Council. Said schedule shall establish a
completion date for all work and failure to maintain the scheduled progress
shall be cause for action under Section 3(B)(4) of this document. The DEVELOPER
shall also clear and grade all land in accordance with the plans and
specifications approved by the Engineer of the CITY and as contained in said
Exhibit “A” attached hereto and in accordance with the ordinances, regulations
and specifications of the CITY. The DEVELOPER agrees to discharge all
liabilities in connection with the installation of the above-mentioned
improvements.
   2.   The DEVELOPER further agrees, pursuant to Section 1248.14 of the Code
of Ordinances of Broadview Heights, Ohio and paragraph 4 of the Agreement,
verification of substantial completion upon completion and by the Engineer of
the CITY, the DEVELOPER shall maintain and keep said improvements in good
repair and free from defects for a period of a minimum of two years following
the completion, verification and acceptance of the installation of the
improvements by the City Engineer. At the end of said two years or after all
required repairs of defects are completed, whichever is later the DEVELOPER
shall have the opportunity to petition City Council to accept said DEVELOPMENT
to public maintenance. The DEVELOPER agrees to pay a storm sewer maintenance
fee of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per acre prior to the commencement of the
project. (The amount of one hundred dollars ($100.00) shall be the fee for the
2006 calendar year and continue to increase 3% over the prior year every
subsequent year thereafter.) Said fees shall be placed in a fund to be used for
the ongoing maintenance of storm sewers in developments in the CITY.  No part
of such fund or fee shall be available to or used by the DEVELOPER to clean
and/or correct any defects in improvements (as further delineated in paragraph
6 herein) for purposes of passing the inspection required for dedication, and
such cleaning and repair shall be at the DEVELOPER’S sole cost. Said fee shall
be calculated by the Finance Department based upon information obtained and
submitted by the DEVELOPER indicating the number of lots in the development and
verified by the City Engineer.
   3.   The DEVELOPER has agreed to (A) Performance Guarantee with Installation
or (B) Performance Guarantee in Lieu of Installation such funds shall be placed
in the name of the CITY subject only to the terms of this escrow agreement.
(A)   The BANK and the DEVELOPER agree that disbursement of the aforesaid funds
shall be made to the DEVELOPER as follows:
      (1)   Upon receipt of the following items:
   (a)   The certificate of the City Engineer that all improvements have been
installed in accordance with the requirements of the Subdivision Regulations of
the CITY and the actions of the Planning Commission;
   (b)   Evidence of receipt by the CITY of a deposit securing the maintenance
and repair of the improvements for a time period as determined pursuant to
Section 1248.14 of the Code of Ordinances of Broadview Heights;
   (c)   A policy of title insurance in a form meeting the approval of the Law
Director covering all lands (exclusive of improvements) to be dedicated to
public use and showing title to the
same to be in the CITY free and clear of any easements, taxes, liens,
assessments or other encumbrances of any kind whatsoever, except the easements
required by the Subdivision Regulations of the CITY and taxes not yet due and
payable, or a certificate from the City Engineer acknowledging receipt of same;
and
   (d)   Evidence of deposit by the DEVELOPER with the CITY of a sum sufficient
to pay all taxes and assessments which are a lien but not yet due and payable.
(2)   Upon receipt of certification by the City Engineer of the satisfactory
completion of a portion of the aforesaid improvements and upon a determination
by the CITY that all remaining uncompleted improvements are adequately secured,
the BANK may release a portion of the funds deposited equal to an amount
estimated by the City Engineer to be the cost of that portion of the
improvements completed, or the difference between the total sum determined by
the CITY to be necessary to secure the completion of all remaining uncompleted
improvements and all other obligations of the DEVELOPER under this Agreement,
whichever may be less.
(B)   The BANK is authorized to deliver or disburse to the CITY all or any part
of the funds as determined by the City Engineer, plus any additional funds
including interest earned on the aforesaid sums, less any and all fees or
penalties due arising from the deposit or investment, upon the BANK being
notified by the CITY of the occurrence of one or more of the following events:
(1)   If the DEVELOPER assigns this Agreement, or any interest therein to any
person, firm or corporation, or gives to any person, firm or corporation any
order or orders thereon;
(2)   If the required improvements shall violate building, subdivision or
zoning laws of the CITY;
(3)   If the land within the development area as identified on the subdivision
plat as approved for record purposes is used for any unlawful purpose or is
occupied for other than dwelling purposes or for any purpose without the
approval of the appropriate administrative official, board or commission of the
CITY;
(4)   If the improvements are not fully constructed by the established
completion date(s) or by any extension date approved by Council;
(5)   If the improvements, in the judgment of the City Engineer are materially
injured or destroyed prior to acceptance by the CITY, and no insurance or other
provision acceptable to the CITY is made for prompt replacement or repair of
the same at no cost to the CITY;
(6)   If the DEVELOPER does not construct the improvements in accordance with
plans and specifications that have been approved by the proper CITY authorities
having charge thereof;
(7)   If the DEVELOPER does not permit the CITY or its authorized agents or
employees to enter upon and inspect the same, in every part at all reasonable
times;
(8)   If the DEVELOPER shall commit an act of bankruptcy, or if any relief
under the Bankruptcy Act is sought by or against the DEVELOPER, or if a
receiver is appointed to take charge of the assets or affairs of the DEVELOPER,
or if the DEVELOPER and/or a lender should become insolvent.
   Prior to the delivery or disbursal under this paragraph 3(B), the CITY shall
provide written notice to the DEVELOPER, by personal service or certified mail,
of the grounds therefor, and shall establish and notify the DEVELOPER of a time
period within which the DEVELOPER shall be afforded an opportunity to correct
or cure the circumstances giving rise thereto. Such time period for correction
or cure shall be no less than forty-five (45) days from the date of said
notice, unless the City Engineer determines that immediate work is required to
protect the public health, safety and welfare, in which case such time period
shall be as established by the City Engineer.
   4.   The DEVELOPER further agrees that, as a condition of and prior to the
acceptance by the CITY of the dedication to public use of the streets and roads
contained in the Subdivision, it will furnish to the CITY a cash bond or
maintenance bond in an amount equal to ten percent (10%) of the costs of the
roadway improvements hereunder, and guarantee that the materials and the
improvements are free from defects for a period of two (2) years following the
acceptance of dedication by City Council. The City Engineer will
provide a letter of substantial completion and verification of all
appurtenances. The acceptance period shall always be limited to May 1 through
October 31. In case of phased development, an additional bond, in an amount to
be determined by the City Engineer on a case-by-case basis, shall be included
to cover road damage to completed phases.
   5.   The DEVELOPER further agrees that during the period prior to city
council’s acceptance, it shall, at its sole expense, repair all faults and
defects of every kind and nature, whether arising out of defects in workmanship
or defective materials.
   6.   In addition to the bond required in paragraph 4 above, at the time the
DEVELOPER desires to obtain approval and acceptance by the CITY of the
aforesaid improvements, the DEVELOPER agrees that it will, as a condition
precedent to the said acceptance by the CITY, provide the CITY with
certificates or other writings from the City Engineer, certifying that all
storm sewer lines, streets, street connections, and all appurtenances thereto,
have been properly installed in accordance with the aforementioned plans and
specifications and that the construction and installation thereof have been
duly completed, inspected and approved by each of the hereinbefore mentioned
respective entities.
   7.   The DEVELOPER, simultaneously with the execution of the Agreement,
shall deposit with the Finance Director of the CITY the sum of                
         (          ) to defray the cost of legal services in implementing and
monitoring this Agreement and the project thereunder, as well as requisite
engineering and inspection fees and other costs and expenses incurred by the
CITY, and the Finance Director is hereby authorized and directed to disburse
said sum to the Law Director, the City Engineer and/or other authorized legal
and technical consultants upon proper billing to the CITY for said services.
The DEVELOPER acknowledges that the foregoing sum is based upon an estimate and
that, in the event said sum is insufficient to fully pay all of the
aforementioned expenses of the CITY, it shall deposit such additional sums as
may be required upon the request of the Finance Director of the CITY. The
Finance Director shall account to the DEVELOPER for any payments made pursuant
to this paragraph.
   8.   The DEVELOPER agrees that, simultaneously with the execution of this
Agreement and before any work hereunder is commenced, it will submit evidence
to the satisfaction of the Law Director of the CITY that it, or its
contractors, have obtained public liability and property damage insurance
covering and insuring the CITY, as its interests may appear, against any
liability whatsoever, in the amount of two hundred thousand dollars ($200,000)
for injury or death to any one person, with a minimum aggregate limit of one
million dollars ($1,000,000), and three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000) for
property damage, which insurance shall be furnished and maintained at the
expense of the DEVELOPER until all the work agreed to be done by the DEVELOPER
has been fully completed and accepted, including the maintenance of the
aforementioned improvements agreed by the DEVELOPER to be maintained. The
DEVELOPER may provide such insurance under a blanket-type policy, provided the
CITY is properly named as an insured thereunder, in accordance with the
provisions of the Agreement. The DEVELOPER shall be liable for any damage,
whether direct or indirect, to any underground or above-ground utilities in the
aforementioned Subdivision and further agrees to comply, both singularly and on
behalf of the CITY, with the provisions contained in Section 153.64 of the Ohio
Revised Code, and any amendments made thereto, to the extent said section shall
be applicable.
   9.   The DEVELOPER agrees to comply with the State law known as the Workers’
Compensation Act, and any amendments made thereto, and to cause to be covered
thereunder all employees working under the control of the DEVELOPER or its
agents, and the DEVELOPER agrees to defend, indemnify and hold harmless the
CITY and its officers, agents and employees from all claims, demands, payments,
loss and expenses, including attorney fees, suits, actions, recoveries and
judgments of every kind and description, whether or not well founded in law,
made, brought or recovered against it, arising from any cause whatever or for
any reason whatever connected with the performance of this Agreement by the
DEVELOPER or its agents, contractors, subcontractors or employees, including
any of the foregoing arising in consequence of insufficient protection or of
the use of any patented invention by said DEVELOPER or its agents, contractors,
subcontractors or employees.
   10.   The DEVELOPER agrees that the performance of this Agreement by it
shall be solely at its expense and cost and at no expense or cost to, or
liability or obligation of, the CITY.
   11.   The DEVELOPER agrees to deliver to the CITY a Title Guarantee in the
fair market value, as determined by the City Engineer, showing title to private
property conveyed to the CITY by easement, if any, to be vested in the CITY
free and clear of all liens and encumbrances.
   12.   This Agreement shall be binding upon any successors in interest,
assignees, heirs, executors, administrators or trustees of the DEVELOPER, and
the DEVELOPER agrees that, prior to any voluntary or involuntary assignment of
this Agreement, it will obtain a written statement forwarded to the CITY
acknowledging the obligation of any successor in interest to comply with the
terms of this Agreement.
   13.   By executing this Agreement, the BANK agrees to faithfully discharge
the escrow provisions contained herein.
   IN WITNESS WHEREOF, the parties hereto have affixed their signatures upon
this Agreement as duly authorized agents, warranting that they are empowered to
bind their respective parties, on the date first written above.
WITNESSES:
 
AS TO CITY:            CITY OF BROADVIEW HEIGHTS, OHIO
                                       By:                                    
                                     
                  MAYOR
                                                                              
                                       
                  APPROVED AS TO FORM:
                  LAW DIRECTOR
 
AS TO DEVELOPER:
                                         By:                                   
                                     
                  NAME                  TITLE
                                                                              
                                       
                  DEVELOPER
                                                                              
             
                  MAILING ADDRESS
                                                                              
             
                  CITY         STATE         ZIP
 
AS TO BANK:
                                         By:                                   
                                     
                  NAME                  TITLE
                                                                              
                                       
                  DEVELOPER
                                                                              
             
                  MAILING ADDRESS
                                                                              
             
                  CITY            STATE         ZIP
(Ord. 15-06, passed 2-6-2006; Ord. 103-06, passed 7-17-2006; Ord. 128-07,
passed 11-19-2007; Ord. 04-16, passed 3-7-2016)
APPENDIX IV:  CUL-DE-SAC SPECIFICATIONS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28880f249272a2a879d6f6324ba48728a75cc96f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4227.jpg]
 
(Ord. 64-96, passed 6-3-1996; Ord. 05-16, passed 3-7-2016)
TITLE SIX:  ZONING
   
CHAP. 1260.   GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
   
CHAP. 1262.   ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY
   
CHAP. 1264.   DISTRICTS GENERALLY AND ZONE MAP
   
CHAP. 1266.   CLASSIFICATION OF USES
   
CHAP. 1268.   CLASS A DISTRICTS
   
CHAP. 1270.   CLASS B-1 DISTRICTS
   
CHAP. 1271.   CLASS B-2 DISTRICTS
   
CHAP. 1272.   CLASS B-3 DISTRICTS
   
CHAP. 1275.   CLASS B-5 DISTRICTS
   
CHAP. 1276.   BUSINESS DISTRICTS
   
CHAP. 1277.   C-4 SHOPPING CENTER DISTRICTS
   
CHAP. 1278.   CLASS D-1 DISTRICTS
   
CHAP. 1279.   C-5 INTERSTATE HIGHWAY SHOPPING CENTER DISTRICT
   
CHAP. 1280.   CLASS E DISTRICTS
   
CHAP. 1281.   RENTAL PROPERTIES
   
CHAP. 1282.   NONCONFORMING USES
   
CHAP. 1283.   TOWN CENTER SPECIAL PLANNING DISTRICT #1
   
CHAP. 1284.   OFF-STREET PARKING
   
CHAP. 1286.   DETENTION AND RETENTION BASIN DESIGN
   
CHAP. 1287.   EXISTING OIL/GAS WELLS
   
CHAP. 1288.   MEDICAL MARIJUANA
   
APPENDIX I.   PARKING AREA BUFFERS
CHAPTER 1260: GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS
Section
1260.01   Interpretation
1260.02   Purpose
1260.03   Separability
1260.04   Definitions
Cross-reference:
   Amendments, see §
1262.07
Statutory reference:
   Basis of districting and zoning; classification of buildings and structures,
see Ohio R.C. 713.10
   Division of municipality into zones, see Ohio R.C. 713.06
   Notice and hearing on municipal zoning regulations, see Ohio R.C. 713.12
   Restriction in location, height and bulk of buildings and structures,
percentage of lot occupancy and setback building lines, see Ohio R.C. 713.07 et
seq.
§ 1260.01  INTERPRETATION.
   (A)   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Zoning Code, they
shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the
public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare.  The lot or
yard areas required by this Zoning Code for a particular building shall not be
diminished and shall not be included as a part of the required lot or yard
areas of any other building.  The lot or yard areas of buildings existing at
the time of the passage of this Zoning Code (Ordinance 46-68, passed February
3, 1969) shall not be diminished below the requirements herein provided for a
building hereafter erected, and such required areas shall not be included as a
part of the required areas of a building hereafter erected.
   (B)   Whenever the requirements of this Zoning Code conflict with the
requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, ordinances or
resolutions, the most restrictive, or that imposing the higher standard shall
govern.
(Ord. 37-91, passed 7-22-1991)
§ 1260.02  PURPOSE.
   This Zoning Code is enacted in accordance with a Comprehensive Plan and the
Charter of the city, for the purpose of dividing the city into zones and
districts; encouraging, regulating and restricting therein the location,
construction, reconstruction, alteration and use of structures and land;
promoting the orderly development of residential, business, industrial,
recreational, and public areas; providing for adequate light, air and
convenience of access to property by regulating the use of land and buildings
and the bulk of structures in relationship to surrounding properties; limiting
congestion in the public rights-of-way; providing for the compatibility of
different land uses and the most appropriate use of land; providing for the
administration of this Zoning Code; defining the powers and duties of the
administrative officers as provided hereinafter; and prescribing penalties for
the violation of the provisions of this Zoning Code protecting the public
health, safety, comfort and general welfare.
(Ord. 37-91, passed 7-22-1991)
§ 1260.03  SEPARABILITY.
   The chapters, sections, divisions, districts and front yard lines forming a
part of or established by this Zoning Code and the several parts, provisions
and regulations thereof, are hereby declared to be independent chapters,
sections, divisions, districts, front yard lines, parts, provisions and
regulations, and the holding of any chapter, section, division, district, front
yard line, part, provision or regulation thereof to be unconstitutional, void
or ineffective for any cause shall not affect or render invalid any other
chapter, section, division, district, front yard line, part, provision or
regulation thereof.
(Ord. 37-91, passed 7-22-1991)
§ 1260.04  DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   As used in this Zoning Code:
      (1)   The word “lot” includes the word “plot” and “parcel”.
      (2)   The words “occupied” or “used”, as applied to any building or
premises, shall be construed as though followed by the words, “or intended,
arranged or designed to be occupied or used”.
      (3)   The word “shall” is a mandatory requirement, the word “may” is a
permissive requirement, and the word “should” is a preferred requirement.
      (4)   All distances are horizontal measurements unless otherwise
specified.
   (B)   Terms not herein defined shall have the meaning customarily assigned
to them.
      “Accessory use” or “accessory building.” Means a use or a building
customarily incident to and located on the same lot with another use or
building.
      “Adult entertainment business.” Means a business establishment or
enterprise which presents material or performances that have an emphasis on
entertainment which shows, depicts or displays the human body in less than
completely and opaquely covered human genitals, the pubic region, buttocks or a
female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or human
male genitals in a discernable turgid state, even if completely or opaquely
covered.
      “Appeal.” Means an application to the Board of Zoning Appeals for the
purpose of requesting a review of any order, requirement, decision,
interpretation or determination made by the City Zoning Administrator.
      “Building.” Includes the word “structure”.
      “Building Commissioner.” Includes all persons succeeding him or her, by
whatever title known, in the duties and powers provided for him or her by this
Zoning Code.
      “Building height.” Means the vertical distance measured at the centerline
of its principal front, from the finished grade or from the natural grade, if
higher than the established grade, to the level of the highest point in the
coping of flat roofs or to the deck line of a mansard roof or to the mean
height of the highest gable of a pitched roof or to half the height of a hipped
roof.  Where no roof beams exist or there are structures wholly or partly above
the roof, the height shall be measured to the level of the highest point of the
building. (See Figure A following the text of this chapter.)
      “Building line.” Means a line parallel to the street right-of-way at a
distance therefrom equal to the depth of the front yard required for the zoning
district in which the lot is located.
      “Central distribution station.” Means a structure which houses the
operation of the distribution of durable goods.
      “Child day-care center.” Has the same meaning as that contained in Ohio
R.C. 5104.01(C).
      “Church.” Means a building, including a temple or other place of
religious worship, together with its accessory buildings and uses, which is
maintained and controlled by an organized religious body, where persons
regularly assemble for religious worship.  Rescue missions, tent revivals and
temporary assemblies are not included in this definition.
      “Cluster development.” Means a community technique in which groups of
buildings are erected in close proximity to one another, making shared use of
the space between the buildings for recreational areas, vest pocket parks, and
the like.  Dwelling units are situated in groups on sites that are smaller than
normal in size, while the remaining land area is used as a common area offering
facilities and amenities for common use. The objective of a “cluster
development” is to permit denser development and thus make the most productive
and most efficient use of available land.  In addition to shared use of
recreational space, there are savings in parking space, operating expenses, and
the like.
      “Community garage.” Means a building or part of a building used for the
storage of passenger automobiles of tenants of an apartment building, without
ordinary maintenance services on such vehicles if located in a B-1 or higher
use district.
      “Condominium.” Means a building or group of buildings in which units are
owned individually, and the structure, common areas and facilities are owned by
all the owners on a proportional undivided basis.
      “Dwelling.” Means any building, structure, or portion thereof, which is
used exclusively for human habitation.
      “Dwelling unit.” Means one or more rooms designed, occupied or intended
for occupancy as separate living quarters, with cooking, sleeping and sanitary
facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of a single
family maintaining a household.
      “Established grade.” Means the elevation of the street curb as fixed by a
city ordinance, or the Engineer’s grade as shown by a plat or profile.
      “Establishment.” When used in the context of a business, means the
opening of a new business, the relocation of an existing business or the
conversion of an existing business.
      “Family.” Means any number of individuals living, sleeping, cooking and
eating together on premises as a single housekeeping unit, provided that such
term shall not include any group of individuals in excess of four in number,
the majority of whom are not related to one another, either by consanguinity or
propinquity.
      “Finished grade.” Means the elevation of the finished surface of the
ground adjoining a building after final grading and normal settling.
      “Gasoline service station.” Means a building or part of a building or
structure, or space, used for retail sale of gasoline, lubricants and motor
vehicle accessories, and for minor services and repairs not accompanied by
objectionable noise, fumes or odor.
      “Gross floor area.” Means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the
several floors of a building measured from the exterior face of exterior walls
or from the centerline of a wall separating two buildings, but not including
interior parking spaces, loading space for motor vehicles, or any space where
the floor-to- ceiling height is less than six feet.
      “Group residence for developmentally disabled persons.” Means a state-
licensed group living arrangement of not more than six developmentally disabled
persons under 24 hour professional care, in addition to resident professional
caretakers, who live together as a single housekeeping unit with no more than
two individuals occupying any one bedroom in a single-family dwelling which
shall remain similar in appearance to other typical houses in the neighborhood.
      “Hard surface for driveways or parking areas.” Means a smoothly graded,
stabilized base and dustless surface constructed of either asphalt or concrete
(oil or chemical treatment is prohibited) in a manner and thickness approved by
the Building Commissioner.
      “Home occupation.” Means an activity carried out for gain by a resident,
conducted as an accessory use in the resident’s dwelling unit.
      “Hotel.” Means a building or part thereof operated as a public inn and
containing ten or more guest rooms without provisions for cooking in a guest
room.  Permanent occupancy is not permitted.
      “Landscaping.” Means the preservation of natural features (streams,
ravines) and original vegetation (trees, shrubs) when possible and/or the
addition of natural materials, “soft landscape” elements (trees, shrubs,
vegetative ground cover) and “hard landscape” elements (fences, walls, signage,
sidewalks).  “Landscaping” normally preserves natural features, buffers
dissimilar land uses, screens objectionable views (parking lots, dumpsters,
junk yards), reduces erosion potential by stabilizing topsoil, breaks up large
expanses of paving, and provides a naturalized setting for buildings by
providing foundation plantings when applicable.
      “Least dimension of a yard.” Means the least of the horizontal dimensions
of such yard.  If two opposite sides of a yard are not parallel, the horizontal
dimensions between them shall be deemed to be the mean distance between them.
      “Lot” or “parcel.” Means a division of land separated from other
divisions by description on a recorded subdivision plat or a recorded survey
map or by metes and bounds, for purposes of sale, lease or separate use.
      “Main building.” Means a building occupied by the chief use or activity
on the premises.
      “Modification.” Means changes to a development proposal, required by the
Planning Commission or City Council, that are required within the limits of
this Zoning Code, that must be carried out by the applicant in order for the
approval of the appropriate body to be considered valid.
      “Motel.” Means and is to be treated the same as a hotel.
      “Motor vehicle.” Means a passenger automobile unless otherwise
designated.
      “Multi-family dwelling.” Means a dwelling consisting of three or more
dwelling units.  (See Figure B following the text of this chapter.)
      “Natural grade.” Means the elevation of the undisturbed natural surface
of the ground adjoining the building.
      “Net floor area.” Means the total of all floor areas of a building,
excluding stairwells and elevator shafts, equipment rooms, interior vehicular
parking or loading areas, and all floors below the first or ground floor,
except when used or intended to be used for human habitation or service to the
public.
      “Nonconforming use.” Means a use that does not comply with the
regulations for the use district in which it is situated.
      “Nonconformities.” Means lots, uses of land, structures and uses of
structures and land in combination, lawfully existing at the time of enactment
of this Zoning Code or its amendments, which do not conform to the regulations
of this Zoning Code or its amendments or which do not conform to the
regulations of the district or zone in which they are situated.
      “Nursery school.” Means a pre-kindergarten school for young children and
includes, but is not limited to, “child day-care center”.
      “Performance.” Means the public exhibition of a skill, including, but not
limited to, dramatics, dance and music.
      “Person.” Includes “firm”, “association”, “organization”, “partnership”,
“trust”, “company” or “corporation” as well as an individual.
      “Presents.” Means creates, produces, directs, publishes, advertises,
sells, rents, disseminates, distributes or displays.
      “Private garage.” Means an accessory building for the storage of
passenger automobiles and in which no occupation, business or service for
profit is carried on.
      “Projection.” Means that part or feature of a building which extends or
projects outside of the enclosing walls.
      “Public notice of a hearing or proceeding.” Means 14 days’ notice of the
time and place thereof printed in a newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality.
      “Repair garage.” Means a building or part of a building used for general
repairs to motor vehicles.
      “Restaurant”, “lounge”, “eating place” and “dining place.” Have their
normal and common meaning as a business or establishment where either food or
beverages (including, but not limited to, alcoholic beverages) are served, but
shall not include any business or establishment where any waiter, waitress,
entertainer, server or employee either exposes or displays his or her genitals,
pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region or pubic hair region, or exposes or
displays any device, costume or covering which gives the appearance of or
simulates the genitals, pubic hair, buttocks, perineum, anal region or pubic
hair region, or exposes or displays any portion of the female breast at or
below the areola thereof.
      “Setback line.” Means that line that is the required minimum distance
from the street right-of-way or any other lot line that establishes the area
within which the principal or accessory structures must be erected or placed.
      “Single-family detached dwelling.” Means a dwelling separated from other
dwellings by open space, not attached by any means, and meant to be occupied by
a single family.  (See Figure B following the text of this chapter.)
      “Storage garage.” Means a building or part of a building, other than a
private garage or a community garage, used for the storage of any kind of motor
vehicle, with or without ordinary maintenance services on such vehicles or sale
of accessories.
      “Street line.” Means, at any level, the wall or part of the building
nearest the street line.
      “Structure.” Means a combination of materials forming a construction for
use, occupancy or ornamentation, whether installed on, above or below the
surface of land or water.
      “Townhouse.” Means a dwelling unit that shares at least one common or
party wall with another unit and is usually comprised of two stories intended
for the private use of a single family or individual and containing all the
necessary facilities and amenities. “Townhouse units” generally are cluster
housing developments in which land surrounding the housing units is owned in
common by the dwelling unit owners.  If the unit is part of a condominium
development, each owner will have a fractional interest in common areas, such
as the open space surrounding the buildings, recreational amenities and the
like.
      “Training school.” Means either:
         (a)   A higher education facility primarily teaching usable skills
through practical vocational, technical and/or academic instruction to prepare
students for employment, or furthering professional skills; and/or
         (b)   A child day-care center.
      “Type A family day-care home.” Has the same meaning as that contained in
Ohio R.C. 5104.01(D).
      “Type B family day-care home.” Has the same meaning as that contained in
Ohio R.C. 5104.01(E).
      “Two-family dwelling.” Means a structure, on a single lot, containing two
dwelling units, each of which is totally separated from the other by a
fireproof party wall.  (See Figure B following the text of this chapter.)
      “Variance.” Means a modification of the strict terms of the relevant
regulations where such modification will not be contrary to the public interest
and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not as a result of
the action of the applicant, a literal enforcement of the regulations would
result in unnecessary and undue hardship.
      “Yard.” Means a required open space, other than a court, unoccupied and
unobstructed by any structure or portion of a structure.
      “Yard/front.” Means the open, unoccupied space between the front line of
the main building and the front lot line. (See Figures C and D following the
text of this chapter.)
      “Yard/side.” Means the open, unoccupied space between the main building
and side line of the lot and extending through from the street or from the
front yard to the rear yard or to the rear line of the lot.  Any lot line that
is not a rear or front line shall be deemed a “side line”.  (See Figures C and
D following the text of this chapter.)
      “Yard/rear.” Means the open, unoccupied space between the rear line of
the main building and the rear lot line.  (See Figures C and D following the
text of this chapter.)
(Ord. 37-91, passed 7-22-1991; Ord. 29-93, passed 6-7-1993; Ord. 220-98, passed
3-15-1999)
CHAPTER 1262:  ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTY
Section
1262.01   Application for rezoning
1262.02   Contents of application
1262.03   Fee for rezoning application
1262.04   Appeals; Board of Zoning Appeals
1262.05   Fees for variances and appeals
1262.06   Determination of similar uses
1262.07   Amendments of regulations and districts
1262.08   Security for correction of violations
1262.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Board of Zoning Appeals, see
Chapter 272
   Zoning Inspector, see §
1440.06
Statutory reference:
   Administrative board; powers and duties, see Ohio R.C. 713.11
   Effect of zoning on laws and charters, see Ohio R.C. 713.14
   Retroactive zoning ordinances prohibited, see Ohio R.C. 713.15
   Violation of Zoning Code may be enjoined, see Ohio R.C. 711.13
§ 1262.01  APPLICATION FOR REZONING.
   Any owner of real estate, or his or her agent or attorney, who desires some
action by Council in connection with rezoning of land must file a written
application with Council setting forth his or her request on forms approved by
Council.
(Ord. 46-68, passed 2-3-1969)
§ 1262.02  CONTENTS OF APPLICATION.
   The written application filed with Council shall, in addition to all other
pertinent data which Council might require, contain the following items related
to the realty, the requested action and the parties making application:
   (A)   The purpose for which the application is filed;
   (B)   A sufficient description of the real estate to enable Council to
properly identify it;
   (C)   Drawings and legal descriptions necessary to complete and give an
accurate understanding of the subject of the application;
   (D)   A statement containing the name and address of the applicant, together
with his or her attorney or agent if he or she is represented; and
   (E)   Execution of an agreement by the applicant wherein the applicant
agrees to appear upon request before Council for the purpose of interrogation
by Council regarding the matter of the application.
(Ord. 46-68, passed 2-3-1969)
§ 1262.03  FEE FOR REZONING APPLICATION.
   (A)   The applicant shall file with the Building Department cash or a check
in the amount of $500, which shall be used by the municipality to pay for
advertising, legal and administrative expenses in connection with the request.
   (B)   The $500 application fee shall be made with and for each separate
application which shall deal with one matter only.
(Ord. 68-98, passed 4-20-1998; Ord. 41-2018, passed 11-5-2018)
§ 1262.04  APPEALS; BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS.
   Any decision of the Building Commissioner made in the enforcement of this
Zoning Code may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals by any person
claiming to be adversely affected by such decision.
(Ord. 46-68, passed 2-3-1969)
§ 1262.05  FEES FOR VARIANCES AND APPEALS.
   (A)   There is hereby established a fee of $250 for each request for a
variance and/or appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals.
   (B)   The fee established in division (A) of this section shall be waived in
all cases where a homeowner seeks a variance from the strict rule of §
1268.06, where such appeal involves the assertion of pre-existing sewer
assessments as a basis for the requested appeal.
(Ord. 7-84, passed 1-16-1984; Ord. 159-00, passed 11-6-2000; Ord. 74-02, passed
6-3-2002; Ord. 181-03, passed 12-15-2003)
§ 1262.06  DETERMINATION OF SIMILAR USES.
   (A)    The determination as to whether or not a use is similar to uses
permitted by right shall be considered as an expansion of the use regulations
of the district and not as a variance applying to a particular situation. Any
use found similar shall thereafter be included in the enumeration of uses
permitted by right.
   (B)    All applications for permits for a building or use not specifically
listed in any of the permitted building or use classifications in any of the
districts shall be submitted to the Planning Commission and, after approval by
it, confirmed by Council in compliance with the following standards:
      (1)   That such use is not listed in any other classification of
permitted buildings or uses;
      (2)   That such a use is more appropriate and conforms to the basic
characteristics of the classification to which it is to be added more than to
any other classification;
      (3)   That such a use does not create a danger to health or safety and
does not create offensive noise, vibration, dust, heat, smoke, odor, glare or
other objectionable influence to an extent greater than normally resulting from
other uses listed in the classification to which it is to be added; and
      (4)   That such a use does not create traffic to a greater extent than
the other uses listed in the classification to which it is to be added.
(Ord. 88-137, passed 9-6-1988)
§ 1262.07  AMENDMENTS OF REGULATIONS AND DISTRICTS.
   Council may from time to time, on its own motion or in petition, after
public notice and hearing, amend the regulations and districts herein
established.  If any area is hereafter transferred to another district by a
change in the district boundaries by amendment as provided in this section, the
provisions of the Zoning Code shall apply with regard to the buildings or
premises existing or building permits issued in such transferred area at the
time of the passage of such amendment.
(Ord. 37-91, passed 7-22-1991)
§ 1262.08  SECURITY FOR CORRECTION OF VIOLATIONS.
   (A)   Any defendant who pleads guilty to or is otherwise found guilty of
violating any provision of this Zoning Code (Chapters
1260 through
1348, inclusive) and/or the Building and Housing Code (Chapters
1420 through
1449, inclusive) may, in addition to other remedies provided by law, be
required to place on deposit with the Clerk of the Mayor’s Court a cash bond in
an amount determined by the Court to be sufficient to secure the faithful
performance of all corrective measures required by the Court with respect to
such Zoning Code and/or Building and Housing Code violation and to secure
payment of all fines and costs levied by the Court. Such cash bond shall be
conditioned upon faithful performance of such corrections within a period of
time to be determined by the Court, but in no event to exceed a period of nine
months from the date such defendant pleads guilty to or is otherwise found
guilty by the Court of the zoning violation in question.
   (B)   In the event that any zoning and/or building and housing violation is
not corrected to the satisfaction of the Court within the period of time set by
the Court for such correction as provided for in division (A) of this section,
or nine months from the date of posting said bond, whichever is earlier, the
deposit required herein shall be declared forfeited by the Court and used by
the city to correct the zoning and/or building and housing violation in
question. Any amount of the deposit remaining after the city has made all
required corrections shall be returned to the defendant, provided that any
unpaid fines and court costs relative to the zoning and/or building and housing
violation in question are first deducted therefrom. 
   (C)   The fund created by this section is in addition to and supplementary
to all existing laws relative to the enforcement of Zoning Code and/or Building
and Housing Code violations. Notwithstanding this section, all current
provisions of this Code of Ordinances relative to the enforcement of zoning
and/or building and housing ordinances shall remain in full force and effect
except as modified herein.
(Ord. 104-96, passed 9-3-1996)
§ 1262.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this
Zoning Code, or builds or alters any building in violation of any detailed
statement or plan submitted and approved thereunder, is guilty of a misdemeanor
of the first degree for each offense and shall be subject to the penalty
provided in §
202.99 of this Code of Ordinances. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.
It shall not be necessary to separately charge such continuing violations and
whoever is charged with a violation of this Zoning Code shall be deemed
separately charged with said offense each day during or on which that violation
and/or noncompliance continues. The owner of any building or any premises or
part thereof where anything in violation of this Zoning Code is placed or
exists, any lessee, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, person or
corporation employed in connection therewith and who may have assisted in the
commission of any such violation, shall each be guilty of a separate offense
and upon conviction thereof shall be subject to the penalty as herein provided.
   (B)   The imposition of any penalty shall not preclude the Director of Law
from instituting an appropriate action or proceeding in a court of proper
jurisdiction to prevent an unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair, conversion, maintenance or use, or to restrain, correct or
abate a violation, or to prevent the occupancy of a building, structure or
premises, or to require compliance with the provisions of this Zoning Code or
other applicable laws, ordinances, rules or regulations, or the orders or
determinations of the Building Commissioner or the Board of Zoning Appeals. 
(Ord. 46-68, passed 2-3-1969; Ord. 124-94, passed 11-7-1994)
CHAPTER 1264:  DISTRICTS GENERALLY AND ZONE MAP
Section
1264.01   Use districts
1264.02   Zone Map; district boundaries
Cross-reference:
   Administration, enforcement and penalty, see
Chapter 1262
   Classification of uses, see
Chapter 1266
   Nonconforming uses, see
Chapter 1282
   Off-street parking, see
Chapter 1284
§ 1264.01  USE DISTRICTS.
   For the purposes of regulating and restricting the location of trades,
industries, condominiums, apartment houses, two-family houses, single-family
houses and other uses of property, as well as the number of square feet of lot
area per family housed, the width of lots, the location and size of side, rear
and front yards and the size and height of buildings, the city is hereby
divided into 14 classes of use districts termed respectively:
   (A)   Class A-1   Single-Family Dwelling;
   (B)   Class A-2   Two-Family Dwelling;
   (C)   Class B-1   Cluster/Townhomes;
   (D)   Class B-2   Multi-Family;
   (E)   Class B-3   Condominium and Rural Residential;
   (F)   Class B-5   Senior Citizen;
   (G)   Class C-1   Local Retail Commercial;
   (H)   Class C-2   General Commercial;
   (I)   Class C-3   Office Space;
   (J)   Class C-4   Shopping Center;
   (K)   Class C-5   Interstate Highway Shopping Center;
   (L)   Class D-1   Community;
   (M)   Class E-1   Office - Laboratory; and
   (N)   Class E-2   Light Industrial.
(Ord. 19-00, passed 2-7-2000; Ord. 70-07, passed 6-4-2007)
§ 1264.02  ZONE MAP; DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   (A)   The Zone Map which accompanies original Ordinance 46-68, passed
February 3, 1969, and which is marked and entitled for identification “Zone Map
of City of Broadview Heights” is hereby declared to be a part hereof. The Map
designations and the designation rules which accompany such Map are hereby
declared to be a part hereof. No building or premises shall be erected or used
except in conformity with the regulations herein prescribed for the use of the
various districts in which such building or premises are located.
   (B)   When definite distances in feet are not shown on the Zone Map, the
district boundaries on the Zone Map are intended to be along the centerline of
an existing street or property line or extensions of the same and if the exact
location of such line is not clear it shall be determined by the Planning
Commission, due consideration being given to the location as indicated by the
scale of the Zone Map.
(Ord. 46-68, passed 2-3-1969)
Editor’s note:
   Resolution 94-87, passed July 18, 1994, accepted a revised Official Zoning
Map. Ordinance 18-99, passed February 1, 1999, accepted a revised Zoning Map
and set a fee of $5 for the purchase of a copy of such Map. Ordinance 37-04,
passed April 5, 2004, amended the fees for a City Zoning Map, setting the fees
at $10 for an 18 x 24 inch color copy and $20 for a 24 x 36 inch color copy.
Copies of the Zoning Map are available from the Clerk of Council.
CHAPTER 1266:  CLASSIFICATION OF USES
Section
1266.01   Classification generally
1266.02   Class A-1
1266.03   Class A-2
1266.04   Class B-1
1266.05   Class B-2
1266.06   Class B-3
1266.07   Class B-5
1266.08   Class C-1
1266.09   Class C-2
1266.10   Class C-3
1266.11   Class C-4
1266.12   Class C-5
1266.15   Class E-1
1266.16   Class E-2
Cross-reference:
   Administration, enforcement and penalty, see
Chapter 1262
   Determination of similar uses, see §
1262.06
   Districts generally and Zone Map, see
Chapter 1264
   General provisions and definitions, see
Chapter 1260
   Nonconforming uses, see
Chapter 1282
   Off-street parking, see
Chapter 1284
§ 1266.01  CLASSIFICATION GENERALLY.
   For the purposes of this Zoning Code, as set forth in §
1264.01, the various uses of buildings and premises are divided into classes or
districts as set forth in the following sections.
(Ord. 46-68, passed 2-3-1969)
§ 1266.02  CLASS A-1.
   (A)   The following uses are considered within a Class A-1 District:
      (1)   Single-family dwellings; and
      (2)   Farming and truck gardening.
   (B)   Third floor living suites, as described in §
1266.03(B), are prohibited.
(Ord. 46-68, passed 2-3-1969)
§ 1266.03  CLASS A-2.
   (A)   The following uses are considered within a Class A-2 District: two-
family dwellings.
   (B)   Third floor living suites containing a bathroom and/or kitchen in a
conventional single-family or two-family dwelling are prohibited. A room or
rooms added on the third floor of such a dwelling may be occupied by members of
the family in the suite or suites below only after approval of the heating and
wiring by the Building Commissioner and the Fire Marshal.
(Ord. 46-68, passed 2-3-1969)
§ 1266.04  CLASS B-1.
   The following uses are considered within a Class B-1 District: townhouse
condominiums and attached or detached single-family dwellings.
(Ord. 244-98, passed 2-1-1999)
§ 1266.05  CLASS B-2.
   The following uses are considered within a Class B-2 District: townhouse
condominiums and apartments.
(Ord. 244-98, passed 2-1-1999)
§ 1266.06  CLASS B-3.
   The following uses are considered within a Class B-3 District: single-family
and multi-family dwelling units, whether they are owned or sold in fee simple
or as condominiums, as defined in Ohio R.C. 5311.01(A), and other accessory
uses provided in §
1272.07 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 90-87, passed 9-2-1987)
§ 1266.07  CLASS B-5.
   The following use is considered within a Class B-5 District: Senior Citizen
Zoning District.
(Ord. 165-87, passed 2-16-1988)
§ 1266.08  CLASS C-1.
   The following use is considered within a Class C-1 District: Local Retail
Commercial District.
(Ord. 88-137, passed 9-6-1988)
§ 1266.09  CLASS C-2.
   The following use is considered within a Class C-2 District: General
Commercial District.
(Ord. 88-137, passed 9-6-1988)
§ 1266.10  CLASS C-3.
   The following use is considered within a C-3 District: Office Space
District.
(Ord. 88-137, passed 9-6-1988)
§ 1266.11  CLASS C-4.
   The following use is considered within a C-4 District: Shopping Center
District.
(Ord. 88-137, passed 9-6-1988)
§ 1266.12  CLASS C-5.
   The following use is considered within a Class C-5 District: Shopping Center
District.
(Ord. 70-07, passed 6-4-2007)
§ 1266.15  CLASS E-1.
   The following uses are considered within a Class E-1 District: offices and
laboratories.
(Ord. 9-78, passed 12-18-1978)
§ 1266.16  CLASS E-2.
   The following uses are considered within a Class E-2 District: light
industry.
(Ord. 9-78, passed 12-18-1978)
CHAPTER 1268:  CLASS A DISTRICTS
Section
1268.01   Permitted uses in A-1 and A-2 Districts
1268.02   Accessory uses in Residential Districts
1268.03   Yard requirements
1268.04   Projections
1268.05   Area and height regulations
1268.06   Number of dwellings; lots; frontage
1268.07   Floor area of sleeping rooms in A-2 Districts
Cross-reference:
   Administration, enforcement and penalty, see
Chapter 1262
   Classification of uses, see
Chapter 1266
   Districts generally and Zone Map, see
Chapter 1264
   General provisions and definitions,
Chapter 1260
   Nonconforming uses, see
Chapter 1282
   Off-street parking, see
Chapter 1284
§ 1268.01  PERMITTED USES IN A-1 AND A-2 DISTRICTS.
   In Class A-1 and A-2 Residential Districts, no land shall be used, and no
building shall be erected which is arranged, intended or designed to be used,
for any use other than the following:
   (A)   Class A-1, single-family dwellings; and
   (B)   Class A-2, two-family dwellings.
(Ord. 46-68, passed 2-3-1969)
§ 1268.02  ACCESSORY USES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   An accessory use customarily incident to a Class A-1 or Class A-2 use
shall be permitted in a Class A-1 or Class A-2 District, respectively, provided
that such accessory use is located upon the same lot with the building or use
to which it is accessory.
   (B)   The following shall be permitted accessory uses for Class A-1 and/or
Class A-2 Districts.
      (1)   For parcels of residential property less than one acre, one utility
building per parcel, not exceeding 320 square feet in area and 16 feet in
height shall be permitted,. The total combined area of an attached garage and
utility building shall not exceed 1,200 square feet in area per parcel. Only
one garage is permitted per parcel and no linear dimension of a garage fronting
on any public right-of-way shall exceed 35 feet.
      (2)   For parcels of residential property of one acre or more, one
utility building per parcel, not exceeding 500 square feet in area and 16 feet
in height shall be permitted. A garage and utility building shall not exceed
1,700 square feet in area per parcel. Only one garage is permitted per parcel
and no linear dimension of a garage fronting on any public right-of-way shall
exceed 35 feet.
      (3)   Accessory structures are subject to the following provisions:
         (a)   “Utility building” means any structure used for the sole purpose
of storing garden and yard equipment, toys, portable tools and home maintenance
supplies and equipment usual and incidental to the use of the premises. Not
permitted for business use at any time;
         (b)   “Attached or detached garage” means any structure for storing of
autos or noncommercial vehicles of one ton rating or less, recreational
vehicles, motorcycles, noncommercial tools and equipment, and/or any items
listed in division (B)(3)(a) above. Not permitted for business use at any time;
and
         (c)   Any other accessory use specifically stated in this Zoning Code,
provided that all provisions regulating such other accessory use shall be
complied with.
   (C)   No building erected pursuant to divisions (A) and (B) hereof shall be
erected unless such building is located within the following described area:
      (1)   At least ten feet from either side lot line of the subject parcel;
      (2)   At least five feet from the rear lot line of the subject parcel;
and
      (3)   Except for attached garages, at least 25 feet from the main
dwelling house located on the parcel.
   (D)   When the rear property line of a corner parcel of land abuts the side
property line of the adjoining parcel fronting on the side street, the
accessory building set on the corner parcel shall be set back from the side
line of the side street not less than the setback line for such side street.
   (E)   An accessory building may only be built in the rear yard, subject to
the approval of the Building Commissioner as to style and size consistent with
this Zoning Code. Such structure shall not project into a front or side yard.
   (F)   No person shall erect a building related to an accessory use without
first obtaining a building permit therefor pursuant to
Chapter 1448 of the Building and Housing Code. The Building Commissioner is
hereby authorized to charge separate fees for issuing a building permit
hereunder as provided in §
1448.02 of the Building and Housing Code.
   (G)   Every accessory building shall have a permanent foundation base with a
vapor barrier approved by the Building Department. For purposes of this
section, the term “permanent foundation base” shall mean a foundation
constructed of wood, concrete, gravel, brick or asphalt.
   (H)   Accessory buildings shall be located only on a lot that contains a
habitable dwelling.
   (I)   Passenger automobiles only shall be kept at any garage or upon any
premises in Class A-1 and Class A-2 Districts, except that an occupant is
permitted a panel or pick-up truck, rated as three-fourths of a ton or less and
used in connection with his or her livelihood.
   (J)   A billboard, signboard or advertising sign for general advertising
shall not be permitted as an accessory use. The placing of a “for sale” or “for
rent” sign, not in excess of six square feet in area and not illuminated, shall
be permitted, provided that it is placed not closer than five feet in front of
the building line of the premises. Where a residence is for sale, an “open”
sign, commonly used by real estate brokers, may be placed on the tree lawn
between 11:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m.  A store, trade, use or business shall not be
permitted as an accessory use, except for an office of a physician, surgeon,
dentist, attorney or musician in a dwelling used as his or her private
residence.  Such uses shall not be permitted in an apartment, except that any
person carrying on a customary home occupation may do so in a dwelling or in an
apartment used by him or her as his or her private residence, provided that
only normal home equipment is used in such home occupation.  In a dwelling or
apartment occupied as a private residence, one room may be rented for lodging
to two persons, or table board furnished, provided that no window display or
signboard is used to advertise such use.
   (K)   Swimming pools, in accordance with §
1268.03 of this Planning and Zoning Code, and
Chapter 1332 (formerly Chapter 1482).
   (L)   Fences, in accordance with
Chapter 1312 (formerly Chapter 1460).
(Ord. 45-87, passed 5-4-1987; Ord. 128-90, passed 9-4-1990; Ord. 60-98, passed
4-6-1998; Ord. 163-99,  passed 9-7-1999; Ord. 10-14, passed 4-21-2014; Ord. 14-
2018, passed 5-7-2018)
§ 1268.03  YARD REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   For a single-family or two-family dwelling, each lot shall have a
front yard not less in depth than 50 feet, measured at right angles from the
street (property) lot line to the nearest foundation wall, or as shown on the
subdivision plat.  A single-family or two-family dwelling on a secondary street
shall have a front yard depth that shall not exceed 60 feet unless granted a
conditional permit by the Planning Commission.  There shall be no fee charged
to an applicant for this request.  However, the front yard setback building
line may be in line with the average of the setback building lines of the
dwellings between intersecting streets if at least 75% of the sublots between
intersecting streets have had dwellings erected.
   (B)   No single side yard shall be less than ten feet, measured from the
side lot line to the main foundation wall.  Each lot shall have a rear yard of
not less than 60 feet at all points between the rear building line and the rear
lot line.
   (C)   No detached garage shall be located nearer than ten feet to the side
lot line or nearer than five feet to the rear lot line.  In the case of a
corner lot, where the rear lot line is also the side lot line of the adjoining
residential lot, a detached garage shall not be located nearer than ten feet to
such rear lot line and shall not be located nearer to the street (property) lot
line than the setback building line of the main dwelling.
   (D)   No detached garage shall be located nearer to the main dwelling than
25 feet, provided that where there has been established a uniform location at
the time of the adoption of this Zoning Code, it shall conform to such uniform
location.
   (E)   Driveways and turnarounds shall be a minimum of three feet from the
property line.  All new driveways and turnarounds shall require a permit.
   (F)   No swimming pool or swimming pool deck shall be located, constructed
or placed at any side yard of a corner lot that abuts the street or closer than
ten feet to any side or rear property line of any parcel.  In no case shall a
pool be located, constructed or placed in any front yard.
(Ord. 220-98, passed 3-15-1999; Ord. 163-99, passed 9-7-1999)
§ 1268.04  PROJECTIONS.
   For a single-family or two-family dwelling, no projection of the structure
into required yards shall be permitted except as provided in this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 46-68, passed 2-3-1969)
§ 1268.05  AREA AND HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The minimum gross floor area of a one-family dwelling shall be not
less than 1,500 square feet in the case of a dwelling with a basement and 1,600
square feet in the case of a dwelling without a basement.  Such minimum square
footage shall be the sum of the gross floor area, as defined, excluding garages
and basements in all dwellings and utility and general storage space in
basementless dwellings.  Portions of a room with a sloping ceiling measuring
less than five feet from the finished floor to the ceiling shall not be
considered as contributing to the minimum gross floor area.
   (B)   The maximum height of a one-family dwelling shall not exceed more than
two and one-half stories above grade, as defined, nor more than 35 feet
measured from the first floor line. 
(Ord. 60-98, passed 4-6-1998)
§ 1268.06  NUMBER OF DWELLINGS; LOTS; FRONTAGE.
   (A)   Number of Dwellings.  Each single-family or two-family dwelling shall
have a separate lot.  Two- family dwellings shall be arranged so that no
dwelling unit shall be located to the rear of another dwelling unit upon the
same lot.
   (B)   Lot Area.  Each lot upon which a dwelling is to be constructed shall
have a minimum of 30,000 square feet of land area.
   (C)   Street Frontage.  Each lot shall have frontage upon a duly dedicated
and accepted street.  Each lot upon which a dwelling is to be constructed shall
have the driveway access street frontage that abuts the lot.
   (D)   Lot Width.  Each lot that is 30,000 square feet or larger, upon which
a dwelling is to be constructed, shall have a minimum lot width of 125 feet. 
The minimum lot width shall be measured at the setback line, which is 50 feet
from the (front) street (property) line to the nearest foundation wall.  (See
§§ 1260.04 and 1268.03(A).)
   (E)   Previously Platted Lots.  A dwelling may be constructed on any lot
that existed prior to the adoption date of this section (Ordinance 70-00,
passed November 6, 2000), provided that such lot complies with the following. 
Only one single-family or two-family dwelling shall be located upon the lot and
no dwelling shall be located to the rear of another dwelling upon the same
lot.  The lots shall have a frontage upon a dedicated and accepted street of
not less than 100 feet, measured at the front building setback line established
for it, or as shown on the subdivision plat, measured from, and at right angles
to, the side line of the street or road, and shall contain not less than 20,000
square feet in those areas of the city where public water facilities are
available.  In addition, said lot shall meet the minimum yard requirements of §
1268.03 .
(Ord. 143-02, passed 10-7-2000; Ord. 70-00, passed 11-6-2000; Ord. 27-16,
passed 4-4-2016)
§ 1268.07  FLOOR AREA OF SLEEPING ROOMS IN A-2 DISTRICTS.
   Every room used for sleeping purposes in a Class A-2 District shall contain
not less than 70 square feet of habitable floor area if used by one occupant
and not less than 50 square feet of habitable floor area per occupant if used
by more than one occupant.
(Ord. 89-57, passed 5-15-1989)
CHAPTER 1270:  CLASS B-1 DISTRICTS
Section
1270.01   Purpose and intent
1270.02   Permitted uses
1270.03   Area regulations
1270.04   Other regulations
1270.05   Modifications
Cross-reference:
   Accessory uses in Residential Districts, see §
1268.02
   Administration, enforcement and penalty, see
Chapter 1262
   Class B-2 Districts, see
Chapter 1271
   Classification of uses, see
Chapter 1266
   Districts generally and Zone Map, see
Chapter 1264
   Fences in B-1 and B-2 Districts, see §
1312.07
   General provisions and definitions, see
Chapter 1260
   Nonconforming uses, see
Chapter 1282
   Off-street parking, see
Chapter 1284
Editor’s note:
   Chapter 1270, previously a codification of Ordinance 46-68, passed February
3, 1969, Ordinance 45-87, passed May 4, 1987, and Ordinance 89-57, passed May
15, 1989, was re-enacted in its entirety by Ordinance 1-90, passed March 5,
1990.  This chapter was then repealed in its entirety and re-enacted by
Ordinance 22-00, passed March 20, 2000.
§ 1270.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The Class B-1 District is permitted in order to achieve, among others, the
following purposes:
   (A)   To promote the development of townhouse condominiums and detached or
attached single-family housing at a density not to exceed six dwelling units
per gross acre, under conditions which maximize open space, minimize
disturbances to adjoining lower-density residential areas, and promote wise
site plan review procedures;
   (B)   To regulate the bulk and location of buildings in relation to the
land, in order to obtain proper light, air, privacy and usable spaces on each
zoning lot appropriate for the district;
   (C)   To provide protection from noxious fumes, odors, dust, excessive
noise, invasion of abnormal vehicular traffic and other objectionable
influences; and
   (D)   To protect the desirable characteristics of existing residential
development, to promote stability and the most desirable and beneficial use of
the land, and to bring about eventual conformity with the adopted or officially
accepted General Plan and other plans of the city.
(Ord. 22-00, passed 3-20-2000)
§ 1270.02  PERMITTED USES.
   Permitted uses in the Class B-1 District shall be as follows:
   (A)   Townhouse condominiums;
   (B)   Detached or attached single-family housing; and
   (C)   Accessory uses as regulated under §
1268.02.
(Ord. 22-00, passed 3-20-2000)
§ 1270.03  AREA REGULATIONS.
   In the Class B-1 District, no building shall be built or altered and no
provision shall be made to accommodate more than:
   (A)   Four dwelling units per gross acre for townhouse condominiums;
   (B)   Four dwelling units per gross acre for detached or attached single-
family housing;
   (C)   Six dwelling units per gross acre for townhouse condominiums when
abutting a C-4 Zoning District; or
   (D)   Five dwelling units per gross acre for detached or attached single-
family housing when abutting a C-4 Zoning District.
(Ord. 22-00, passed 3-20-2000)
§ 1270.04  OTHER REGULATIONS.
   In the Class B-1 District, all buildings shall be built in accordance with
this chapter.
(Ord. 22-00, passed 3-20-2000)
§ 1270.05  MODIFICATIONS.
   In its consideration of proposed B-1 developments, the Planning Commission
may permit exceptions to any of the provisions of this chapter if it finds that
such modification or exception will not violate the spirit or intent of this
chapter when applied to the development and that a more harmonious and useful
project will result.
(Ord. 22-00, passed 3-20-2000)
CHAPTER 1271:  CLASS B-2 DISTRICTS
Section
1271.01   Purpose and intent
1271.02   Reclassification of districts; permitted uses
1271.03   Area and bulk regulations
1271.04   Height regulations
1271.05   Yard and buffer regulations
1271.06   Distances between buildings and uses
1271.07   Off-street parking and loading
1271.08   Outdoor lighting
1271.09   Landscaping; natural environment
1271.10   Sewage disposal
1271.11   Size of dwelling units
1271.12   Approval for subdivision or development required
1271.13   Compliance with approved general site plan
1271.14   Pre-existing assessment and improvement
Cross-reference:
   Accessory uses in Residential Districts, see §
1268.02
   Administration, enforcement and penalty, see
Chapter 1262
   Class B-1 Districts, see
Chapter 1270
   Classification of uses, see
Chapter 1266
   Districts generally and Zone Map, see
Chapter 1264
   Fences in B-1 and B-2 Districts, see §
1312.07
   General provisions and definitions, see
Chapter 1260
   Nonconforming uses, see
Chapter 1282
   Off-street parking, see
Chapter 1284
§ 1271.01  PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   The Class B-2 District is permitted in order to achieve, inter alia, the
following purposes:
   (A)   To promote development of townhouse condominiums and apartments at a
density not to exceed six dwelling units per gross acre, under conditions which
maximize open space, minimize disturbances to adjoining lower-density
residential areas, and promote wise site plan review procedures;
   (B)   To regulate the bulk and location of buildings in relation to the
land, in order to obtain proper light, air, privacy and usable open spaces on
each zoning lot appropriate for the district;
   (C)   To provide protection from noxious fumes, odors, dust, excessive
noises, invasion of abnormal vehicular traffic and other objectionable
influences; and
   (D)   To protect the desirable characteristics of existing residential
development, the promotion of stability, the most desirable and beneficial use
of the land, and bringing about the eventual conformity with the adopted or
officially accepted General Plan and other plans of the city.
(Ord. 23-00, passed 3-20-2000)
§ 1271.02  RECLASSIFICATION OF DISTRICTS; PERMITTED USES.
   (A)   All land currently zoned Class B-1, Class B-2 prior to the effective
date of this chapter shall be reclassified as Class B-2, provided that all land
rezoned Class B-1, Class B-2 in the year 1998 shall be reclassified as Class B-
1. Future classifications shall be designated as either Class B-1 or Class B-2.
   (B)   Permitted uses in the Class B-2 District shall be as follows:
      (1)   Townhouse condominiums;
      (2)   Apartments; and
      (3)   Accessory uses as regulated under §
1268.02, including storage garages and off-street parking areas for automobiles
as accessory to townhouse and apartment units.
(Ord. 23-00, passed 3-20-2000)
§ 1271.03  AREA AND BULK REGULATIONS.
   (A)   In the Class B-2 District, no building shall be built or altered and
no provision shall be made to accommodate more than one dwelling unit for each
7,260 square feet of lot area.
   (B)   The following shall be deducted from the total project area:
      (1)   Any public right-of-way within the project boundary existing at the
time the development plan is submitted; and
      (2)   The area of land within a designated wetland.
(Ord. 23-00, passed 3-20-2000)
§ 1271.04  HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   In the Class B-2 District, no main building shall be erected or an
existing building altered which exceeds three stories or 35 feet in height,
measured from the first floor line to the highest point of the roof.
   (B)   The height of accessory buildings shall not exceed 15 feet. In no
instance shall the accessory building exceed the height of the main building.
(Ord. 23-00, passed 3-20-2000)
§ 1271.05  YARD AND BUFFER REGULATIONS.
   In the Class B-2 District, land and structures shall be developed and
maintained in accordance with the following yard and buffer regulations.
Landscape features, gardens, fences, walls and signs shall be permitted in
required yard and buffer areas, provided that such uses conform to applicable
regulations of this Zoning Code.  Other accessory uses are permitted in
required yards only in accordance with the buffer regulations of division (B)
of this section.
   (A)   Yards. The minimum yard depth from a lot line to a main building shall
be as set forth below:
 
Number of Stories In                  Minimum Yard Depth     To Lot Line (Other
Main Building:       To Street R.O.W. (ft.) To District Line Than A-1)
                                      (A-1)
1                    60               100                    30
2                    60               100                    45
3                    80               100                    60
 
   (B)   Buffer Regulations.
      (1)   The minimum distance from any main building to a detached garage
building, driveway, walk and recreation area, and from these accessory uses to
lot lines, shall be determined by the following schedule:
 
Schedule of Distances From Buildings to Accessory Uses and From Accessory Uses
to Lot Lines
Accessory Uses           Minimum Distance From Main From Lot Line (ft.) Minimum
                         Building (ft.)             Distance
Detached garages and     25                         20
parking areas
Driveways                30 (except at building     10
                         entrances)
Recreation areas (active 40                         20
play)
Walks                    15 (except at building     10
                         entrances)
 
      (2)   The foregoing formulas and schedule are intended as design criteria
to be applied with professional skill to produce the optimum development for
the lot in relation to the surrounding conditions. In the review of the
preliminary plan, the Planning Commission may approve certain adjustments to
the foregoing formulas and schedule as may be deemed advisable by the
Commission in order to conform with topographic and natural conditions
prevailing in the neighborhood. Before making a decision to adjust any of the
formulas, the Commission shall hold a public meeting on all requests for
adjustments of the foregoing formulas. Notices of the time and place of such a
meeting shall be mailed to the applicant and to the affected property owners as
they appear in the current records of the County Recorder. Public notice shall
be given of the first meeting for any consideration of the request by the
posting of a notice in the main entrance of the Municipal Building for a period
of at least 14 days. Written notice by certified mail, return receipt
requested, of any adjustment to be considered by the Planning Commission shall
be given to the property owners within  a 500-foot radius of the property for
which an adjustment is requested. In the instance(s) where such property is in
the condominium form of ownership, notice shall be sent to the condominium unit
owners association only. There is hereby established a fee of $500, to the
applicant, for each request for any adjustment of the foregoing formulas by the
Planning Commission.
(Ord. 23-00, passed 3-20-2000; Ord. 50-01, passed 5-7-2001; Ord. 42-2018,
passed 11-5-2018)
§ 1271.06  DISTANCES BETWEEN BUILDINGS AND USES.
   In a B-2 District, land and structures shall be developed and maintained in
accordance with the following regulations regarding the required distances
between buildings and other uses.
   (A)   Definitions and Measurement Standards. The following definitions and 
measurement standards shall apply to terms used in this section.
      (1)   “Facing walls.” Although more than one set of walls may be
overlapping in relationship between two buildings, only one set of two walls
shall be considered facing. Facing walls shall be those two overlapping walls
for which the length of overlap is the greater.
      (2)   “Length of overlap.” The length of overlap shall be considered as
the length of the portion of one wall from which perpendicular lines will
intersect a second wall. In determining the “length of overlap”, the minimum
possible overlap shall be used for computation.
      (3)   “Main wall.” Any exterior wall(s) of a residential building
containing principal windows of a living, dining and/or sleeping room.
      (4)   “Overlapping walls.” A wall of one building shall be considered as
overlapping a wall of a second building when perpendicular lines extended from
the wall intersect the second wall.
      (5)   “Secondary wall.” Any exterior wall(s) of a residential building,
other than a main wall, containing minor windows of a dining or sleeping room,
principal or minor windows of a kitchen or bathroom, or no window.
   (B)   Schedule of Distances.
      (1)   The minimum distance between walls of main buildings and other
walls or uses shall be set forth in the following schedule:
 
Building Wall Other Wall of Use Minimum Distance (ft.)
Main wall, facing:          accessory building         30
                           another main wall          40 plus X*
                           private road               30
                           recreation facility        30
                           secondary wall             30 plus X
                           surface parking area       10
Secondary wall, facing:     accessory building         20
                           another secondary wall     25 plus X
                           private road               20
                           recreation facility        20
                           surface parking area       10
Accessory building, facing: another accessory building 15
                           private road               10
X= length of overlap divided by 5
 
      (2)   The foregoing formulas and schedule are intended as design criteria
to be applied with professional skill to produce the optimum development for
the lot in relationship to the surrounding conditions. In the review of the
preliminary plan, the Planning Commission may approve certain adjustments to
the foregoing formulas and schedule as may be deemed advisable by the
Commission in order to conform with topographic and natural conditions
prevailing in the neighborhood. Before making a decision to adjust any of the
formulas, the Commission shall hold a public meeting on all requests for
adjustments of the foregoing formulas. Notices of the time and place of such a
meeting shall be mailed to the applicant and to the affected property owners as
they appear in the current records of the County Recorder. Public notice shall
be given of the first meeting for any consideration of the request by the
posting of a notice in the main entrance of the Municipal Building for a period
of at least 14 days. Written notice by certified mail, return receipt
requested, of any adjustment to be considered by the Planning Commission shall
be given to the property owners within a 500-foot radius of the property for
which an adjustment is requested. In the instance(s) where such property is in
the condominium form of ownership, notice shall be sent to the condominium unit
owners association only. There is hereby established a fee of $500, to the
applicant, for each request for any adjustment of the foregoing formulas by the
Planning Commission.
(Ord. 23-00, passed 3-20-2000; Ord. 50-01, passed 5-7-2001; Ord. 43-2018,
passed 11-5-2018)
§ 1271.07  OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING.
   Off-street parking and loading facilities, as well as access drives, shall
be required as provided in
Chapter 1284 for the Class B-2 Zoning District.
(Ord. 23-00, passed 3-20-2000)
§ 1271.08  OUTDOOR LIGHTING.
   Sources of light for illumination of buildings or grounds shall be shielded
or directed so as not to be objectionable or hazardous to owners or users of
adjacent property or public streets.
(Ord. 23-00, passed 3-20-2000)
§ 1271.09  LANDSCAPING; NATURAL ENVIRONMENT.
   In the Class B-2 District, a minimum of 40% of the lot shall be landscaped. 
The development of a lot shall be done in a manner so as to preserve the
natural assets, such as brooks, valleys, trees and ravines unless otherwise
impossible to develop. Recreation facilities shall be considered part of the
landscaping.
(Ord. 23-00, passed 3-20-2000)
§ 1271.10  SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   In the Class B-2 District, no building shall be erected or an existing
building altered unless there is provided a municipal or county sanitary sewer
exit as may be approved by the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency and the
City Engineer. In the absence of any municipal or county sanitary sewer exit,
the design and construction of an independent sanitary system, including
primary and secondary treatment plant, may be approved, provided that such a
system is designed and the plant located so that it can be integrated into the
comprehensive city sanitary sewerage system, and the temporary treatment plant
can be abandoned when public trunk sewers are installed.
(Ord. 23-00, passed 3-20-2000)
§ 1271.11  SIZE OF DWELLING UNITS.
   (A)   In the Class B-2 District, no building shall be erected or existing
building altered unless there is provided a minimum of 850 square feet of floor
area per dwelling unit for a one-bedroom dwelling unit and 1,000 square feet
for a two-bedroom unit. For any dwelling unit containing more than two
bedrooms, there shall be an additional 150 square feet of floor area for each
additional bedroom.
   (B)   The square footage shall be the sum of the gross floor area above the
basement level, including rooms having a minimum ceiling height of eight feet
and having natural light and ventilation, closets having a minimum ceiling
height of eight feet, rooms above the first floor which are directly connected
by a permanent stairway and hall and which have a minimum ceiling height of
eight feet, and spaces under pitched roofs having a minimum ceiling height of
four feet at the side or edge if two-thirds of the room or space has a minimum
ceiling height of eight feet, excluding common hallways, common stairways,
utility rooms, storage rooms, furnace rooms and chimney and flue space.
   (C)   The method of measuring each suite in an apartment to meet the square
footage requirements shall be as follows:
      (1)   If the measurement starts at an exterior wall and terminates at an
interior wall, such measurement shall be taken from the exterior face of the
exterior wall to the centerline of the interior wall;
      (2)   If the measurement starts at an interior wall and terminates at an
interior wall, such measurement shall be taken from the centerline of each
interior wall; and
      (3)   If the measurement starts at an exterior wall and ends at an
exterior wall, such measurement shall be taken from the exterior face of each
exterior wall.
(Ord. 23-00, passed 3-20-2000)
§ 1271.12  APPROVAL FOR SUBDIVISION OR DEVELOPMENT REQUIRED.
   The developer of a Class B-2 District shall submit to the Planning
Commission a General Site Plan depicting the development area requested to be
developed. The General Site Plan shall be approved by Council following the
review and favorable recommendation of the General Site Plan by the Planning
Commission. Such General Site Plan shall show the following:
   (A)   The boundaries of the proposed development area;
   (B)   A tabular summary of the total acreage of the proposed development
area and the maximum allowable number of dwelling units;
   (C)   The topography of the development area, including contours of no
greater interval than two feet;
   (D)   The proposed general street system, both local private streets and
dedicated public streets, and the general pedestrian circulation system for the
proposed development area;
   (E)   The proposed locations for all areas for multi-family dwelling units
and all nonresidential structures;
   (F)   The general plan for proposed sewer and water facilities; and
   (G)   The proposed reservations for recreational areas, including parks and
playgrounds, open spaces and other community facilities, with a statement of
proposed methods to be employed to preserve and maintain recreational areas,
open spaces, and ponds and lakes.
(Ord. 23-00, passed 3-20-2000)
§ 1271.13  COMPLIANCE WITH APPROVED GENERAL SITE PLAN.
   (A)   Any land zoned Class B-2 under the provisions of this chapter shall be
developed in the following respects and according to the General Site Plan
submitted to and approved by the Planning Commission and Council with the
following provisions.
      (1)   The development of the development area (or if phased pursuant to
division (A)(2) hereof, the development of each phase) shall commence as
provided in §
1448.09 of the Building and Housing Code.
      (2)   The developer may phase or stage the development of the development
area, provided that the developer of the same submits to Council and the
Planning Commission a Phase/Stage General Site Plan for each phase and/or stage
of the development. The requirements of the Phase/Stage General Site Plan, and
the approval process for the same, shall comply with the requirements of §
1271.12.
      (3)   Multi-family residential development shall conform to the areas
indicated for respective types of residential development on the approved
General Site Plan.
      (4)   Recreation areas and open spaces shall be developed generally as
indicated on the approved General Site Plan.
   (B)   Any substantial proposed change from the General City Plan, with
respect to compliance with the General Site Plan as required by this chapter,
shall be allowed only upon approval by the majority of Council following a
recommendation of the same by the Planning Commission. If the Planning
Commission recommends that said change should not be approved by Council, said
change shall require a concurrence of at least two-thirds of the members of
Council for approval.
(Ord. 23-00, passed 3-20-2000)
§ 1271.14  PRE-EXISTING ASSESSMENT AND IMPROVEMENT.
   Notwithstanding any provision contained herein to the contrary, any parcel
that has been assessed and improved based upon a density per gross acre in
excess of the maximum permitted hereunder shall be permitted to be developed at
the density per gross acre for which it was assessed.
(Ord. 23-00, passed 3-20-2000)
CHAPTER 1272:  CLASS B-3 DISTRICTS
Section
1272.01   Purpose
1272.02   Development area and densities
1272.03   Floor space
1272.04   Garage areas
1272.05   Land coverage
1272.06   Maximum dwelling unit height
1272.07   Accessory uses
1272.08   Street circulation system
1272.09   Private land
1272.10   Common land
1272.11   Landscape plan and site appearance
1272.12   Building arrangements and lot sizes
1272.13   Pavements, drainage, sidewalks and lighting
1272.14   Landscaping; natural environment
1272.15   Sewage disposal
1272.16   Approval for subdivision or development required
1272.17   Compliance with approved general site plan
Cross-reference:
   Accessory uses in Residential Districts, see §
1268.02
   Administration, enforcement and penalty, see
Chapter 1262
   Classification of uses, see
Chapter 1266
   Districts generally and Zone Map, see
Chapter 1264
   General provisions and definitions, see
Chapter 1260
   Nonconforming uses, see
Chapter 1282
   Off-street parking, see
Chapter 1284
§ 1272.01  PURPOSE.
   The Class B-3 Rural Residential District is established to recognize and
accommodate, in a development area of at least 200 acres, creative and
imaginative planned community design, and to permit those innovations in the
technology of land development that are in the best interests of the city. In
order to accomplish this purpose, it is the intention, in establishing these
District regulations, to permit:
   (A)   In a large scale planned development, a variety of dwelling types,
including single-family and multi-family dwellings, which may be either
attached or detached, and constructed at an average density of 3.5 dwelling units per acre;
   (B)   The flexible spacing of lots and buildings in order to encourage:
      (1)   The separation of pedestrian and vehicular circulation;
      (2)   The conservation of the natural amenities of the landscape;
      (3)   The provision of readily accessible recreation areas and green
space;
      (4)   The creation of functional and interesting residential areas; and
      (5)   The provision of a necessary complement of community facilities
such as central sanitary sewer and central water supply systems.
(Ord. 90-87, passed 9-2-1987)
§ 1272.02  DEVELOPMENT AREA AND DENSITIES.
   A development area of not less than 200 acres shall be developed in a B-
3 District. The dwelling units need not be distributed at a uniform density
throughout the development area. However, the average density of the dwelling
units shall not exceed three and one-half units per acre.
(Ord. 90-87, passed 9-2-1987)
§ 1272.03  FLOOR SPACE.
   (A)   Any dwelling unit constructed on a 20,000 square foot lot or larger,
sold in fee simple, shall contain a minimum floor area of 1,550 square feet.
All other dwelling units shall contain a minimum of 950 square feet. However,
the average floor area for all of the units in the development area shall be
1,150 square feet.
   (B)   These areas shall be computed as the sum of all the floor areas
measured from the interior face of exterior walls, the interior face of party
walls, and the interior face of all other interior walls separating the unit
from other spaces within a building, including one-half the floor area of
balconies. Excluded are public areas, building service areas and garage,
storage and basement areas.
(Ord. 90-87, passed 9-2-1987)
§ 1272.04  GARAGE AREAS.
   (A)   The minimum garage area required for a unit shall be 200 square feet
per 1,200 square feet, or fraction thereof, of air conditioned and/or heated
area in the dwelling unit. All dwelling units in excess of 1,201 square feet of
air conditioned and/or heated area shall be required to have 400 square feet of
garage area.
   (B)   Garages at grade level should be designed, wherever practical to do
so, so that the doors are turned so as not to face directly upon a dedicated
public street, except in the case of single-family, fee simple owned, dwelling
units.  Every effort should be made to recess or otherwise screen the garage
doors of multi- family dwelling units from dedicated public streets. Entrance
courts or other similar landscape forms are encouraged and recommended.
   (C)   One open parking space may be permitted near the entrance of the
dwelling unit served. Open parking for more than two parking spaces shall be
screened by walls or hedges or shall have a buffer strip of landscaped area
surrounding the same. The paved areas for more than 12 parking spaces shall be
interrupted with landscaped planting areas.
(Ord. 90-87, passed 9-2-1987)
§ 1272.05  LAND COVERAGE.
   (A)   For the purpose of computing land coverage, garages at ground level
shall be included but garage roofs below grade, if landscaped or developed as a
terrace or with similar landscape treatment, may be excluded.
   (B)   The sum of the condominium and ground level garage coverage shall not
exceed more than 30% of the development area.
(Ord. 90-87, passed 9-2-1987)
§ 1272.06  MAXIMUM DWELLING UNIT HEIGHT.
   No building shall be erected or an existing building altered which exceeds
three stories or 35 feet in height, measured from the first floor line to the
highest point of the roof. 
(Ord. 220-98, passed 3-15-1999)
§ 1272.07  ACCESSORY USES.
   (A)   Single-Family and Multi-Family Dwellings.  The accessory uses provided
for in §
1268.02 shall be permitted for single-family and multi-family dwellings in B-
3 Districts. The Planning Commission may vary the number and location of
accessory buildings in cluster/multi-family development areas.
   (B)   Development Areas.  Accessory uses in development areas shall be as
follows.
      (1)   Gardens, fences, walls, pools and other recreational facilities on
private and common land are permitted.
      (2)   Shops and service establishments intended primarily to serve the
daily living needs of the occupants of the development area, such as a food
shop, a florist, a gift shop, a newsstand, a beverage shop, a restaurant, a
beauty and/or barber shop, a laundry and/or dry cleaning agency and a branch
bank, are permitted by special permit with the approval of Council.
      (3)   The following accessory uses are required:
         (a)   Facilities for the disposal of garbage and rubbish according to
specifications, if any, of the city;
         (b)   Garages for dwelling units in accordance with §
1272.04(A);
         (c)   Parking areas for the use of guests of the occupants of multi-
family dwelling units in accordance with §
1272.04(C); and
         (d)   Facilities for commercial and service delivery vehicles, if any,
with enclosed areas separated from pedestrian circulation in the development
area and separated from garage areas.
(Ord. 57-98, passed 4-6-1998; Ord. 128-99, passed 9-7-1999)
§ 1272.08  STREET CIRCULATION SYSTEM.
   (A)   Each multi-family dwelling unit shall be served by a local street, not
dedicated for public use, so as to exclude all through traffic. The vehicular
circulation system and parking facilities shall be designed to fully
accommodate the automobile with safety and efficiency without permitting it to
dominate and destroy the form of the group or neighborhood.
   (B)   The minimum standards for the streets serving the single-family and
the multi-family areas of the development area shall be in accordance with the
schedule set forth below:
      (1)   Double lane width dedicated streets shall be a minimum of 22 feet
wide;
      (2)   Single lane width local streets shall be a minimum of 12 feet wide;
      (3)   Double lane width local streets shall be a minimum of 18 feet wide;
and
      (4)   All dedicated public streets and all local streets shall be paved
and drained in accordance with §
1272.13.
(Ord. 90-87, passed 9-2-1987)
 
§ 1272.09  PRIVATE LAND.
   In the planning of multi-family dwelling units in a variety of groups or
clusters, land shall be provided for the private outdoor use of the occupants
at such locations as the entrances and garden side of the building.
(Ord. 90-87, passed 9-2-1987)
§ 1272.10  COMMON LAND.
   The common land shall be readily accessible and of such conditions, size and
shape as to be usable for parking areas, recreation and natural and landscaped
areas. The integrity of the common land shall be guaranteed from further
division or other changes through deed indenture by explicit prohibition of
other than the intended uses and exempt from further amendment except upon
prior approval of Council.
(Ord. 90-87, passed 9-2-1987)
§ 1272.11  LANDSCAPE PLAN AND SITE APPEARANCE.
   (A)   It is a requirement of these regulations that all trees, shrubs and
other site features be retained, if possible, and incorporated into the site
and landscape plan of the development area. It is intended that a  program for
quickly recreating the landscape environment of the city be a part of any
development carried out under the provisions of this Zoning Code.
   (B)    All utilities installed within a B-3 District shall be entirely
underground and shall be installed according to the specifications of the city.
(Ord. 90-87, passed 9-2-1987)
§ 1272.12  BUILDING ARRANGEMENTS AND LOT SIZES.
   The locations of the dwelling units within the development area shall be
arranged so that the distance between buildings and various parts thereof, the
distances to the boundaries of the development area, and the sizes of lots,
shall not be less than as set forth in this section.
   (A)   The distance between any building, or part thereof, in a B-3 District
from the rear or side line of any lot within a dedicated subdivision, or any
boundary line of a B-3 District which abuts ten or more contiguous rear
property lines at the time of rezoning, shall be not less than 100 feet.
   (B)   In the case of a single-family, fee simple owned dwelling, situated on
a building lot of 20,000 square feet or greater:
      (1)   Yard requirements shall be as regulated under §
1268.03;
      (2)   Projections shall be as regulated under §
1268.04;
      (3)   Area and height regulations as regulated under §
1268.05; and
      (4)   The number of dwellings and the lot area and width shall be as
regulated under §
1268.06.
   (C)   In all other cases, the minimum distance between buildings shall be
ten feet.
   (D)   The minimum lot size within the development area, or the minimum area
which is reserved for the exclusive use of the owner of a dwelling unit,
whether the unit is owned in fee simple or not, shall include not less than ten
feet of side yards which need not be uniformly distributed, and not less than
20 feet to the front and rear of each dwelling unit.
(Ord. 90-87, passed 9-2-1987; Ord. 57-98, passed 4-6-1998)
 
§ 1272.13  PAVEMENTS, DRAINAGE, SIDEWALKS AND LIGHTING.
   (A)   Streets, drainage and sidewalks shall be designed in accordance with
Chapter 1248 of the subdivision regulations.
   (B)   Street lighting shall be in accordance with
Chapter 1252 of the subdivision regulations.  Lighting shall be directed so as
not to create a nuisance to adjoining residences.
   (C)   A pedestrian circulation system shall be included in the development
and shall be designed to ensure that pedestrians can walk safely and easily
throughout the development.  The pedestrian system shall provide connections
between properties and activities or special features within the restricted
open space system and need not always be located along streets.  Trails for
which public right of passage has been established should be incorporated in
the pedestrian circulation system.
   (D)   All local streets, pedestrian circulation systems, common lands and
recreation areas within the development area shall be owned, managed and
maintained by a homeowners association specifically established for such
purpose and activity.
(Ord. 200-99, passed 12-20-1999)
§ 1272.14  LANDSCAPING; NATURAL ENVIRONMENT.
   A minimum of 40% of the development area shall be landscaped or left in its
natural state. The development of any development area shall be done in a
manner so as to preserve the natural assets, such as brooks, valleys, trees and
ravines, unless otherwise impossible to develop. Recreational facilities and
recreational areas shall be considered part of the landscape and natural
environment area.
(Ord. 90-87, passed 9-2-1987)
§ 1272.15  SEWAGE DISPOSAL.
   No building shall be erected or an existing building altered unless there is
provided municipal or county sanitary sewer exits as may be approved by the
Ohio Environmental Protection Agency and the City Engineer. In the absence of
any municipal or county sanitary sewer exits, the design and construction of an
independent sanitary system, including a secondary and tertiary treatment plant
or plants, may be approved, provided that such a system is designed and located
so that it can be integrated into the comprehensive city sanitary sewerage
system and the temporary treatment plant abandoned when public trunk sewers are
installed.
(Ord. 90-87, passed 9-2-1987)
§ 1272.16  APPROVAL FOR SUBDIVISION OR DEVELOPMENT REQUIRED.
   The developer of a B-3 District shall submit to Council a General Site Plan
depicting the development area requested to be developed. The General Site Plan
shall be approved by Council following the review and favorable recommendation
of the General Site Plan by the Planning Commission. Such General Site Plan
shall show the following:
   (A)   The boundaries of the proposed development area;
   (B)   A tabular summary of the total acreage of the proposed development
area and the maximum allowable number of dwelling units;
   (C)   The topography of the development area, including contours of no
greater interval than two feet;
   (D)   The proposed general street system, both local private streets and
dedicated public streets, and general pedestrian circulation system for the
proposed development area;
   (E)   The proposed locations for all areas for single-family and multi-
family dwelling units and all nonresidential structures;
   (F)   The general plan for proposed sewer and water facilities; and
   (G)   The proposed reservations for recreational areas, including parks and
playgrounds, open spaces and other community facilities, with a statement of
the proposed methods to be employed to preserve and maintain recreational
areas, open spaces, ponds and lakes.
(Ord. 90-87, passed 9-2-1987)
§ 1272.17  COMPLIANCE WITH APPROVED GENERAL SITE PLAN.
   Any land zoned B-3 District under the provisions of this chapter shall be
developed in the following respects and according to the General Site Plan
submitted and approved by the Planning Commission and Council and according to
the following provisions.
   (A)   The development of the development area (or, if phased pursuant to
division (B) hereof, the development of each phase) shall commence as provided
in §
1448.09 of the Building and Housing Code.
   (B)   The developer may phase or stage the development of the development
area, provided that the developer of the same submits to Council and the
Planning Commission a General Site Plan for each phase and/or stage of the
development.  The requirements of the Phase/Stage General Site Plan, and the
approval process for the same, shall comply with the requirements of §
1272.16.
   (C)   Single-family residential development and multi-family residential
development shall conform to the areas indicated for the respective types of
residential development on the approved General Site Plan, except that in any
area designated for multi-family residential development on the approved
General Site Plan a single-family development may be constructed in lieu
thereof.
   (D)   Recreational areas and open spaces shall be developed generally as
indicated on the approved General Site Plan.
   Any substantial proposed change from the General City Plan, with respect to
compliance with the General Site Plan as required by this chapter, shall be
allowed only upon approval by the majority of Council following a
recommendation of the same by the Planning Commission. If the Planning
Commission recommends that said change should not be approved by Council, said
change shall require a concurrence of at least two-thirds of the members of
Council for approval.
(Ord. 52-90, passed 5-7-1990; Ord. 92-97, passed 6-23-1997; Ord. 189-98, passed
3-15-1999)
CHAPTER 1275:  CLASS B-5 DISTRICTS
Section
1275.01   Definitions
1275.02   Purpose and intent
1275.03   Permitted uses
1275.04   Site planning criteria
1275.05   Preliminary and final site development plans
1275.06   Area regulations
1275.07   Height regulations
1275.08   Yard and buffer regulations
1275.09   Distances between buildings and other uses
1275.10   Design regulations and standards
1275.11   Landscaping; natural environment
1275.12   Exterior lighting
Cross-reference:
   Administration, enforcement and penalty, see
Chapter 1262
   Classification of uses, see
Chapter 1266
   Districts generally and Zone Map, see
Chapter 1264
   Fences in B-5 Districts, see §
1312.07
   General provisions and definitions, see
Chapter 1260
   Human Services Department,  see
Chapter 258
   Nonconforming uses, see
Chapter 1282
   Off-street parking, see
Chapter 1284
§ 1275.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter.
   “Dwelling unit.” Means that portion of a building, suite of rooms or
efficiency unit used by the occupants as and for their kitchen area, dining
area, bedroom or recreation or study area, including clothes closets and other
similar uses. Basement rooms or spaces are excluded from this definition unless
the basement has one-half of its clear story height above the grade level of
the lot and is used as the first floor of the building in which it is included.
   “Persons of retirement age.” Means individuals who are 55 years of age or
older or persons under 55 years of age who are married to persons over that
age.
(Ord. 165-87, passed 2-16-1988)
§ 1275.02  PURPOSE AND INTENT.
   A Class B-5 Senior Citizen District and regulations therefor are hereby
established in order to achieve, among others, the following purposes:
   (A)   To provide appropriate developments of dwelling facilities for persons
of retirement age in locations convenient to city social and welfare facilities
and to shops, public transportation and other needs of the senior citizen;
   (B)   To provide in such development health, dining and recreational
facilities for the comfort and convenience of the occupants;
   (C)   To regulate the bulk, height and spacing of buildings within the
development in order to obtain proper light, air, privacy and open space for
passive recreation and landscaped amenities;
   (D)   To protect adjacent residential properties by requiring adequate yards
and screening; and
   (E)   To regulate the density of population within such Districts.
(Ord. 165-87, passed 2-16-1988)
§ 1275.03  PERMITTED USES.
   In a Class B-5 Senior Citizen District, land and buildings shall be used,
and buildings shall be designed, erected, altered or maintained, in whole or in
part, only for the following purposes:
   (A)   Any use or accessory use permitted and regulated in an A-1 Zoning
District; and
   (B)   A senior citizen center, which means a development or institution
providing dwelling facilities for three or more persons, principally of
retirement age, who are ambulatory and not dependent upon the services of
others and who are not related to the owner or operator. A senior citizen
center may include rest, nursing or other health facilities as set forth in
Ohio R.C. Chapter 3721, and shall include dining, recreational and other
related facilities and services.
      (1)   The following main uses shall be restricted primarily for occupants
and/or employees:
         (a)   Senior Citizen District buildings consisting of residential
units with full dining service and other support services provided within the
buildings; and
         (b)   Other attached or detached dwellings, such as row houses or
other attached or detached dwellings with access to full dining and support
services provided as a mandatory condition of residency.
      (2)   The following accessory uses shall be permitted:
         (a)   Health centers, recreation facilities and administrative offices
primarily for the use of residents of the Senior Citizen District;
         (b)   Dining facilities for residents of the District and their
guests;
         (c)   Private garages and parking areas, roads and walkways;
         (d)   Utility, maintenance, sanitation and storage facilities wholly
enclosed within separate buildings or otherwise permitted buildings, except
that maintenance and repair of trucks, tractors, automobiles and similar
vehicles shall not be permitted within residential buildings;
         (e)   Landscape features, private gardens, fences and walls;
         (f)   Rooftop mechanical equipment necessary for the normal operation
of the development;
         (g)   Signs, as regulated in
Chapter 1328; and
         (h)   Home occupations, as regulated in §
1268.02(J).
(Ord. 165-87, passed 2-16-1988)
§ 1275.04  SITE PLANNING CRITERIA.
   (A)   A Class B-5 Senior Citizen District project shall be designed
specifically for this purpose, incorporating necessary safety and convenience
features. In general, the site amenities provided shall be more attractive than
for multi-family projects since elderly people spend nearly all their time on
the site. The yards and passive recreation areas shall be extensive in quantity
and fully landscaped. There shall be a composition of small, intimate, private
yard and court areas for a variety of passive activities.
   (B)   Safety must be emphasized. Vehicular circulation drives shall
preferably be only at the perimeter of the project. Parking areas may penetrate
into the perimeter of the site. The interior of the site shall be assigned
completely to pedestrian use. Abrupt grades shall be avoided. All changes in
grade in the walk system shall be accomplished by ramps. All entrances to
buildings shall be approachable by ramps. There shall not be more than two
exterior steps to any building used by the occupants. All safety concerns shall
meet American National Standards Institute (ANSI) requirements.
(Ord. 165-87, passed 2-16-1988)
§ 1275.05  PRELIMINARY AND FINAL SITE DEVELOPMENT PLANS.
   Preliminary and final site plans shall be required for all purposed multi-
family developments in a Class B-5 Senior Citizen District, as follows.
   (A)   Preliminary Plans.
      (1)   Requirements.
         (a)   Survey. A survey of the property and topography, performed by a
registered surveyor, showing the land owned and proposed for development,
including descriptions of adjacent properties;
         (b)   Buildings. The locations, size, height and use of all main and
accessory buildings and their general design, color and exterior materials;
         (c)   Floor Plans. The floor plans for each proposed building, drawn
to scale and dimensioned, indicating the proposed uses and gross floor area of
each dwelling unit, other main uses and any accessory uses housed within a
building;
         (d)   Streets. The proposed pattern of vehicular circulation,
including estimated traffic volumes, service access and relationship to
existing streets;
         (e)   Utilities. Evidence of adequacy of all required utilities and
services;
         (f)   Parking. The general layout and estimate of spaces provided,
both open and enclosed; and
         (g)   Miscellaneous. Other site improvements, including the general
drainage pattern, the general landscape plan and the location and pavement type
of pedestrian walkways.
      (2)   Submittal.
         (a)   The presentation of preliminary plans shall be made concurrently
to the Building Department (to file an application for construction) and to the
Planning Commission.
         (b)   A nonreturnable application fee shall accompany the application
to the Building Department.
         (c)   The Planning Commission shall submit plans to the appropriate
departments within the city for their comments, i.e., Fire, Police and Public
Service Departments.
      (3)   Approval.
         (a)   If preliminary plans are not acceptable to both the Planning
Commission and Council, based on the requirements and intent of this chapter, a
revised preliminary plan may be submitted.
         (b)   If preliminary or revised preliminary plans are acceptable to
both the Planning Commission and Council with slight modification, final plans,
including such modification, may be submitted.
   (B)   Final Development Plans.
      (1)   Requirements.
         (a)   Site Plan. All items submitted for preliminary approval; with
modification as requested; 
         (b)   Utilities Plan. Detailed drawings of all required utilities,
including water, sewers and underground electric and telephone systems;
         (c)   Fire Protection Plan. Water mains, hydrants and other
appurtenances;
         (d)   Landscape Plan. Adequate design criteria with plants and
vegetation lists, including specifications, landscape and safety features; and 
         (e)   Miscellaneous. The construction schedule and disposition program
and any other information specifically required by the Planning Commission.
      (2)   Submittal.
         (a)   The presentation of final plans shall be made to the Planning
Commission.
         (b)   The Planning Commission shall submit plans to the appropriate
departments within the city for their comments, i.e., Fire, Police, Public
Service and Building Departments.
         (c)   When the development given preliminary approval is to be
constructed in two or more phases, final plans shall be submitted separately
for each phase prior to the scheduled construction.
      (3)   Approval.
         (a)   If final plans are not acceptable to both the Planning
Commission and Council, based upon the requirements and intent of this chapter,
revised final plans may be submitted.
         (b)   Only when final or revised final plans are acceptable to
Council, having first received the recommendation of the Planning Commission,
shall final approval be given.  If the Planning Commission recommends that said
final or revised final plans should not be accepted by Council, said plans
shall only be approved upon the concurrence of at least two-thirds of the
members of Council.
      (4)   Changes. At any time after the approval of a preliminary or final
development plan, the owner may request a change which shall be subject to the
same procedure and conditions of approval as the original application.
      (5)   Building and Occupancy Permits.
         (a)   No building permit for the improvement of a parcel or portion
thereof, or for the erection of any building, shall be issued for any building
or structure in the Senior Citizen District unless and until a final
development plan has been approved by Council in accordance with this section.
If and when any proposed final development plan has been approved, the Building
Commissioner shall then issue the necessary building and other permits upon
payment of the required fees and upon compliance with applicable codes.
         (b)   An occupancy permit shall be issued by the Building Commissioner
if the use qualifies under the various restrictions of this Zoning Code and the
inspections required have been made and the work approved.
         (c)   Occupancy permits shall not be granted until all required
improvements, including landscaping, are completed in compliance with this
Zoning Code.
         (d)   If weather conditions prevent completion of some minor
improvements (i.e., landscaping, paving and the like), a returnable deposit,
equal to the estimated cost of the improvement, shall be deposited with the
city to guarantee completion of the improvements when weather permits. 
         (e)   The development of the development area shall commence as
provided in §
1448.09 of the Building and Housing Code.
(Ord. 165-87, passed 2-16-1988; Ord. 92-97, passed 6-23-1997; Ord. 189-98,
passed 3-15-1999; Ord. 137-12, passed 9-17-2012)
§ 1275.06  AREA REGULATIONS.
   In a Class B-5 Senior Citizen District, land and structures shall be
developed and maintained in accordance with the following area regulations:
   (A)   Development Area. Ten acres minimum;
   (B)   Density.
      (1)   Senior Citizen District Buildings (SCDB). Fifteen dwelling units
per acre maximum with 40% efficiency units maximum per building; and
      (2)   Other Attached or Detached Dwellings (OAD). Ten dwelling units per
acre.
   (C)   Lot Width at Building Line. Two hundred fifty feet minimum;
   (D)   Lot Width at Street Line. Sixty feet minimum at each vehicular
entrance and along the length of each vehicular access through a yard;
   (E)   Building Coverage (All Main and Accessory Buildings). Twenty percent
for SCDB; 30% for OAD;
   (F)   Common Open Space. Five hundred square feet of lot area, minimum, per
dwelling unit as defined and regulated in §
1275.10 ;
   (G)   Dwelling Unit Area.
      (1)   SCDB. Four hundred square feet minimum floor area for an efficiency unit, 650
square feet minimum floor area for a one-bedroom unit and 800 square feet for a two
bedroom unit. An efficiency unit shall have not less than 400 square feet of
livable floor area, and shall include a full bath and kitchenette. Occupancy of
an efficiency unit shall not exceed one permanent resident, but shall not
prohibit an overnight or weekend guest; and
      (2)   OAD. One thousand square feet minimum for a one-bedroom unit and
1,150 square feet for a two-bedroom unit.
   (H)   Common Space.  A common living room and dining room to be shared by
the inhabitants. The area of the common living room shall be not less than 60
square feet per dwelling unit. The area of the dining room shall be not less
than 15 square feet per dwelling unit. The community and activity rooms,
library, kitchens, dispensary and/or any other rooms and areas shall be in
addition to the 75 square feet required per dwelling unit; and
   (I)   Storage Area.  Sixty cubic feet minimum per dwelling unit. This is in
addition to the actual storage area within the dwelling unit.
(Ord. 165-87, passed 2-16-1988)
§ 1275.07  HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   In a Class B-5 Senior Citizen District, structures shall be developed and
maintained in accordance with the following height regulations:
   (A)   Main Buildings.
      (1)   Senior Citizen District Buildings. Three stories maximum and not
exceeding 35 feet; and
      (2)   Other Attached or Detached Dwellings. Two and one-half stories
maximum and not exceeding 35 feet.
   (B)   Accessory Structures.
      (1)   Fences and Walls.  Eight feet maximum, except that fences enclosing
tennis courts shall not exceed 12 feet in height; and
      (2)   Other Accessory Structures. Twelve feet maximum for private parking
garages, 20 feet maximum for repair and storage garages and 35 feet maximum for
buildings housing health, recreation and dining facilities.
   (C)   Exceptions.  Roofing mechanical equipment as permitted in §
1275.03  may extend a maximum of ten feet above the highest point of the
building on which it is located, provided such equipment conforms to Planning
Commission standards. With the exception of chimneys and antennas on attached
single-family dwellings, such equipment shall be set back from any building
face a distance at least equal to the height by which is exceeds the building
height.
(Ord. 165-87, passed 2-16-1988; Ord. 137-12, passed 9-17-2012)
§ 1275.08  YARD AND BUFFER REGULATIONS.
   (A)   In a Class B-5 Senior Citizen District, land and structures shall be
developed and maintained in accordance with the following yard and buffer
regulations. Landscape features, gardens, fences, walls and signs shall be
permitted in required yard and buffer areas, provided that such uses conform to
applicable regulations of this Zoning Code. Other accessory uses are permitted
in required yards only in accordance with the buffer regulations of division
(C) hereof.
   (B)   The minimum yard depth from a lot line to a main building shall be as
follows:
 
Number of Stories To Street Right of To A-1 District  Line  To Lot Line (other
in Main Building  Way (ft.)          (ft.)                   than A-1) (ft.)
1                 80                 100                     50
2                 80                 100                     60
3                 100                100                     70
 
   (C)   The minimum distance from any Senior Citizen District building to
detached garage buildings, driveways, walks and recreation areas, and from such
accessory uses to lot lines, shall be determined by the following schedule:
 
Accessory Uses               Minimum Distance From  Minimum Distance From Lot
                             Residence Center (ft.) Line (ft.)
Detached garages and parking 25                     20
areas
Driveways                    30 (except at building 10
                             entrances)
Walks                        15                     10
Recreation areas (active     40                     20
play)
 
(Ord. 165-87, passed 2-16-1988)
§ 1275.09  DISTANCES BETWEEN BUILDINGS AND OTHER USES.
   In a Class B-5 Senior Citizen District, land and structures shall be
developed and maintained in accordance with the following regulations regarding
the required distances between buildings and other uses.
   (A)   Definitions and Measurement Standards. As used in this section:
      “Facing walls.” Means those two overlapping walls for which the length of
overlap is the greater. Although more than one set of walls may be overlapping
in relationship between two buildings, only one set of two walls shall be
considered facing.
      “Length of overlap.” Means the length of the portion of one wall from
which perpendicular lines will intersect a second wall. In determining the
length of overlap, the minimum possible overlap shall be used for computation.
      “Main wall.” Means any exterior wall of a residential building containing
principal windows of a living, dining or sleeping room.
      “Overlapping wall.” Means a wall of one building overlapping a wall of a
second building when perpendicular lines extended from the first wall intersect
the second wall.
      “Secondary wall.” Means any exterior wall of a residential building,
other than a main wall, containing minor windows of a dining or sleeping room,
principal or minor windows of a kitchen or bathroom or no windows.
   (B)   Schedule of Distances. The minimum distance between walls of main
buildings and other walls or uses shall be as set forth in the following
schedule:
 
Building Wall Other Wall or Use Minimum Distance (ft.)
Main wall, facing          Accessory building         30
                          Another main wall          40X
                          Private road **            30
                          Recreation facility        30
                          Secondary wall             30X
                          Surface parking area       10
Secondary wall, facing     Accessory building         20
                          Another secondary wall     25X
                          Private road **            20
                          Recreation facility        20
                          Surface parking area       10
Accessory building, facing Another accessory building 15
                          Private road **            10
X =   length of overlap divided by 5
**   A private road excludes a drive providing direct access to a Senior
Citizen District building or other attached or detached dwelling.
 
(Ord. 165-87, passed 2-16-1988)
§ 1275.10  DESIGN REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS.
   In a Class B-5 Senior Citizen District, land and structures shall be
developed and maintained in accordance with the following design regulations
and standards.
   (A)   Building Design.
      (1)   Senior Citizen District Buildings. The maximum length of a building
wall shall be 100 feet. However, building length may extend to a maximum of 300
feet, provided that walls are offset or aligned at angles as approved by the
Planning Commission.
      (2)   Other Attached or Detached Dwellings. In order to enhance privacy
and encourage attractive building arrangements, the alignment of other attached
or detached dwelling buildings should be varied and the facades of not more
than every two dwelling units shall be offset at least 16 inches. Not more than
eight units shall be located in one building.
      (3)   Generally. Attractive variations in such building elements as
facade, width, color, exterior materials and rooflines shall be desirable.
Parallel arrangements of buildings should be avoided. However, uniformity in
design is not expressly prohibited.
   (B)   Site Design. Senior Citizen District residential developments shall be
designed to complement the topography of the land in order to utilize natural
contours, economize in the construction of utilities, reduce required grading
and maximize the conservation of trees, watercourses and other distinctive
characteristics of the site. Such distinctive characteristics shall be
integrated into the plan to create functional variations in the arrangement of
residences, open spaces and accessory uses.
   (C)   Modifications to Area, Yard and Buffer Requirements. With respect
particularly to properties of irregular shape, unusual topography or limited
size, the Planning Commission, with the approval of Council, may modify
requirements regarding areas, yards, buffers and distances between uses if
compliance with such requirements is either clearly infeasible or contrary to
compliance with the design regulations set forth in this section.
   (D)   Common Open Space. As required in §
1275.06 (F), at least 500 square feet of land per dwelling unit shall be
reserved as common open space in Senior Citizen Districts.
      (1)   Required Characteristics. Land designated as common open space
under this section shall conform with the following characteristics:
         (a)   Common open space shall consist of land or a combination of land
and water of such condition, size and shape as to be usable for active
recreation and/or scenic enjoyment as appropriate to the site, the surrounding
area and the expected resident population. Such area shall contain no
structures, other than those related to recreational uses, and shall not
include roads or parking areas;
         (b)   Required yard and buffer areas shall be excluded in the
computation of common open space; and
         (c)   Consideration shall be given to the arrangement and location of
common open space to take advantage of physical characteristics of the site and
to place common open space with easy access and view of dwelling units. Common
open space shall not be separated from the development by existing roads.
      (2)   Ownership and Maintenance. Such common open space, including any
recreational facilities proposed to be constructed in such space, shall be
clearly delineated on the site plan, together with descriptive data as to the
methods to be employed to preserve and maintain such open space. All common
open space shown on the site plan must be subject to legally enforceable
reservations and restrictions, acceptable to the city government, which
reservations and restrictions will ensure the preservation of such land for
recreation and open space use in perpetuity and will absolutely prohibit
development of such land except for permitted recreational uses.
   (E)   Pedestrian Circulation. Each Senior Citizen District residential
development should be served by a comprehensive walkway system adequately
separated from recreation areas and health center buildings.
   (F)   Utility Equipment. All utility lines serving Senior Citizen District
residential developments shall be located underground. Rooftop mechanical
equipment shall be enclosed in a manner which complements the architectural
style of the building on which it is located.
   (G)   Swimming Pools. Any swimming pool in which water may collect to a
depth in excess of one and one-half feet shall be enclosed by a wall or fence
not less than five feet in height, with access provided from a controlled
point.
(Ord. 165-87, passed 2-16-1988; Ord. 137-12, passed 9-17-2012)
§ 1275.11  LANDSCAPING; NATURAL ENVIRONMENT.
   A minimum of 40% of a lot shall be landscaped. The development of any lot
shall be done in a manner so as to preserve natural assets, such as brooks,
valleys, trees and ravines, unless the lot is otherwise impossible to develop.
Recreation facilities shall be considered part of the landscaping.
(Ord. 165-87, passed 2-16-1988)
§ 1275.12  EXTERIOR LIGHTING.
   Exterior lighting shall be provided for the safety and convenience of
residents and their guests and employees, but shall not be of excessive
brightness and shall be placed in such a way so as not to cause annoying glare
or reflections on neighboring premises or public streets.
(Ord. 165-87, passed 2-16-1988)
CHAPTER 1276:  BUSINESS DISTRICTS
Section
1276.01   Purposes
1276.02   Permitted and conditionally permitted uses for C-1 Local Retail
Commercial Districts
1276.03   Permitted and conditionally permitted uses for C-2 General Commercial
Districts
1276.04   Permitted uses for C-3 Office Space Districts and C-6 Corridor
Conversion District
1276.05   C-1, C-2, C-3, and C-6 District area regulations
1276.06   C-1, C-2, C-3, and C-6 District yard regulations
1276.07   Height regulations
1276.08   Off-street parking requirements
1276.09   Supplemental regulations
1276.10   Site development plans
1276.11   Sign regulations
1276.12   Variances
Cross-reference:
   Administration, enforcement and penalty, see
Chapter 1262
   Class C-4 Districts, see
Chapter 1277
   Classification of uses, see
Chapter 1266
   Districts generally and Zone Map, see
Chapter 1264
   Fences in business districts, see §
1312.07
   General provisions and definitions, see
Chapter 1260
   Nonconforming uses, see
Chapter 1282
   Off-street parking, see
Chapter 1284
§ 1276.01  PURPOSES.
   Local Retail, General Commercial, Shopping Center, Office Space Districts,
and Corridor Conversion Districts, and their regulations are established herein
in order to achieve, among others, the following purposes.
   (A)   The purpose of such Districts is to provide, in appropriate and
convenient locations, zoning districts of sufficient size for the exchange of
goods and services and other business activities.
   (B)   The purpose of the C-1 Local Retail Commercial District is to provide
for the need to have convenience goods in close proximity to residential
neighborhoods. Typically, the permitted uses allowed in such District tend to
meet the daily needs of the residents of the adjacent neighborhoods without
generating large volumes of traffic.
   (C)   The purpose of the C-2 General Commercial District is to provide for
the need to allow certain commercial uses which either generate relatively high
traffic volumes, which require large land areas and/or which may not be
permitted elsewhere, in centrally-located areas of the city along major
arterial highways, provided they do not interfere with or detract from the
city’s residential neighborhoods. Typically, the permitted uses in this
District would draw people from a relatively large geographic area and thus
would serve a regional rather than just a local market.
   (D)   The purpose of the C-3 Office Space District is to provide areas
within the city devoted exclusively to professional services, banking and other
similar financial services, and the management of commercial, industrial,
public and semipublic institutions.
   (E)   The purpose of the C-6 District is to provide areas within the city
for similar uses and requirements as those listed in the C-3 District, with the
exception of special area and architectural design stipulations identified in
this chapter.
(Ord. 88-137, passed 9-6-1988; Ord. 195-12, passed 1-22-2013) 
§ 1276.02  PERMITTED AND CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES FOR C-1 LOCAL RETAIL
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in a C-1 Local Retail
Commercial District:
        (1)   A bank, studio or telephone exchange;
      (2)   A barber shop or a beauty shop;
      (3)   A confectionery, delicatessen or non-drive-through restaurant or
ice cream parlor;
      (4)   A dress, wearing apparel or tailor shop;
      (5)   A drug store or variety and dry goods store not to exceed 7,500
square feet;
      (6)   A flower shop, beverage store or gift shop;
      (7)   A grocery, including sales of fruit, vegetables, meat, fish, dairy
products or baked goods, not being displayed outdoors, not to exceed 7,500
square feet;
      (8)   A hardware, paint, wallpaper, furniture, household appliance or
accessory store;
      (9)   A pressing and dry cleaning shop, except that no person shall
perform any dry cleaning, whether of a commercial or private nature, using more
than five gallons of low-hazard dry cleaning fluids;
      (10)   A retail store not to exceed 7,500 square feet;
      (11)   A sales office, job printing shop or newspaper printing shop;
      (12)   A shoe store or shoe repair shop;
      (13)   A child or adult day-care center fully licensed pursuant to law;
and
      (14)   Any other business of a similar nature, approved by the Planning
Commission and confirmed by Council in accordance with §
1262.06.
   (B)   Conditionally Permitted Uses. The Planning Commission may issue
conditional zoning certificates for the following uses, subject to the general
requirements of
Chapter 1328  and Chapters
1262  and
1284 :
        (1)   A gasoline service station, car wash or garage for the storage
and/or repair of motor vehicles, provided that:
         (a)   Only minor repairs are permitted outside the building and such
repairs must be completed within 24 hours;
         (b)   Curb cuts for entrances and exits shall be approved by the
Planning Commission;
         (c)   No repairs shall be made to fenders, bodies or frames and no
other work shall be done that produces odor, smoke, fumes or noise that cannot
be confined to the premises;
         (d)   No pump shall be located less than 20 feet from any pedestrian
sidewalk; and
         (e)   The storage of vehicles shall not exceed 30 days.
      (2)   Office buildings other than for those offices permitted in division
(A) hereof; and
      (3)   Drive-through and fast food restaurants, provided that they are
located at least 350 feet away from an abutting residential dwelling or a
school, church, synagogue, other place of worship, hospital, nursing home or
other fast food establishment, and provided further, that indoor eating
facilities must be provided. 
(Ord. 88-137, passed 9-6-1988; Ord. 44-96, passed 6-3-1996; Ord. 195-12, passed
1-22-2013)
§ 1276.03  PERMITTED AND CONDITIONALLY PERMITTED USES FOR C-2 GENERAL
COMMERCIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Permitted Uses. The following uses are permitted in a C-2 General
Commercial District:
      (1)   Stores, services and other use classifications permitted in the
Local Retail Commercial District, provided that the maximum permissible area
(square footage dimension) for grocery stores and retail stores shall be
increased from 7,500 square feet to 20,000 square feet;
      (2)   Department and variety stores;
      (3)   Amusement and recreational services, such as assembly and meeting
halls, billiard halls, bowling alleys, dance halls, indoor theaters, ice and
roller skating rinks and other social, athletic, fraternal, sport or
recreational establishments, provided they are conducted within an enclosed
building and sufficiently sound insulated to confine the noise to the premises;
      (4)   Miniature golf courses;
      (5)   Office buildings;
      (6)   Veterinary clinics; and
      (7)   Any other general business store, shop or service not listed in
divisions (A)(1) to (A)(6) hereof or in any subsequent use classification and
determined as similar by the Planning Commission and Council in accordance with
§
1262.06.
   (B)   Conditionally Permitted Uses. The Planning Commission may issue
conditional zoning certificates for the following uses, subject to the general
requirements of
Chapter 1328  and Chapters
1262  and
1284 :
      (1)   Sales, service and storage of bicycles, outdoor garden equipment,
boats, campers and trailers, provided such sales, service and storage are
conducted wholly within enclosed buildings;
      (2)   Sales, service and storage of new automobiles and other new motor
vehicles, and sales, service and storage of used motor vehicles, but only if
sold in conjunction with a new motor vehicle sales, service and storage
facility, provided the following conditions are met:
         (a)   Firms must certify that they are an authorized franchised car
dealer for an auto manufacturer and must have filed with the Bureau of Motor
Vehicles a manufacture statement;
         (b)   The front yard is landscaped and maintained attractively;
         (c)   All vehicles and advertising are located behind the minimum
front yard setback; and
         (d)   All service work is conducted wholly within enclosed buildings.
      (3)   Nursery stock sales; and
      (4)   Drive-through and fast food restaurants, provided that they are
located at least 350 feet away from an abutting residential dwelling or a
school, church, synagogue, other place of worship, hospital, nursing home or
another fast food establishment, and provided further, that indoor eating
facilities must be provided.
(Ord. 88-137, passed 9-6-1988; Ord. 91-94, passed 8-22-1994; Ord. 195-12,
passed 1-22-2013)
§ 1276.04  PERMITTED USES FOR C-3 OFFICE SPACE DISTRICTS AND C-6 CORRIDOR
CONVERSION DISTRICT.
   (A)   Principal Uses. The following uses are permitted in a C-3 Office Space
District:
      (1)   Administrative, executive, financial, insurance, governmental and
professional offices, banks, saving and loan associations, medical offices,
including clinics, and public utility and real estate offices;
      (2)   Sales offices, provided that no goods are distributed or dispensed
from the property;
      (3)   A child or adult day-care center fully licensed pursuant to law;
and
      (4)   Any other type of office not listed in divisions (A)(1), (A)(2) or
(A)(3) hereof and determined to be similar by the Planning Commission and
confirmed by Council in accordance with §
1262.06.
   (B)   Conditionally Permitted Uses. All uses listed in division (A) hereof
for the C-6 Corridor Conversion District are conditionally permitted uses that
must be approved by the Planning Commission.
   (C)   Accessory Uses. Any accessory use which is incidental to the main use
shall be permitted, provided it is planned and developed in conjunction with
the main building, such as:
      (1)   Off-street parking and loading areas in accordance with
Chapter 1284;
      (2)   Pharmacies, which may be included as part of a medical building or
clinic;
      (3)   Employee lunch rooms;
      (4)   Maintenance, storage and trash facilities if provided within the
main building;
      (5)   Restaurants, provided that they do not exceed 10% of the gross
floor area of the buildings, (except in the C-6 Corridor Conversion District);
restaurants are not permitted; and
      (6)   Other uses which are developed integrally and are essential to the
successful operation of any of the permitted principal uses in division (A)
hereof and conditionally permitted in the C-6 Corridor Conversion District.
(Ord. 88-137, passed 9-6-1988; Ord. 44-96, passed 6-3-1996; Ord. 195-12, passed
1-22-2013)
§ 1276.05  C-1, C-2, C-3 AND C-6 DISTRICT AREA REGULATIONS.
   In all C-1, C-2, C-3 and C-6 Districts, buildings and land shall be used,
and buildings shall be designated, erected, altered, moved and maintained, in
whole or in part, only in accordance with the following schedule:
 
Schedule of Minimum Lot Area and Width Requirements
Main Use          District           Lot Area                 Lot Width (ft.)
Automotive Sales  General Commercial 2 acres                  250
Boat, camper and
trailer sales and General Commercial 2 acres                  250
services
Office buildings  Office Space       1 acre (a)               150
Offices and banks Local Retail       30,000 sq. ft. (a)       150
                  General Commercial
Restaurants       Local Retail       1 acre                   150
                  General Commercial
Service stations  Local Retail
and auto-related  General Commercial 1 acre                   150
facilities
All other retail  Local Retail and   30,000 sq. ft.           150
and services uses General Commercial 30,000 sq. ft.    (a) 150
Footnote: (a) Minimum lot area for all facilities in the C-6 Corridor
Conversion District shall be two acres.
 
(Ord. 88-137, passed 9-6-1988; Ord. 195-12, passed 1-22-2013)
§ 1276.06  C-1, C-2, C-3 AND C-6 DISTRICT YARD REGULATIONS.
   (A)   In all C-1, C-2, C-3 and C-6 Districts, buildings shall be designed,
erected, altered, moved or maintained in whole or in part, only in accordance
with the following schedule of regulations or as allowed in division (B)
hereof:
 
Schedule of Minimum Yard and Setback Dimensions
                   Front     Side Yard Setback (Ft.)    Rear Yard Setback
                   Yard
         Main and  Setback
         Accessory (Distance Abutting    Abutting       Abutting    Abutting
District Building  from      Residential Nonresidential Residential Nonresidential
         and Use   Street    District    District       District    District
                   Right-of-
                   way (Ft.)
                   e.
                                           None,
           Office,                         except 25
           stores and 50 e.      100 d.    where       100 d.      25
           services                        adjoining a
C-1 Local                                  public
Retail                                     street
           Sales in   Not        Not       Not allowed Not allowed Not allowed
           open yards allowed    allowed
           Parking
           areas and  20 e.      50 d.     5           50 d.       5
           drives
           Offices,
           stores,                         None, or
           services,  80 e.      100 b. d. minimum 10  100 b. d.   25
           amusements                      between
C-         and                             bldgs.
2 General  recreation
Commercial Service    75 e.      100 b. d. 25          100 b. d.   25
           stations
           Sales in   20 e.      50 d.     5           50 d.       5
           open yards
           Parking    20 e.      50 d.     5           50 d.       5
           drives
C-3        Offices    150 from   100 d.    15 a.       100 d.      15 a.
                      centerline
                      50 from
C-6        Offices    right- of- 100 d.    15 a.       100 d.      15 a.
                      way
a.   Or at least one-half the height of the main building, whichever is
greater
b.   Or two times the building height, whichever is greater
c.   No parking shall be permitted within five feet of a building
d.   An appropriate landscape visual barrier shall be provided
e.   Along Royalton Road, the minimum setback for all such Districts shall be
110 feet from centerline for building and 80 feet for parking.
 
   (B)   When two or more parcels of land which have different owners are
proposed to be developed jointly, any common side and rear yard setback may be
reduced when a development plan for all parcels in the joint development is
approved by the Planning Commission as a conditional use in accordance with §
1262.06. A zero setback may be considered, in which case two or more buildings
on separate parcels, either built simultaneously or at different times, would
abut each other. In establishing the reduced setback,  the Planning Commission
shall consider the impact of any reduction on the arrangement of buildings,
parking, site access and circulation, landscaping, property maintenance and the
overall quality and marketability of the proposed development. To consider a
parcel of land in a joint development, the Planning Commission must have
written authorization from each property owner stating that the development
proposal on each parcel may be considered as part of the joint development.
   (C)   All main structures located in the C-6 Corridor Conversion District
shall have a minimum main floor area (grade level) of 5,000 square feet per
building.
   (D)   Any existing residence converted to a commercial office building,
financial institution, sales office, or day-care in a C-6 District, must be
renovated to eliminate the front facade residential appearance as determined by
the Planning Commission. The developer is encouraged to raze any/all existing
structures prior to re-development. Any re-use of an existing single-family
residential use must have the conversion of the structure and the new use
approved as a conditionally permitted use by the Planning Commission.
   (E)   Refer to Special Planning District Zoning §
1283.06 for building design guidelines that apply to C-6 District.
(Ord. 88-137, passed 9-6-1988; Ord. 195-12, passed 1-22-2013)
§ 1276.07  HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   The height of any main or accessory building in the C-1 Local Retail
Commercial District and the C-2 General Commercial District shall not exceed 35
feet, and the height of a building in the C-3 Office District and C-6 Corridor
Conversion District shall not exceed four stories or 50 feet, excluding roof
pitch.
(Ord. 125-90, passed 8-20-1990; Ord. 69-00, passed 5-8-2000; Ord. 195-12,
passed 1-22-2013)
 
§ 1276.08  OFF-STREET PARKING REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   For a C-1 Local Retail Commercial District and a C-2 General
Commercial District, off-street parking shall be required as provided in
Chapter 1284.
   (B)   Access driveways shall not be closer than 60 feet between
centerlines.  The centerline of a driveway on a corner lot shall not be closer
than 75 feet to the intersection right-of-way line.  This width of driveways
shall conform to the schedule set forth in §
1276.06.
(Ord. 88-137, passed 9-6-1988; Ord. 69-00, passed 5-8-2000; Ord. 16-10, passed
2-1-2010; Ord. 195-12, passed 1-22-2013)
§ 1276.09  SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS.
   In Local Retail Commercial, General Commercial, Office Space Districts, and
Corridor Conversion Districts, the following supplemental regulations must also
be met.
   (A)   Conformity to Site Plan. All buildings and grounds shall be designed,
constructed and maintained as approved in the site development plan. All
landscaping, sidewalks, pedestrian plazas, parking areas and building exteriors
shall be maintained free of any unsafe, unsightly or blighting conditions which
deteriorate the appearance, character, safety or value of the city or
surrounding area.
   (B)   Outdoor Storage. All outdoor storage, including refuse, shall be
screened from view from the street and from all adjacent properties.
   (C)   Outdoor Sales. Outdoor sales shall not be permitted.
   (D)   Landscaped Strip. All commercial sites shall maintain a 20-foot
landscaped strip adjacent to the street right-of-way lines and a five-foot
landscaped strip adjacent to all side and rear lot lines, except as permitted
under §
1276.06 (B).
   (E)   Screening and Buffering Next to Residential Districts. All side and
rear yards adjoining residential districts shall be planted with a screen of
evergreen and deciduous trees or shrubs to create a year-round visual barrier.
Where deemed necessary, the Planning Commission may require other planting and/
or earth mounds or fences to supplement the landscaping requirements for
commercial sites that adjoin residential districts.
   (F)   Minimum Landscaped Areas. A minimum of 20% of the total land area
shall be landscaped. The area required to be landscaped shall be placed within
six months from the date of issuance of a certificate of occupancy, and
thereafter such landscaped area shall be reasonably maintained with permanent
plants and materials. All landscaping plans shall be reviewed and subject to
final approval by the Planning Commissions.
   (G)   Utilities. All utilities serving the buildings and site, including
electric and telephone and all supporting equipment thereto, including meters,
transformers, and the like, shall be placed underground or within the main
building. Where meters, transformers or other equipment cannot be located
within the main building, no such equipment shall be visible from any front,
side or rear lot line.
   (H)   Off-Street Parking. All off-street parking areas, including parking
garages, shall be designed and constructed so as to provide safe, efficient and
visually appealing parking facilities. Entrances, aisles and spaces shall be
clearly controlled, marked, channeled and separated. Ends of aisles and drives
shall be controlled with concrete curbs and landscape islands.
   (I)   Pedestrian Access. Pedestrian access from the parking area to the
building entrance shall be provided and accessible per ADA guidelines.
   (J)   Usage. Buildings and land shall be used, and buildings shall be
designed, erected, altered, moved or maintained, in whole or in part, in the C-
1, C-2, C-3 and C-6 Districts, only for the main or accessory uses set forth in
the schedules and regulations of this chapter for the respective district in
which the building and land are located.
   (K)   Conversion. A building designed and constructed as a residence cannot
be occupied, in whole or in part, by another use, unless the entire building is
redesigned or reconstructed to express and serve the proposed use in regard to
the exterior design, the building plan and the site plan, and must be made to
conform to all requirements of the Building Code and this Zoning Code regarding
commercial structures. Refer to §
1276.08 (B) for C-6 District.
   (L)   Corner Lots. On a corner lot or other parcel where a side lot line or
rear lot line is along a public street, a side or rear yard of not less than 50
feet shall be provided.
   (M)   Lighting. Floodlighting or other lighting of buildings, signs and
parking areas shall be located and designed so as to shield the light source
from adjoining residences and shall be of a constant intensity. In addition, in
no event shall any lighting be placed or directed so as to permit the beams and
illumination therefrom to be directed or beamed upon a public thoroughfare so
as to cause glare or reflection that may constitute a traffic hazard or
nuisance.
   (N)   Location of Entrances and Exits. Entrances and exits shall be located
to minimize traffic congestion and avoid undue interference with pedestrian
access to street corners. There shall not be more than two access ways from any
one property to a public highway for 400 feet of street frontage, nor more than
one access way if the frontage is less than 150 feet. There shall be no
entrances or exits within 60 feet of any residential district. If the property
frontages are on two or more streets, the driveways shall be located as far
from the street intersection as practicable, and no driveway shall be located
within 75 feet of street intersections as measured from the right-of-way line.
Access ways shall be not less than 18 feet nor more than 36 feet in width at
the property line. Access lanes shall be provided as deemed necessary for fire
and emergency vehicles.
   (O)   Adult Entertainment Businesses.  Notwithstanding anything contained in
this chapter to the contrary, no person shall cause or permit the establishment
of an adult entertainment business within one mile of a public or private
school, preschool or day-care center, or within 1,000 feet of any residential
zoning district, residential dwelling, church or park, nor within 1,000 feet of
the C-6 Corridor Conversion District.  For purposes of this division, distances
shall be measured in a straight line without regard to intervening structures
or objects, from the nearest portion of the building within which the adult
entertainment business is located to the nearest residential district boundary
lines, or to the nearest property lines of the premises of a public or private
school, preschool or day-care center or residential zone, residential dwelling,
church or park.
(Ord. 88-137, passed 9-6-1988; Ord. 29-93, passed 6-7-1993; Ord. 125-98, passed
7-27-1998; Ord. 69-00, passed 5-8-2000; Ord. 137-12, passed 9-17-2012; Ord.
195-12, passed 1-22-2013)
§ 1276.10  SITE DEVELOPMENT PLANS.
   (A)   Required. Site development plans for all proposed commercial sites,
and for all exterior modifications to existing commercial sites, in C-1, C-2,
C-3 and C-6 Districts, shall be required as set forth in this section.
   (B)   Submission and Content. The overall site plan shall be submitted to
the Planning Commission for its review and recommendation to Council for its
final approval. The site development plan shall be drawn to a scale of not less
than one inch equals 100 feet and shall include the following items:
      (1)   Survey. A survey of the property and topography, showing the land
owned and proposed for development;
      (2)   Buildings. The locations, size, height and use of all main and
accessory buildings;
      (3)   Traffic. The proposed system of circulation of vehicular traffic,
including delivery trucks; details for connections to present streets; type of
pavements; estimates of traffic volumes; and plans for control of traffic in
and around the commercial site;
      (4)   Utilities. The plans for all utility installations and connections
and estimated requirements;
      (5)   Parking Areas. A layout and estimate of the number of spaces,
design features, type of pavement and location and type of lighting fixtures;
      (6)   Miscellaneous. Other site developments, including pedestrian
walkways, grading and drainage, and designs of landscaped yards, planting areas
and strips adjoining residential areas;
      (7)   Signs. The size, location and nature of outdoor signs, approved by
the Planning Commission; and
      (8)   Improvements. The grading, drainage and site improvements, approved
by the City Engineer prior to final approval by the Planning Commission. The
construction of all site improvements shall be inspected by the City Engineer.
All of the costs for reviews, approvals and inspections shall be paid for by
the developer.
   (C)   Approval.
      (1)   If the site development plan is not acceptable to both the Planning
Commission and Council, based upon the requirements and intent of this section,
a revised site development plan may be submitted.
      (2)   Only when final or revised final plans are acceptable to Council,
having first received the recommendation of the Planning Commission, shall
final approval be given.  If the Planning Commission recommends that said final
or revised final plans should not be accepted by Council, said plans shall only
be approved upon the concurrence of at least two-thirds of the members of
Council.
   (D)   Changes to Plan. At any time after the approval of a site development
plan, the owner may request a change, which request shall be subject to the
same procedures and conditions of approval as the original application.
   (E)   Building and Occupancy Permits.
      (1)   No building permit for the improvement of a parcel or portion
thereof, or for the erection of any building, shall be issued for any building
or structure in a business district unless and until a site development plan
has been approved by the Planning Commission and Council in accordance with
this section. If and when any proposed site development plan has been approved,
the Building Commissioner shall then issue the necessary building and other
permits upon payment of the required fees and compliance with applicable
codes.         
      (2)   An occupancy permit shall be issued by the Building Commissioner,
provided that the use, placement and dimensions of all buildings, exterior
lighting fixtures, driveways, sidewalks, parking areas and curb cuts, and the
installation of landscaping, fences and walks, conform to the site development
plan approved by both the Planning Commission and Council.
   (F)   Time Limitation for Construction. The development of the development
area shall commence as provided in §
1448.09  of the Building and Housing Code.
(Ord. 88-137, passed 9-6-1988; Ord. 92-97, passed 6-23-1997; Ord. 69-00, passed
5-8-2000; Ord. 137-12, passed 9-17-2012; Ord. 195-12, passed 1-22-2013)
§ 1276.11  SIGN REGULATIONS.
   Signs for all business districts shall be designed, erected, altered, moved
or maintained, in whole or in part, in accordance with
Chapter 1328 and this chapter. 
(Ord. 88-137, passed 9-6-1988; Ord. 195-12, passed 1-22-2013)
§ 1276.12  VARIANCES.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals, with the recommendation of the Planning
Commission, may vary or permit exceptions to any of the provisions of this
chapter if it finds that such variance or exception will not violate the spirit
or intent of this chapter and that a more harmonious and useful development
will result.
(Ord. 88-137, passed 9-6-1988; Ord. 195-12, passed 1-22-2013)
CHAPTER 1277:  C-4 SHOPPING CENTER DISTRICT
Section
1277.01   Purposes
1277.02   Permitted uses
1277.03   Permitted accessory uses
1277.04   Minimum lot area
1277.05   Landscaping
1277.06   Yard and setback regulations
1277.07   Minimum and maximum height and size of buildings
1277.08   Off-street parking
1277.09   Signs
1277.10   Site development plans; review and approval
1277.11   Supplemental regulations
1277.12   Variances
Cross-reference:
   Administration, enforcement and penalty, see
Chapter 1262
   Class C-1, C-2 and C-3 Districts, see
Chapter 1276
   Classification of uses, see
Chapter 1266
   Districts generally and Zone Map, see
Chapter 1264
   General provisions and definitions, see
Chapter 1260
   Nonconforming uses, see
Chapter 1282
   Off-street parking, see
Chapter 1284
   Subdivision procedures, see
Chapter 1244
§ 1277.01  PURPOSES.
   The purpose of the C-4 Shopping Center District is to encourage the
development of planned, integrated shopping centers within the city, and to
regulate the provision of shopping center uses so as to not detract from the
value, health and safety of existing residential neighborhoods. C-4 Shopping
Center Districts shall be located on arterial thoroughfares, consistent with
the city’s overall development plan and the Downtown Master Plan.
(Ord. 126-98, passed 6-15-1998; Ord. 69-00, passed 5-8-2000; Ord. 142-02,
passed 10-7-2002)
§ 1277.02  PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses are permitted in a C-4 Shopping Center District:
   (A)   The uses enumerated for Class C-1 and Class C-2 Districts, provided
that such uses shall be grouped as a shopping center serving the ordinary needs
of the community, with off-street parking facilities in accordance with Chapter
1284, and further provided that the maximum permissible area (square footage
dimension) for grocery and/or retail stores shall be 60,000 square feet;
   (B)   Theaters and moving picture shows;
   (C)   Offices;
   (D)   Department and variety stores;
   (E)   Office park development, when permitted, meeting the requirements for
the C-3 Office Space District, except that yard regulations must meet C-
4 District requirements; and
   (F)   Outbuildings, when permitted, of a similar architectural design as the
main buildings as permitted in divisions (A) through (F) above.
(Ord. 69-00, passed 5-8-2000; Ord. 142-02, passed 10-7-2002)
§ 1277.03  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   The following uses are permitted: residential dwelling units when located
above a permitted principal use, provided that the minimum size of each
residential dwelling unit shall be not less than as governed by the
requirements of §
1271.11.
(Ord. 142-02, passed 10-7-2002)
§ 1277.04  MINIMUM LOT AREA.
   (A)   The minimum lot area for a shopping center development in the C-
4 Shopping Center District is five acres except as follows:
      (1)   It shall be a minimum of 23 acres at the southwest corner of
Broadview and Royalton Roads;
      (2)   It shall be a minimum of 14 acres at the northwest corner of
Broadview and Royalton Roads;
      (3)   It shall be a minimum of 13 acres at the southeast corner of
Broadview and Royalton Roads; and
      (4)   It shall be a minimum of eight acres at the northeast corner of
Broadview and Royalton Roads.
   (B)   A shopping center development may be established upon a tract of land
in single ownership or under unified control, provided that a site development
plan for a planned business center has been prepared, submitted and approved in
accordance with this chapter.
   (C)   An office park development shall be a minimum of three acres in areas
except as follows:
      (1)   It shall be a minimum of 23 acres at the southwest corner of
Broadview and Royalton Roads;
      (2)   It shall be a minimum of 14 acres at the northwest corner of
Broadview and Royalton Roads;
      (3)   It shall be a minimum of 13 acres at the southeast corner of
Broadview and Royalton Roads; and
      (4)   It shall be a minimum of eight acres at the northeast corner of
Broadview and Royalton Roads.
(Ord. 97-00, passed 7-24-2000; Ord. 142-02, passed 10-7-2002)
§ 1277.05  LANDSCAPING.
   A minimum of 20% of the total land area within the development shall be
landscaped. The area required to be landscaped shall be planted in a time frame
as set forth in the developer’s agreement, and thereafter such landscaped area
shall be maintained with permanent plants and materials in accordance with the
approved landscaping plan. The Planning Commission may, at its discretion,
lower the percentage of landscaping to no less than 15% if the landscaped areas
are grouped to provide an open usable public area within the shopping center
development consistent with the City’s Downtown Development Plan. In addition
to the above landscaping requirement, any development at the intersection of
Royalton and Broadview Roads shall contain a least one-half acre of usable
public area (green space) placed directly at the corner of the two intersecting
roads. Details of said “usable public area” shall be spelled out in the
developer’s agreement. All landscaped areas shall be underground irrigation
that is automatically operated. All such landscaping plans shall be reviewed
and subject to final approval by the Planning Commission and Council and shall
be consistent with the following regulations.
   (A)   Screening and Buffering Next to Residential Districts. All side and
rear yards adjoining residential districts shall be provided with a year-round
visual or barrier composed of evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs. Where
deemed necessary, the Planning Commission may require other planting or earth
mounds or fences to supplement natural elements required by this Code of
Ordinances in order to achieve a sufficient screening effect.
   (B)   Landscaped Strip to Screen Front Parking. 
      (1)   No parking may be situated in a required front yard. Where
sufficient space exists to provide off-street parking between the front setback
line and the main building, such commercial sites shall provide and maintain a
20-foot irrigated landscaped strip adjacent to the street right-of-way lines,
except for required vehicular and pedestrian accessways.
      (2)   Exception: along Broadview Road.
   (C)   Utilities.  All utilities serving the buildings and site of a shopping
center development, including electric and telephone installations and all
supporting equipment thereto, shall be placed underground or within main
buildings on the site. Where such supporting equipment cannot be located within
a main building, no such equipment shall be visible from any front, side or
rear lot line. All pole lighting shall be of a Western Reserve style and design
as determined by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 69-00, passed 5-8-2000; Ord. 142-02, passed 10-7-2002; Ord. 137-12,
passed 9-17-2012; Ord. 12-14, passed 4-21-2014)
§ 1277.06  YARD AND SETBACK REGULATIONS.
   The following minimum yard and setback requirements shall be provided for
shopping center developments in the C-4 Zoning District:
   (A)   Main Buildings.
         (1)   Front Yard Setback.
         (a)   From right-of-way except from Broadview Road: 25 ft.; and
         (b)   From Broadview Road: 0 ft.
      (2)   Side Yard Setback.
         (a)   Abutting residential district:100 ft.; and
         (b)   Abutting nonresidential district: 50 ft.
      (3)   Rear Yard Setback.
         (a)   Abutting residential district: 100 ft.; and
         (b)   Abutting nonresidential district: 50 ft.
   (B)   Parking Areas and Drives.
      (1)   Front Yard Setback.
         (a)   From right-of-way except from Broadview Road: 25 ft.; and
         (b)   From Broadview Road: 0 ft.
      (2)   Side Yard Setback.
         (a)   Abutting residential district: 75 ft.; and
         (b)   Abutting nonresidential district: 10 ft.
      (3)   Rear Yard Setback.
         (a)   Abutting residential district: 75 ft.; and
         (b)   Abutting nonresidential district: 10 ft.
(Ord. 69-00, passed 5-8-2000; Ord. 142-02, passed 10-7-2002)
§ 1277.07  MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM HEIGHT AND SIZE OF BUILDINGS.
   The minimum height of any main building (as permitted in § 1277.02(A)
through (F)) in the C-4 Shopping Center District, shall not be less than one
and one-half stories of leasable floor space from the finished grade. However,
50% of the main buildings shall be not less than two stories in height of
leasable floor space. The height of any main or accessory building in the C-
4 Shopping Center District shall not exceed four stories or 50 feet, excluding
roof pitch, from the finished grade. The maximum permissible area of any single
tenant/user’s grocery and/or retail store(s) shall not exceed 60,000 square
feet of gross area.
(Ord. 69-00, passed 5-8-2000; Ord. 142-02, passed 10-7-2002)
§ 1277.08  OFF-STREET PARKING.
   Vehicular and pedestrian access to such off-street parking areas shall be in
conformity with Chapter 1284 and shall be provided and maintained as approved
by the Planning Commission. Lighting and location of entrances and exits shall
be provided as required by §
1276.08 and §
1277.05(C). No loading spaces shall be located in a required side or front
yard.
(Ord. 69-00, passed 5-8-2000; Ord. 142-02, passed 10-7-2002; Ord. 15-10, passed
2-1-2010)
§ 1277.09  SIGNS.
   The size, location and nature of outdoor signs, including the manner of
illumination in accordance with
Chapter 1328 (formerly Chapter 1479), shall be provided as approved in the
shopping center development plan as reviewed by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 69-00, passed 5-8-2000; Ord. 142-02, passed 10-7-2002; Ord. 137-12,
passed 9-17-2012)
§ 1277.10  SITE DEVELOPMENT PLANS; REVIEW AND APPROVAL.
   (A)   Preliminary Plan; Information Required. Site development plans for all
proposed commercial sites, and for all exterior modifications to existing
commercial sites in C-4 Shopping Center Districts, shall be required as set
forth in this section. The overall site plan shall be submitted to the Planning
Commission for its review and recommendation to Council for its final approval.
The site development plan shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one inch
equals 100 feet and shall include the following:
      (1)   Survey. A survey of the property and topography, showing the land
owned and proposed for development;
      (2)   Buildings. The locations, size, height and use of all main and
accessory buildings proposed to be situated on the lot;
      (3)   Traffic. The proposed system of circulation of vehicular traffic,
including delivery trucks; details for connections to present streets; plans
for assuring pedestrian access to and around the buildings; type of pavements;
estimates of vehicular traffic volumes; and plans for control of traffic in and
around the commercial site;
      (4)   Utilities. The plans for all utility installations and connections
and estimated requirements;
      (5)   Parking Areas. A layout and estimate of the number of parking
spaces, loading areas, design features, type of pavement, location and type of
lighting fixtures, and proposed location of on-site drainage ways and storm
water retention facilities for the development;
      (6)   Loop Road for Any Development at the Southwest Corner of Broadview
and Royalton Roads.  The plans for a street located at the westerly and
southerly property boundaries shall conform to the requirements of Chapter
1248, and shall indicate any and all traffic signals deemed necessary by the
city; and
      (7)   Miscellaneous Requirements. Other site developments proposed for
the project, including a detailed landscaping plan, including planting areas,
proposed berms and barriers, and strips adjoining residential areas, and
loading and trash collection areas, and the siting of proposed outdoor approved
by the Planning Commission. All grading, drainage, paving and site improvement
plans shall be inspected by the City Engineer. All of the costs for reviews,
approvals and inspections shall be paid for by the developer.
   (B)   Additional Information Required.  In addition to the site development
plan, the developer shall submit the following additional information in
support of the application:
      (1)   A market analysis summary, including identification of the trade
area of the proposed shopping center; trade area population, present and
future; and net potential customer buying power for stores in the proposed
shopping center;
      (2)   A financial report shall satisfy the Planning Commission as the
financial responsibility of the proponent to carry the proposal to completion
in full compliance with this chapter, including the source of construction
funds, and information on leasing arrangements;
      (3)   A traffic study, which shall include an estimate of traffic volumes
to be generated by the development and the assignment of traffic to proposed
entrances and exits;
      (4)   Time schedule; and
      (5)   Substantiation of ownership, which shall include a certification of
a title company that the record owners of the property, as represented on the
application for the shopping center development, are correct.
   (C)   Review by City Departments; Action by Council.  Upon receipt of a
preliminary site development plan with supporting data for the development of a
shopping center, the Secretary of the Planning Commission shall transmit a copy
thereof to the appropriate departments within the city for their review,
reports and recommendations. The appropriate city departments  shall, within 30
days from receiving the preliminary site development plan and supporting data,
provide and furnish to the Planning Commission their reports.
      (1)   Conditions.  The Planning Commission may stipulate conditions on
the shopping center development, or any portions of the shopping center
development that may be in the public interests in a developer’s agreement that
is acceptable, in form, to the City Law Director and approved by Council.
      (2)   Reports to Council. Within 60 days, unless extended for good
cause,  after a preliminary site development has been filed with the Secretary,
the Planning Commission shall evaluate the plans and reports of the appropriate
city departments and shall furnish to Council its detailed report and
recommendations, in writing, with respect thereto. The report of the Planning
Commission shall include a finding either that the preliminary site plan and
supporting data comply with regulations, standards and criteria prescribed in
this chapter for planning shopping centers applicable to the proposal, or a
finding of failure of such compliance, and the Commission’s action that the
preliminary site plan is approved, disapproved or modified. If in any such
evaluation the Planning Commission finds that any regulations, standards or
criteria prescribed by this chapter are inapplicable because of the unusual
conditions related to the shopping center or to the nature and quality of the
proposed design, it may recommend to Council that an adjustment will not be in
conflict with the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare of
the city.
      (3)   Action by Council. Council, at not later than its next regular
meeting following receipt of the Planning Commission report, shall set a date
for a public hearing on the preliminary site development plan, which hearing
date shall be published in the local newspapers. Following the completion of
such public hearing, and review of any public input, Council shall then proceed
to act upon the preliminary development plan.
   (D)   Final Plan; Information Required; Action by Council.  Following
affirmative action of the preliminary site development plan by Council, the
Secretary of the Planning Commission shall notify the developer of such action
and authorize him or her to proceed with the preparation of the final
development plan of the shopping center.
      (1)   The final development plan shall contain all of the information
required under the provisions of this chapter, as well as any other information
requested by the Planning Commission and/or Council in their review of the
preliminary site development plan.
      (2)   Within 60 days, unless extended for good cause, from the date on
which the final development plan is filed with the Secretary, the Planning
Commission shall review, approve or disapprove such plan. In order to approve
such final development plan, the Planning Commission must first find that the
proposed final development plan of a shopping center is in substantial
compliance with the preliminary development plan heretofore approved; that it
complies with all of the conditions which may have been imposed in the approval
of the preliminary site development plan; that it is in compliance with the
design criteria and provisions of this chapter which apply particularly to any
plan of a Shopping Center District; and that all applicable provisions of the
subdivision regulations have been complied with.
   (E)   Approval.
      (1)   If the site development plan is not acceptable to both the Planning
Commission and Council, based on the requirements and intent of this section, a
revised site plan may be submitted.
      (2)   Only when final or revised final plans are acceptable to the City
Council, having first received the recommendation of the Planning Commission,
and any variances requested, shall final approval be given. In the event that
the Planning Commission recommends that said final or revised final plans
should not be accepted by the City Council, said plans shall only be approved
upon the concurrence of at least two-thirds of the members of City Council.
      (3)   At any time after the approval of a site development plan, the
owner may request a change, which request shall be subject to the same
procedures and conditions of approval as the original application.
   (F)   Building and Occupancy Permits.
      (1)   No building permit shall be issued for the improvement of a parcel
or any portion thereof, or for the erection of any building or structure in a
C-4 District unless and until a site development plan has been approved by the
Planning Commission and Council in accordance with this section. If and when
any proposed site development plan has been approved, the Building Commissioner
shall then issue the necessary building and other permits upon payment of the
required fees and compliance with applicable codes.
      (2)   An occupancy permit shall be issued by the Building Commissioner,
provided that the use, placement and dimensions of all buildings, exterior
lighting fixtures, driveways, sidewalks, parking areas and curb cuts, and the
installation of landscaping, fences and walks, conform to the site development
plan approved by the Council, as otherwise specified herein.
   (G)   Time Limitation for Commencing Construction. A building permit shall
be secured and construction begun in accordance with the approved final site
development plan within 12 months after the effective date of approval of such
site development plan. An application may be made by the developer to the
Planning Commission for not more than a six-month extension of the time limit
for commencement of construction. If construction is not begun within the
specified time limits, the approved site development plan shall become null and
void.
(Ord. 69-00, passed 5-8-2000; Ord. 142-02, passed 10-7-2002; Ord. 137-12,
passed 9-17-2012)
§ 1277.11  SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS.
   In the C-4 District, the following supplemental regulations must also be
met.
   (A)   Conformity to Site Plan. All buildings and grounds shall be designed,
constructed and maintained as approved in the site development plan. All
landscaping, sidewalks, pedestrian plazas, parking areas and building exteriors
shall be maintained free of any unsafe, unsightly or blighting conditions which
deteriorate the appearance, character, safety or value of the city or the
surrounding area.
   (B)   Off-Street Parking. All off-street parking areas, including parking
garages, shall be designed and constructed so as to provide safe, efficient and
visually appealing parking facilities. Entrances, aisles and spaces shall be
clearly controlled, marked, channeled and separated. Ends of aisles and drives
shall be controlled with concrete curbs and landscape islands.
   (C)   Pedestrian Access. Restricted pedestrian access from the parking area
to the building entrance shall be provided.
   (D)   Lighting.  Floodlighting or other lighting of buildings, signs and
parking areas shall be located and designed so as to shield the light source
from adjoining residences and shall be of a constant intensity. In addition, in
no event shall any lighting be placed or directed so as to permit the beams and
illumination therefrom to be directed or beamed upon a public thoroughfare so
as to cause glare or reflection that may constitute a traffic hazard or
nuisance.
   (E)   Location of Entrances and Exits. Entrances and exits shall be located
to minimize traffic congestion and avoid undue interference with pedestrian
access to street corners. There shall be not more than two access ways from any
one property to a public highway for 400 feet of street frontage, nor more than
one access way if the frontage is less than 150 feet. There shall be no
entrances or exits within 60 feet of any residential district. If the property
frontages are on two or more streets, the driveways shall be located as far
from the street intersection as practicable, and no driveway shall be located
within 75 feet of street intersections as measured from the right-of-way line. 
Access ways shall be not less than 18 feet nor more than 36 feet in width at
the property line. Access lanes shall be provided as deemed necessary for fire
and emergency vehicles.
   (F)   Appearance. The architectural appearance of main and accessory
buildings shall be approved by the Planning Commission.
   (G)   Adult Entertainment Businesses.  Notwithstanding anything contained in
this chapter to the contrary, no person shall cause or permit the establishment
of an adult entertainment business within one mile of a public or private
school, preschool or day-care center, or within 1,000 feet of any residential
zoning district, residential dwelling, church or park. For purposes of this
division, distances shall be measured in a straight line without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building
within which the adult entertainment business is located to the nearest
residential district boundary lines, or to the nearest property lines of the
premises of a public or private school, preschool, or day-care center or
residential zone, residential dwelling, church or park.
(Ord. 69-00, passed 5-8-2000; Ord. 142-02, passed 10-7-2002; Ord. 137-12,
passed 9-17-2012)
§ 1277.12  VARIANCES.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals, with the recommendation of the Planning
Commission, may vary or permit exceptions to any of the provisions of this
chapter if it finds that such variance or exception will not violate the spirit
or intent of this chapter and that a more harmonious and useful development
will result.
(Ord. 69-00, passed 5-8-2000; Ord. 142-02, passed 10-7-2002)
CHAPTER 1278:  CLASS D-1 DISTRICTS
Section
1278.01   Community facilities defined; purposes
1278.02   Use regulations
1278.03   Area regulations
1278.04   Yard regulations
1278.05   Height regulations
1278.06   Lighting
1278.07   Sign regulations
1278.08   Development plans
1278.09   Criteria for plan review
Cross-reference:
   Administration, enforcement and penalty, see
Chapter 1262
   Classification of uses, see
Chapter 1266
   Districts generally and Zone Map, see
Chapter 1264
   Fences in D-1 Districts, see §
1312.07
   General provisions and definitions, see
Chapter 1260
   Nonconforming uses, see
Chapter 1282
   Off-street parking, see
Chapter 1284
Editor’s note:
   This chapter was repealed and re-enacted in its entirety by Ordinance 89-8,
passed February 27, 1989.
§ 1278.01  COMMUNITY FACILITIES DEFINED; PURPOSES.
   As used in this chapter, “community facilities” means facilities classified
as main and accessory buildings and uses in §
1278.02. Class D-1 Community Districts and regulations are established in order
to achieve, among others, the following purposes:
   (A)   To provide proper zoning classifications for governmental, civic,
health, welfare, educational and recreational facilities in proper locations
and to such an extent as to promote the general safety, convenience, comfort
and welfare;
   (B)   To protect such community facilities and institutions from the
encroachment of certain other uses;
   (C)   To ensure that such community facilities shall be compatible with
adjoining residential uses;
   (D)   To provide an environment for the proper functioning of community
facilities in relation to the city’s adopted land use or street plan and other
plans for community facilities; and
   (E)   To alert the public to the location of parcels either intended to be
used or currently being used for community facilities.
(Ord. 89-8, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 1278.02  USE REGULATIONS.
   Buildings and land shall be used and buildings shall be designed, erected,
altered, moved or maintained in a Class D-1 Community District only for the
following uses:
   (A)   Main Buildings and Uses.
      (1)   Governmental. Municipal, county, state and federal buildings, uses
for administrative functions and uses by the general public, including post
offices, police and fire stations and town halls;
      (2)   Civic. Art galleries, public zoos, libraries, museums,
observatories, places of public assembly, memorials, monuments, cemeteries,
fraternal organizations and private clubs;
      (3)   Educational. Nursery, primary and secondary public, private or
parochial schools and institutions of higher education;
      (4)   Recreational. Parks, recreation fields, recreation centers,
playgrounds, lakes, beaches, pools, public gardens and golf courses;
      (5)   Religious. Churches and synagogues; and
      (6)   Welfare. General hospitals, clinics, health centers and publicly
owned and operated institutions for children, the elderly and the infirm; and
   (B)   Accessory Buildings and Uses. Public parking areas, storage garages,
parsonages, residences for custodians or guards and maintenance and heating
facilities.
(Ord. 89-8, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 1278.03  AREA REGULATIONS.
   The parcel of land to be developed for a Class D-1 Community District, i.e.,
the main buildings and uses set forth in §
1278.02, shall be sufficiently large in area so as to provide a proper setting
for the development so that the main and accessory buildings shall not occupy
more than 20% of the parcel. Such parcel shall accommodate off-street parking
and other accessory uses without impairing the character of the neighborhood or
the enjoyment of use of adjoining properties.
(Ord. 89-8, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 1278.04  YARD REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Front Yards. The front yard setback shall be not less than 75 feet
when adjacent to any residential district and not less than the required front
yard setback for any adjacent residential or nonresidential district.
   (B)   Side and Rear Yards.
      (1)   Main Buildings and Uses. The yards for each community facility
building shall be not less than the criteria set forth in the following
schedule when adjacent to any residential district:
 
Community Facility Building Minimum Yard (ft.)*
                            Side* Rear*
Civic: Nonassembly buildings                                         100 100
     Assembly buildings                                          100 100
Educational: Public, private and parochial schools                   100 100
   Nursery schools and child day-care centers                     100 100
Governmental: Administrative buildings                               100 100
Recreational: Buildings                                              100 100
Religious: Churches and synagogues                                   100 100
Welfare: General hospitals and clinics, homes for children, the aged 100 100
and the infirm
*Or two times the height of the building, whichever is greater.
 
      (2)   Accessory Uses. Driveways and parking areas serving the community
facility may be located within the side or rear yard set forth in the schedule
set forth in division (B)(1) hereof, but driveways, parking areas and accessory
buildings shall be located not less than 50 feet from any adjacent lot line.
Play areas shall not be located less than 50 feet from any adjacent boundary
line of a residential district.
      (3)   Yards Adjacent to Nonresidential Districts. Side and rear yards for
main and accessory buildings and uses adjacent to a nonresidential district
shall be not less than the side and rear yard setbacks for that particular
nonresidential district.
(Ord. 89-8, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 1278.05  HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   In a Class D-1 Community District, buildings may be erected to a
height not exceeding 40 feet or three floors. The side and rear yard setbacks
shall be a minimum of 50 feet, but shall be two times the height of the
building when the height of the building exceeds 25 feet. Further, chimneys,
spires, cupolas, domes, towers, flagpoles, radio or television receiving
antennas, monuments and other mechanical appurtenances located upon or
constructed as an integral part of the main building shall not exceed a height
of 50 feet.
   (B)   The maximum height of radio and television transmitting towers and
water towers shall be determined by the Planning Commission but shall not
exceed the minimum width of the side yard, the minimum depth of the rear yard
or the minimum depth of the front yard, whichever is less.
(Ord. 89-8, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 1278.06  LIGHTING.
   Flood lighting or other lighting of play fields in a Class D-1 Community
District, as specified in §
1278.02(A)(4)  shall be extinguished between 12:00 midnight and 7:00 a.m.
Buildings, bulletin boards and parking areas shall be located and designed so
as to shield the light source from adjoining residences.
(Ord. 89-8, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 1278.07  SIGN REGULATIONS.
   Signs in a Class D-1 Community District shall be designed, erected, altered,
moved and maintained in whole or part in accordance with
Chapter 1328 (formerly Chapter 1479).
(Ord. 89-8, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 1278.08  DEVELOPMENT PLANS.
   Preliminary and final development plans of proposed community facilities and
land improvements in a Class D-1 Community District shall be submitted, along
with maps, surveys and other required information, to the Planning Commission
for review as follows:
   (A)   Contents. Plans for a development shall be drawn to a scale of not
less than one inch equals 100 feet and shall include:
      (1)   Surveys. Property and topography surveys performed by a registered
surveyor showing land owned and proposed for development, surrounding and
adjoining streets and adjoining lots and their uses;
      (2)   Buildings. The location, size, height and use of all proposed main
and accessory buildings; their general design, exterior materials and color;
and the nearest building on an adjoining lot and its use; 
      (3)   Traffic. The proposed system of on-site vehicular and pedestrian
circulation, including proposed streets, driveways and sidewalks, details for
accessways to streets, methods for control of traffic and the type of pavement.
At the option of the Planning Commission, a traffic study may be required to be
performed by a qualified traffic engineer at the applicant’s expense;
      (4)   Parking Areas. The general layout and estimate of the number of
spaces provided, landscaping and other design features and the type of
pavement;
      (5)   Utilities. The location, size and grade for all utility
installations and connections to present or proposed facilities;
      (6)   Site development. A grading plan; the design of landscaped yards,
planting areas and buffering of adjoining residential areas; the size, location
and type of all outdoor signs; and exterior lighting;
      (7)   Agreements. Preliminary drafts of all agreements, contracts,
dedications, deed restrictions, sureties and other instruments as may be
required; and
      (8)   Landscaping and buffering. Appropriate landscaping and buffering as
necessary to provide an aesthetically pleasing appearance and to shield
adjacent properties. The nature and extent of required landscaping and
buffering will be dependent on the type of facility and the use of adjacent
property.
   (B)   Submittal. A preliminary development plan designed in accordance with
the planning standards, regulations and criteria established in this chapter
shall be submitted to the Planning Commission; 
   (C)   Approval by Council.  After the approval of the preliminary plan,
final plans shall be prepared and submitted to the Planning Commission in
accordance with procedures set forth in Appendix I following the text of the
subdivision regulations (
Chapter 1252 ).  Only when final or revised final plans are acceptable to
Council, having first received the recommendation of the Planning Commission,
shall final approval be given.  If the Planning Commission recommends that said
final or revised final plans should not be accepted by Council, said plans
shall only be approved upon the concurrence of at least two-thirds of the
members of Council; and
   (D)   Time Limitation for Construction. The development of the development
area shall commence as provided in §
1448.09  of the Building and Housing Code.
(Ord. 89-8, passed 2-27-1989; Ord. 92-97, passed 6-23-1997; Ord. 189-98, passed
3-15-1999)
§ 1278.09  CRITERIA FOR PLAN REVIEW.
   (A)   An application for development plan approval within a proposed public
facility shall not be approved unless, after a determination, the Planning
Commission finds that the use applied for complies with the following standards
and criteria.
      (1)   The proposed use shall be located so as to have access only on an
arterial or collector street. However, such use may be located on a local
street, provided it is found that the extent and intensity of the proposed
development will not substantially increase the volume and type of traffic
movement on local streets.
      (2)   The proposed use is necessary to serve the neighborhood or the
community at large.
      (3)   The dimensions of the site are sufficient to fully provide the
area, yard and open space requirements and to insulate it from surrounding
dwellings.
      (4)   The location, design and operation of such use will not discourage
the appropriate development or impair the value of the surrounding residential
areas.
   (B)   In addition to complying with the criteria specified in this section,
conditions appropriate to each particular application may also be set forth in
the permit, as determined by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 89-8, passed 2-27-1989)
CHAPTER 1279:  C-5 INTERSTATE HIGHWAY SHOPPING CENTER DISTRICT
Section
1279.01   Purposes
1279.02   Permitted uses
1279.03   Permitted accessory uses
1279.04   Minimum lot area
1279.05   Landscaping
1279.06   Yard and setback regulations
1279.07   Minimum and maximum height and size of buildings
1279.08   Off-street parking
1279.09   Signs
1279.10   Site development plans; review and approval
1279.11   Supplemental regulations
1279.12   Variances
§ 1279.01  PURPOSES.
   The purpose of the C-5 Interstate Highway Shopping Center District is to
encourage the development of planned, integrated retail and office within the
city, and to regulate the provision of shopping center uses so as to not
detract from the value, health and safety of existing residential
neighborhoods. C-5 Interstate Highway Shopping Center District shall be located
on land located adjacent to the Interstate-77/Route 82 interchange.
(Ord. 70-07, passed 6-4-2007)
§ 1279.02  PERMITTED USES.
   The following uses are permitted in a C-5 Interstate Highway Shopping Center
District: the uses enumerated in the C-4 District, with the exception that the
maximum permissible area (square footage dimension) for retail stores shall be
225,000 square feet.
(Ord. 70-07, passed 6-4-2007)
§ 1279.03  PERMITTED ACCESSORY USES.
   No other accessory uses shall be permitted.
(Ord. 70-07, passed 6-4-2007)
§ 1279.04  MINIMUM LOT AREA.
   (A)   The minimum lot area for a shopping center development in the C-
5 Interstate Highway Shopping Center District is ten acres, except as follows:
The minimum lot area at the northwest quadrant of Route 82 and Interstate 77
interchange shall be 40 acres.
   (B)   A shopping center development may be established upon a tract of land
in single ownership or under unified control, provided that a site development
plan for a planned business center has been prepared, submitted and approved in
accordance with this chapter.
(Ord. 70-07, passed 6-4-2007)
§ 1279.05  LANDSCAPING.
   A minimum of 20% of the total land area within the development shall be
landscaped. The area required to be landscaped shall be planted in a time frame
as set forth in the developer’s agreement, and thereafter such landscaped area
shall be maintained with permanent plants and materials in accordance with the
approved landscaping plan. The Planning Commission may, at its discretion,
lower the percentage of landscaping to no less than 15% if the landscaped areas
are grouped to provide an open useable public area within the shopping center
development. All landscaped areas shall have underground irrigation that is
automatically operated. All such landscaping plans shall be reviewed and
subject to final approval by the Architectural Review Board and shall be
consistent with the following regulations:
   (A)   Screening and Buffering Next to Residential Districts. All yards
adjoining residential districts shall be provided with a year-round visual
screen or barrier composed of evergreen and deciduous trees and shrubs. Where
deemed necessary, the Planning Commission and the Architectural Review Board
may require other planting or earth mounds or fences to supplement natural
elements required by this Code of Ordinances in order to achieve a sufficient
screening effect.
   (B)   Utilities. All utilities serving the buildings and site of a shopping
center development, including electric and telephone installations and
supporting equipment thereto, shall be placed underground or within main
buildings on the site. Where such supporting equipment cannot be located within
a main building, no such equipment shall be visible from any front, side or
rear lot line. All pole lighting shall be approved by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 70-07, passed 6-4-2007; Ord. 137-12, passed 9-17-2012)
§ 1279.06  YARD AND SETBACK REGULATIONS.
   (A)   A shopping center in the C-5 District shall be designed and developed
as a unified and well- organized arrangement of buildings and services.
Vehicular traffic shall be separated from the principal pedestrian movements
other than to and from parking areas. Delivery facilities shall be located so
as not to interfere with movements of pedestrians and vehicles.
   (B)   All buildings shall be set back from any main arterial street or
highway at least 300 feet, except that the yard may be developed for parking
facilities to within a minimum of 30 feet of the street line.
(Ord. 70-07, passed 6-4-2007)
§ 1279.07  MINIMUM AND MAXIMUM HEIGHT AND SIZE OF BUILDINGS.
   The height of any main building in the C-5 Interstate Highway Shopping
Center District shall not exceed six stories or 75 feet, excluding roof pitch,
from the finished grade. The maximum permissible area of any single retail
tenant shall not exceed 225,000 square feet of gross area.
(Ord. 70-07, passed 6-4-2007)
§ 1279.08  OFF-STREET PARKING.
   In a C-5 Interstate Highway Shopping Center District, one off-street parking
space shall be provided in an approved parking area for each 200 square feet of
net leasable area within the main building(s) situated on the property, unless
as modified by the Planning Commission for cause.
(Ord. 70-07, passed 6-4-2007)
§ 1279.09  SIGNS.
   The size, location and nature of outdoor signs, including the manner of
illumination in accordance with
Chapter 1328 (formerly Chapter 1479), shall be provided as approved in the
interstate development plan as review by the Planning Commission. Signs shall
be approved by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 70-07, passed 6-4-2007; Ord. 137-12, passed 9-17-2012)
§ 1279.10  SITE DEVELOPMENT PLANS; REVIEW AND APPROVAL.
   (A)   Preliminary Plan; Information Required.  Site development plans for
all proposed commercial sites, and for all exterior modifications to existing
commercial sites in C-5 Districts, shall be required as set forth in this
section. The overall site plan shall be submitted to the Planning Commission
for its review and recommendation to Council for its final approval. The site
development plan shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100
feet and shall include the following:
      (1)   Survey. A survey of the property and topography, showing the land
owned and proposed for development;
      (2)   Buildings. The location, size, height and use of all main and
accessory buildings proposed to be situated on the lot;
      (3)   Traffic. The proposed system of circulation of vehicular traffic,
including delivery trucks, details for connections to present streets, plans
for assuring pedestrian access to and around the buildings; type of pavements;
estimates of vehicular traffic volumes; and plans for control of traffic in and
around the site;
      (4)   Utilities. The plans for all utility installations and connections
and estimated requirements; and
      (5)   Parking Areas. A layout and estimate of the number of parking
spaces, loading areas, design features, type of pavement, location and type of
lighting fixtures, and proposed location of on-site drainage ways and storm
water retention facilities for the development.
   (B)   Additional Information Required. In addition to the site development
plan, the developer shall submit the following additional information in
support of the application:
      (1)   A market analysis summary, including identification of the trade
area of the proposed shopping center; trade area population, present and
future; and net potential customer buying power for stores in the proposed
shopping center;
      (2)   A financial report shall satisfy the Planning Commission as the
financial responsibility of the proponent to carry the proposal to completion
in full compliance with this chapter, including the source of construction
funds, and information on leasing arrangements;
      (3)   A traffic study, which shall include an estimate of traffic volumes
to be generated by the development and the assignment of traffic to proposed
entrances and exits;
      (4)   Time schedule; and
      (5)   Substantiation of ownership, which shall include a certification of
a title company that the record owners of the property, as represented on the
application for the shopping center development, are correct.
   (C)   Review by City Departments; Action by Council. Upon receipt of a
preliminary site development plan with supporting data for the development of a
shopping center, the Secretary of the Planning Commission shall transmit a copy
thereof to the appropriate departments within the city for their review,
reports and recommendations. The appropriate city departments shall, within 30
days from receiving the preliminary site development plan and supporting data,
provide and furnish to the Planning Commission their reports.
      (1)   Conditions. The Planning Commission may stipulate reasonable
conditions on the shopping center development, or any portions of the shopping
center development that may be in the public interests in a developer’s
agreement that is acceptable, in form, to the City Law Director and approved by
Council.
      (2)   Reports to Council. Within 60 days, unless extended for good cause,
after a preliminary site development has been filed with the Secretary, the
Planning Commission shall evaluate the plans and reports of the appropriate
city departments and shall furnish to Council its detailed report and
recommendations, in writing, with respect thereto. The report of the Planning
Commission shall include a finding either that the preliminary site plan and
supporting data comply with regulations, standards and criteria prescribed in
this chapter for planning shopping centers applicable to the proposal, or a
finding of failure to such compliance, and the Commission’s action that the
preliminary plan is approved, disapproved or modified. If in any such
evaluation the Planning Commission finds that any regulations, standards or
criteria prescribed by this chapter are inapplicable because of the unusual
conditions related to the shopping center or to the nature and quality of the
proposed design, it may recommend to Council that an adjustment will not be in
conflict with the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare of
the city.
      (3)   Action by Council. Council, at not later than its next regular
meeting following receipt of the Planning Commission report, shall set a date
for a public hearing on the preliminary site development plan, which hearing
date shall be published in the local newspapers. Following the completion of
such public
hearing, and review of any public input, Council shall then proceed to act upon
the preliminary development plan.
   (D)   Final Plan; Information Required; Action by Council. Following
affirmative action of the preliminary site development plan by Council, the
Secretary of the Planning Commission shall notify the developer of such action
and authorize him of her to proceed with the preparation of the final
development plan of the shopping center.
      (1)   The final development plan shall contain all of the information
required under the provisions of this chapter, as well as any other information
requested by the Planning Commission and/or Council in their review of the
preliminary site development plan.
      (2)   Within 60 days, unless extended for good cause, from the date on
which the final development plan is filed with the Secretary, the Planning
Commission shall review, approve or disapprove such plan. In order to approve
such final development, the Planning Commission must first find that the
proposed final development plan of a shopping center is in substantial
compliance with the preliminary development plan heretofore approved; that it
complies with all of the conditions which may have been imposed in the approval
of the preliminary site development plan; that it is in compliance with the
design criteria and provisions of this chapter which apply particularly to any
plan of a shopping center, and that all applicable provisions of the
subdivision regulations have been complied with.
   (E)   Approval.
      (1)   If the site development plan is not acceptable to both the Planning
Commission and Council, based on the requirements and intent of this section, a
revised site plan may be submitted.
      (2)   Only when final or revised final plans are acceptable to the City
Council, having first received the recommendations of the Planning Commission,
and any variances requested, shall final approval be given. In the event that
the Planning Commission recommends that said final or revised final plans
should not be accepted by the City Council, said plans shall only be approved
upon the concurrence of at least two- thirds of the members of City Council.
      (3)   At any time after the approval of a site development plan, the
owner may request a change, which request shall be subject to the same
procedures and conditions of approval as the original application.
   (F)   Building and Occupancy Permits.
      (1)   No building permit shall be issued for the improvement of a parcel
or any portion thereof, or for the erection of any building or structure in a
C-5 District unless and until a site development plan has been approved by the
Planning Commission and Council in accordance with this section. If and when
any proposed site development plan has been approved, the Building Commissioner
shall then issue the necessary building and other permits upon payment of the
required fees and compliance with applicable codes.
      (2)   An occupancy permit shall be issued by the Building Commissioner,
provided that the use, placement and dimensions of all buildings, exterior
lighting fixtures, driveways, sidewalks, parking areas
and curb cuts, and the installation of landscaping, fences and walks, conform
to the site development plan approved by the Council, as otherwise specified
herein.
   (G)   Time Limitation for Commencing Construction. A building permit shall
be secured and construction begun in accordance with the approved final site
development plan within 12 months after the effective date of approval of such
site development plan. An application may be made by the developer to the
Planning Commission for not more than a six-month extension of the time limit
for commencement of construction. If construction is not begun within the
specified time limits, the approved site development plan shall become null and
void.
(Ord. 70-07, passed 6-4-2007)
§ 1279.11  SUPPLEMENTAL REGULATIONS.
   In the C-5 District the following supplemental regulations must also be met.
   (A)   Conformity to Site Plan. All buildings and grounds shall be designed,
constructed and maintained as approved in the site development plan. All
landscaping, sidewalks, pedestrian plazas, parking areas, and building
exteriors shall be maintained free of any unsafe, unsightly or blighting
conditions which deteriorate the appearance, character, safety, or value of the
city or the surrounding area.
   (B)   Off-Street Parking. All off-street parking areas, including parking
garages, shall be designed and constructed so as to provide safe, efficient and
visually appealing parking facilities. Entrances, aisles and spaces shall be
clearly controlled, marked, channeled and separated. Ends of aisles and drives
shall be controlled with concrete curbs and landscape islands.
   (C)   Pedestrian Access. Restricted pedestrian access from the parking area
to the building entrance shall be provided.
   (D)   Lighting. Floodlighting or other lighting of buildings, signs and
parking areas shall be located and designed so as to shield the light source
from adjoining residences and shall be of a constant intensity. In addition, in
no event shall any lighting be placed or directed so as to permit the beams and
illumination therefrom to be directed or beamed upon a public thoroughfare so
as to use glare or reflection that may constitute a traffic hazard or nuisance.
   (E)   Location of Entrances and Exits. Entrances and exits shall be located
to minimize traffic congestion and avoid undue interference with pedestrian
access to street corners.
   (F)   Appearance. The architectural appearance of buildings shall be
approved by the Planning Commission.
   (G)   Adult Entertainment Businesses. Notwithstanding anything contained in
this chapter to the contrary, no person shall cause or permit the establishment
of an adult entertainment business within one mile of a public or private
school, preschool or day-care center, or within 1,000 feet of any residential
zoning district, residential dwelling, church or park. For purposes of this
division, distances shall be measured in a straight line without regard to
intervening structures or objects, from the nearest portion of the building
within which the adult entertainment business is located to the nearest
residential district boundary lines, or to the nearest property lines of the
premises of a public or private school, preschool, or day-care center or
residential zone, residential dwelling, church or park.
(Ord. 70-07, passed 6-4-2007; Ord. 137-12, passed 9-17-2012)
§ 1279.12  VARIANCES.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals, with the recommendation of the Planning
Commission, may vary or permit exceptions to any of the provisions of this
chapter if it finds that such variance or exception will not violate the spirit
or intent of this chapter and that a more harmonious and useful development
will result.
(Ord. 70-07, passed 6-4-2007)
CHAPTER 1280:  CLASS E DISTRICTS
Section
1280.01   Purposes
1280.02   Use regulations
1280.03   Schedule of permitted buildings and uses
1280.04   Similar uses
1280.05   Area regulations
1280.06   Yard regulations
1280.07   Height regulations
1280.08   Off-street parking facilities
1280.09   Off-street loading facilities
1280.10   Landscape buffers
1280.11   Performance standards
1280.12   Development plans
1280.13   Building and occupancy permits
1280.14   Performance bonds
1280.15   Variances
1280.16   Applicability
Cross references:
   Administration, enforcement and penalty, see
Chapter 1262
   Classification of uses, see
Chapter 1266
   Districts generally and Zone Map, see
Chapter 1264
   Fences in Class E Districts, see §
1312.07
   General provisions and definitions, see
Chapter 1260
   Nonconforming uses, see
Chapter 1282
   Off-street parking, see
Chapter 1284
§ 1280.01  PURPOSES.
   Office-Laboratory Districts and Light Industrial Districts and their
respective regulations are established herein in order to achieve, among
others, the following purposes:
   (A)   To provide convenient and sufficient districts for industrially
oriented office and research activities and for the production and distribution
of goods in order to serve and promote economic development of the community;
   (B)   To provide Office-Laboratory Districts in close proximity to the major
traffic arteries so as to be accessible to widely dispersed administrative and
technical personnel in the region;
   (C)   To provide Light Industrial Districts near the major traffic arteries
for uses which generate relatively large volumes of traffic, so as to be
accessible to a large labor force and consumers throughout the region;
   (D)   To protect and stabilize developments from traffic congestion by
regulating the intensity of use, by requiring off-street parking, loading and
on-site circulation facilities and by regulating the access to streets;
   (E)   To protect nearby residential zoning by restricting the types of
nearby uses, particularly at their common boundaries, which would otherwise
create objectionable influences; and
   (F)   To promote the most desirable and beneficial industrial use of the
land.
(Ord. 88-137, passed 9-6-1988)
§ 1280.02  USE REGULATIONS.
   Buildings and land shall be used and buildings shall be designed, erected,
altered, moved or maintained in industrial districts only for the uses set
forth for each district, respectively, in the schedules and regulations of this
Zoning Code.
   (A)   The main buildings and uses set forth in §
1280.03 shall be permitted by right as the principal building or use of a
zoning lot.
   (B)   Conditional uses are certain types of main or accessory uses, so
classified because of their uncommon characteristics, infrequency of
occurrence, large land area requirements or other features and shall not be
permitted in certain locations by right. Such uses require consideration and
approval by the Planning Commission and Council, approval in the form of a
conditional use permit being granted only if:
      (1)   The proposed use is located not closer than necessary to schools,
churches and other places of assembly;
      (2)   The location, extent and intensity of the proposed use are such
that its operation is not objectionable to nearby dwellings by reason of noise,
smoke, dust, odors, fumes, vibrations or glare greater than is permitted by the
performance standards of the district; and
      (3)   The proposed use forms a harmonious part of the industrial
district, taking into account, among other considerations, traffic and the
relationship of one use to another.
   (C)   The accessory buildings and uses set forth in §
1280.03 are permitted as a subordinate building or use if they are planned and
developed integrally therewith, clearly incident thereto and located on the
same zoning lot as the main building or use.
   (D)   A building designed and constructed as a residence cannot be occupied
in whole or in part by an industrial use unless the entire building is
redesigned and reconstructed to express and serve the proposed use in regard to
the exterior design, the building plan and the site plan and unless it is made
to conform to all requirements of the Building Code pertaining to structures
permitted in industrial districts.
   (E)   Existing residences, not permitted as of right within any industrial
district under this section, shall be construed as nonconforming uses, but may
be continued, extended, altered, enlarged and maintained as a residence subject
to all lot area, building area, lot coverage and yard regulations of the A-
1 District.
   (F)   Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter, no person shall
cause or permit the establishment of an adult entertainment business within one
mile of a public or private school, preschool or day-care center, or within
1,000 feet of any residential zoning district, residential dwelling, church or
park.  For purposes of this division, distances shall be measured in a straight
line without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the nearest
portion of the building within which the adult entertainment business is
located to the nearest residential district boundary lines, or to the nearest
property lines of the premises of a public or private school, preschool or day-
care center or residential zone, residential dwelling, church or park.
(Ord. 88-137, passed 9-6-1988; Ord. 29-93, passed 6-7-1993)
§ 1280.03  SCHEDULE OF PERMITTED BUILDINGS AND USES.
   (A)   The following schedule enumerates all main, conditional and accessory
buildings and uses which are permitted in industrial districts.
   (B)   Those buildings and uses which are permitted and regulated as main,
conditional and accessory uses in a given industrial district are designated by
an “M,” “C” or “A,” respectively, placed opposite to the use and in the columns
under the districts in which such use is permitted.
 
Schedule of Permitted Buildings and Uses
Permitted Buildings and Uses District
                             E-1 Office- Laboratory E-2 Light Industrial
(a) Offices. General offices, including, but not limited to, professional,         M M
financial, governmental, public utility, administrative and sales offices.
(b) Hotels. Hotels and motels having three or more floors and on-site restaurant   M
facilities.
(c) Training Schools and Child or Adult Day-Care Centers. Private training schools
which are of a technical or professional nature.  Child day-care centers as       M M
otherwise defined herein and fully licensed pursuant to law.  Adult day-care
centers which are fully licensed pursuant to law.
(d) Newspaper Printing Establishments.                                             M M
(e) Research Laboratories. Research laboratories include experimental, research
and testing and all types of basic and applied research of product design and      C C
development, under authority of the Planning Commission with Council approval.
(f) Experimental and Pilot Plant Operations.                                         M
(g) Restaurants. Restaurants in accordance with division (k)(7) hereof.            C
(h) Metal Production. Metal production includes metal cutting and stamping;
electric, gas and ultrasonic welding; grinding, machining and finishing, only in
the production and/or assembly of products such as:
   (1)   Automotive and aircraft parts;                                        M
   (2)   Electrical and electronic equipment and motors;                       M
   (3)   Electrical appliances, lamps, fixtures and clocks;                    M
   (4)   Hardware, cutlery and kitchen utensils;                               M
   (5)   Musical and scientific instruments;                                   M
   (6)   Medical, orthopedic and photographic instruments and equipment;       M
   (7)   Sporting goods, athletic equipment and toys;                          M
   (8)   Sheet metal components; heating and ventilating ductwork, gutters and M
downspouts, flashing and related products; and
   (9)   Tin shop.                                                             M
(i) Nonmetal production. Nonmetal production includes:
   (1)   Clothing and other textile products;                                  M
   (2)   Pharmaceutical products and compounding of cosmetics, drugs and       M
toiletries;
   (3)   Plastics, including extrusion, moulding and frabricating of panels,   M
sheets, tubes and rods;
   (4)   Printing, publishing,  engraving, binding and blueprinting;         M
   (5)   Wood, including fabrication of furniture, cabinets and other wood    M
products;
   (6)   Ceramics, including pottery, dishware, figurines and tile from clay  M
the enameling of pottery-ware or metals; and
   (7)   Painting or varnishing establishment.                                M
(j)   Service and Sales Establishments. Service and sales establishments are limited
to:
   (1)   Cleaning, dyeing, dry cleaning and carpet cleaning establishments;    M
   (2)   Repair of household appliances and goods produced by manufacturing andM
assembly processes permitted above;
   (3)   Food and drink preparation limited to bakeries, confections, ice cream,
refrigeration, ice manufacture, bottling of soft drinks or milk, creameries,         M
wineries, capping and packing;
   (4)   Shops and offices of contractors, including carpentry, electrical,
masonry, plumbing, welding, heating, ventilating, air conditioning, painting,        M
roofing, sheet metal, packaging and crating;
   (5)   Wholesale produce sales and parcel delivery stations;                 M
   (6)   Household and maintenance services, including dry cleaning and laundryM
establishments and dyeing, rug cleaning, janitorial and maintenance services;
   (7)   Monument works;                                                       C
   (8)   Storage and sale of new lumber and other building materials, public   C
utility materials and equipment, garden supplies and contractors’ equipment;
   (9)   Heliports and helistops;                                            C C
   (10)   Freight stations or distribution stations for commercial enterprises;M
   (11)   A motor freight depot or trucking terminal;                          C
   (12)   A central distribution station or cold storage plant; and            M
   (13)   Auto body shops, provided that all work is done within an enclosed   C
building or buildings.
(k)   Accessory Buildings and Uses. Accessory buildings and uses include:         
   (1)   Parking garages and off-street parking and loading facilities as
permitted and as regulated in §                                                   A A
1280.08;
   (2)   Signs as permitted and as regulated in                              A A
Chapter 1328 (formerly Chapter 1479);
   (3)   Restaurants, pharmacies, assembly rooms, newsstand, barber and/or beauty
shops, banks, health facilities or similar convenience services, all of which are
accessory to and totally enclosed within the main building. Such accessory uses
shall not occupy more than 20% of the total floor area of the building and shall   A
have no exterior entrance or identification sign except that a restaurant may have
one exterior identification sign as controlled by
Chapter 1328.
   (4)   Water towers, radio or television antennas, satellite dishes and
microwave dishes, as permitted and as regulated in §                                C
1280.07;
   (5)   Maintenance, storage and refuse facilities within wholly enclosed   C A
buildings;
   (6)   Employee lunch rooms;                                               A A
   (7)   Free-standing restaurants, provided they are located at least 500 feet
away from an abutting residential district or a school, church, synagogue, other
place of worship, hospital, nursing home or another restaurant, and provided,      C
further, that indoor eating facilities must be provided. Restaurant lot area shall
be one acre minimum and shall include at least 20% landscaping; and
   (8)   Other uses which are developed integrally and are essential to the  C C
successful operation of any of the permitted principal uses.
 
(Ord. 88-137, passed 9-6-1988; Ord. 44-96, passed 6-3-1996; Ord. 145-05, passed
2-6-2006)
§ 1280.04  SIMILAR USES.
   The Planning Commission may approve, with the consent of Council, any office
laboratory or light industrial use not listed in §
1280.03 if such use complies with the performance regulations in §
1280.11 and is similar to a permitted use, based upon the following standards:
   (A)   Such use is not listed in any other classification of permitted
buildings or uses;
   (B)   Such use is more appropriate to, and conforms more closely to, the
basic characteristics of the classification to which it is to be added than to
any other classification;
   (C)   Such a use does not create dangers to health and safety and does not
create offensive noise, vibration, dust, heat, smoke, odor, glare or other
objectionable influence to an extent greater than the other uses listed in the
classification to which it is to be added;
   (D)   Such a use does not generate traffic to a greater extent than the
other uses listed in the classification to which it is to be added; and
   (E)   Such use is similar as to hours of operation of permitted uses.
(Ord. 88-137, passed 9-6-1988)
§ 1280.05  AREA REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Every lot or parcel shall be of sufficient size to accommodate the
main and accessory buildings and uses and required yards. Every lot occupied by
a main building or use shall comply with the lot area, lot width, percentage of
lot coverage by buildings and the landscaped areas for the various permitted
uses as follows:
 
Schedule of Lot Area Regulations
         Building Fronts Minimum Lot  Minimum Lot Maximum Lot Minimum
District on              Area (Acres) Width (Ft.) Coverage    Landscaped Area
                                                  (Percent)   (Percent)
E-1      Arterial road   3            300         15          35
         Industrial road 1            150         20          30
E-2      Arterial road   3            300         40          25
         Industrial road 1            150         45          20
 
   (B)   Definitions. As set forth in the above schedule.
      “Landscaped area.” Means the percentage of that part of any lot which is
not covered by buildings or occupied by any parking area, driveway or other
permitted accessory use.   
      “Lot area.” Means the area of a lot or lots comprising a development
exclusive of a public or private right-of-way.
      “Lot coverage.” Means the percentage of a lot covered by the ground floor
area of all buildings on the lot.
      “Lot width.” Means the horizontal distance of a lot measured along the
building setback line at right angles to the mean lot depth line.
(Ord. 88-137, passed 9-6-1988; Ord. 47-98, passed 3-2-1998; Ord. 61-98, passed
4-20-1998)
§ 1280.06  YARD REGULATIONS.
   (A)   (1)   In an industrial district, front, side and rear yards shall be
provided on every lot occupied by a main, conditional or accessory building or
use in accordance with the following Schedule of Minimum Yard Dimensions.
      (2)   All required yards, exclusive of paved areas, shall be landscaped.
Neither gravel nor plastic chips shall be permitted as a substitute for natural
grass in lawn areas. The Planning Commission shall require a planting buffer
and/or a fence or wall, where necessary to protect residential districts
adjacent to or across the street from an industrial district, in accordance
with §
1280.10. Such planting buffer and/or fence or wall may extend into a front yard
but shall not be planted or constructed within 15 feet of the planned right-of-
way.
   (B)   The depth of the front yard of a corner lot shall be not less than the
required setback from the front lot line as provided in this section. The width
of a side yard on the side street shall be not less than 50 feet for a main or
accessory building or use, except that for off-street parking and/or loading
facilities such width shall be not less than ten feet. The minimum width of the
opposite side yard or interior side yard shall be not less than the minimum
dimensions provided in the Schedule of Minimum Yard Dimensions following.
 
Schedule of Minimum Yard Dimensions (In Feet)
                   Front Yard
                   (Measured from      Side Yard                                            Rear Yard
                   Street Right-of-
                   Way)
         Permitted Lot                                                      Adjoining
District Building  Abuts               Adjoining Residential District       Nonresidential              Lot
         or Use    Major or Lot Abuts                                       District        Lot Adjoins Adjoins No
                   Arterial Industrial                                Other Minimum Minimum Residential Residentia
                   Street   Road       Minimum Adjacent  Residential Side  Total   Each    District    l District
                   (a)                 District                       (e)   Both    Side(e)
                                                                            Sides
                   Main and accessory 150    100    150   25 75   25 100   50
Office- Laboratory building or use
                   Off-street parking 150(c) 100(c) 50(d) 5  N.A. 10 50(d) 10
                   and/or loading(b)
                   Main and accessory 100    50     150   25 N.A. 25 100   50
Light Industrial   building or use
                   Off-street parking 100(c) 50(c)  50(d) 5  N.A. 25 50(d) 10
                   and/or loading(b)
(a)   Major or arterial streets include Boston, Broadview, Edgerton, Royalton
and Harris Roads east of 1-77.
(b)   Driveways shall be located a minimum of 30 feet from any side lot line
and 70 feet from any side lot line adjoining a residential district.
(c)   Visitor parking over and above the minimum parking requirement is
permitted within a required front yard, the above regulations
notwithstanding, but in no case shall such parking spaces be less than 75
feet from an existing or planned street right-of- way nor shall such visitor
parking exceed 10% of the minimum parking requirement.
(d)   Parking areas located adjacent to a residential district lot line shall
provide a six-foot solid fence or wall or an appropriate landscaped visual
buffer.
(e)   On corner lots, the side yard bounded by a street right-of-way shall be
not less than 50 feet wide for main and accessory buildings or uses, except
that for off-street parking and/or loading facilities such width shall be not
less than ten feet.
N.A. - Not Applicable.
 
(Ord. 88-137, passed 9-6-1988; Ord. 47-98, passed 3-2-1998; Ord. 61-98, passed
4-20-1998)
§ 1280.07  HEIGHT REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Permitted structures in E-1 Office-Laboratory Districts shall not
exceed 75 feet in height. However, the maximum height of structures within
2,500 feet of an intersection of a state highway and an  interstate highway
shall be 120 feet. Permitted uses in E-2 Light Industrial Districts shall not
exceed 35 feet in height. However, within any industrial district, chimneys,
domes, elevator penthouses, skylights, spires, stacks, ventilators or other
necessary appurtenant features usually carried above the roof of structures
permitted in each respective district, when erected upon and as an integral
part of a building, may be erected above the height limit, but in no case shall
such feature extend more than ten feet above the height of the building.
   (B)   Water towers, radio or television antennas and other similar
structures permitted as conditional accessory uses may be erected above the
height limit specified, subject to the following provisions:
      (1)   The height from the base of such structure, or the uppermost point
at which such structure is attached to a building, to the top of such structure
shall not be greater than the horizontal distance from the base of the
structure to the nearest adjoining property line; and
      (2)   No structure detached from the main building shall exceed 35 feet
in height.
(Ord. 88-137, passed 9-6-1988)
§ 1280.08  OFF-STREET PARKING FACILITIES.
   The following requirements are provided so that the required off-street
parking facilities shall be developed in such manner as to interfere as little
as possible with the use of neighboring properties and with vehicular traffic
on neighboring streets.
   (A)   Required off-street parking facilities shall be located on the same
lot as the main building or use served.
   (B)   The gross floor area of a building is the total area of all the
floors, including the basement, measured from the exterior faces of the
building.
   (C)   A parking space shall be not less that 180 square feet, nine feet by
20 feet, exclusive of drives and turning spaces.
   (D)   All parking areas and driveways shall be surfaced with asphalt,
concrete or other similar hard surface. All parking areas and driveways shall
provide adequate drainage so that all water is contained within the lot on
which the parking area or driveway is located in such manner that water will
not drain across other private property. Adequate bumper guards or curbs shall
be provided to establish the limits of the parking area except at exits and
entrances. Such guards or curbs shall restrain the vehicles so that no part of
the parked vehicle projects into that portion of a required yard in which off-
street parking is prohibited.
   (E)   (1)   The location and width of entrance and exit driveways to parking
facilities shall be planned, whenever possible, so that the nearer edge of an
access driveway on the frontage street of a corner lot is at least 50 feet from
the right-of-way line of the nearest intersecting street. Whenever possible,
driveways shall be spaced at not less than 120-foot intervals, measured from
the centerline of the driveways. Entrances and exits to a Class E District
shall be limited to streets along which the frontage is located in a Class E
District or a Class C District. The width of such entrances and exits shall
conform to the following schedule:
 
Lane(s)     Minimum Width (ft.) Maximum Width (ft.)
One lane    10                  12
Two lanes   20                  24
Three lanes 30                  33
 
      (2)   In all cases, the radius of the edge of the apron shall be at lest
25 feet so that a car may enter or leave the curb lane without obstructing
vehicles in other traffic lanes.  The maximum curb cut shall be limited to the
width of the entrance or exit plus each radius of the apron.
   (F)   Sources of light for illumination of buildings or grounds shall be
shielded so as not to be objectionable or hazardous to owners of adjacent
property or public streets.
(Ord. 88-137, passed 9-6-1988; Ord. 13-10, passed 2-1-2010)
§ 1280.09  OFF-STREET LOADING FACILITIES.
   Accessory loading and unloading facilities shall be provided as a condition
precedent to occupancy of all industrial buildings hereafter erected and
altered to such uses. Such facilities shall be maintained so long as such a
building is occupied or unless equivalent facilities are provided in conformity
with the provisions of this section.
   (A)   Allocation of Use. Space required and allocated for any off-street
loading shall not be used to satisfy the space requirements for off-street
parking. An off-street loading space shall not be used for repairing or
servicing of motor vehicles and it shall be available for its designated
purpose when needed.
   (B)   Location of Facility. In an industrial district, a loading space shall
not be permitted in a front yard. A required loading and unloading space shall
be permitted in a side yard or rear yard in accordance with side or rear yard
requirements for parking areas as provided in §
1280.06 .
   (C)   Access Driveways. Each required off-street loading space shall be
designed for direct vehicular access to a public street, by means of a driveway
or driveways, in a manner which will least interfere with traffic movements.
The access shall be located so that the nearer pavement edge is not less than
50 feet from the nearest intersecting street right-of-way line.
   (D)   Improvements. All accessory off-street loading spaces shall be of
concrete construction.
   (E)   Minimum Size Criteria. Each required off-street loading space for
buildings less than 20,000 square feet in ground floor area shall be at least
ten feet wide by at least 25 feet in length. Each required loading space for a
building of 20,000 square feet or more of ground floor area shall be not less
than 14 feet wide by 60 feet in length. The above requirements shall be
exclusive of the maneuvering space and each loading space shall have a vertical
clearance of at least 17 feet.
   (F)   Schedule of Required Loading Facilities.
      (1)   All buildings shall be provided with sufficient off-street loading
facilities so that a truck will not obstruct a public right-of-way. In
addition, all buildings shall be provided with accessory off-street loading
spaces as follows:
 
Ground Floor Area of Buildings (In Gross Required Minimum Number of Spaces
Square Feet) Exclusive of Office Uses
Less than 40,000                         1
40,001 to 100,000                        2
Each additional 100,000                  1 additional space
 
      (2)   If a proposed use does not require the number of loading spaces as
provided in the above schedule, due to the nature of the industrial use, the
Planning Commission may permit the construction of a lesser number of spaces.
However, the additional area required to provide the number of spaces in the
schedule shall be reserved and held as open area (along with all required
areas) for future construction of loading spaces in the event that the use of
the building is changed to require the additional loading spaces.
(Ord. 88-137, passed 9-6-1988)
§ 1280.10  LANDSCAPE BUFFERS.
   (A)   Intent. The intent of this section is:
      (1)   To screen undesirable views of permitted industrial uses from
fronting streets and surrounding residential areas;
      (2)   To increase soil and water retention through landscape
requirements;
      (3)   To protect and preserve the appearance, privacy and property values
of single-family residential uses from any adverse influences of adjoining
industrial uses; and
      (4)   To shield adjoining single-family residential uses from noise, dust
and objectionable views during site construction.
   (B)   Definitions. As used in this section:
      “Buffer.” Means a dense five to six-feet high site improvement consisting
of landscape materials and groundforms located and designed to alleviate
otherwise objectionable views of necessary permitted accessory uses, such as
parking and loading facilities (see Appendix I, following this Zoning Code),
trash containment areas and utility installations.
      “Groundforms.” Means natural or human-made earth berms and other changes
in topography commonly employed in the development of buffers and visibility
screens.
      “Landscape materials.” Means winter-hardy ornamental plantings and
nonliving durable wall and fencing materials properly employed in the
development of buffers and visibility screens, subject to Planning Commission
approval.
      “Visibility screen.” Means a medium-dense eight to 15-feet high site
improvement consisting of landscape materials and groundforms located and
designed to reduce the visual effect of large building masses otherwise
disproportionate to the scale of adjacent development, existing or proposed.
   (C)   Location. Buffers and visibility screens shall be mandatory within the
required side and rear yards of Class E Industrial Districts abutting
residential districts so as to achieve the intent of this section without
visually obstructing necessary lines of sight required for safe pedestrian and
vehicular movement.
   (D)   Compliance Period and Maintenance.
      (1)   Effective buffers or screening may be required prior to other site
development in order to reduce objectionable views, noise and dust associated
with the construction process.
      (2)   If not determined necessary prior to other site development, all
buffer and screen requirements shall be in place before a certificate of
occupancy is issued.
      (3)   If not determined necessary prior to other site development, the
desired buffer or screening effect shall be achieved not later than 12 months
after the initial installation. The Planning Commission may extend this period
of time where a hardship would be created because of unexpected slow growth or
material shortages, but in no event shall the Commission extend such period
beyond two years from the time that initial installation was to have been or
has taken place.
      (4)   Once achieved, the required buffer or screening effect shall be
satisfactorily maintained in perpetuity by the owner.
   (E)   Applicability. All provisions of this section shall be applicable to
both new development and the expansion, alteration or modification of existing
development, including such expansion, alteration or modification limited
solely to parking and/or access.
   (F)   Procedures.
      (1)   A landscape plan showing buffer and visibility screen provisions
shall be included as part of all preliminary and final development plans. Such
plan shall accurately convey the nature and effect of proposed buffer and
screening solutions.
      (2)   The Planning Commission may request photographs, elevations, sight
lines or other descriptive data considered necessary to determine the
effectiveness of the landscape plan.
   (G)   Violations; Notice. Whoever violates any of the provisions of this
section and fails to comply therewith within 30 days of notification thereof
shall be punished as provided in §
1262.99 .
(Ord. 88-137, passed 9-6-1988)
§ 1280.11  PERFORMANCE STANDARDS.
   Every performance standard set forth generally herein shall be complied with
to the full extent required by all applicable federal, state and local
regulations as a precedent to occupancy of any use in an industrial district. 
   (A)   Structures.
      (1)   Enclosure.
         (a)   All permitted main and accessory uses and operations, except for
off-street parking and loading facilities, shall be performed wholly within an
enclosed building or buildings. Only outdoor overnight parking of cargo
carriers in the process of loading and unloading in required off-street loading
spaces shall be permitted.
         (b)   Exception: the Planning Commission may grant a conditional use
permit for outside storage in Class E-2 Districts only, provided the Planning
Commission approve plans that comply with §§
1280.10 and
1280.12(A)(1)(f)
      (2)   Fire and Explosive Hazards.
         (a)   The storage, handling and use of flammable or explosive
materials shall be permitted only in structures having incombustible exterior
walls.
         (b)   All activities concerned with flammable or explosive materials
shall be provided with adequate safety and protective devices against hazards
of fire and explosion as well as with adequate firefighting and suppression
equipment and devices standard to the operation involved.
         (c)   All buildings shall be accessible to firefighting equipment and
shall comply with other fire prevention codes and requirements adopted by the
municipality.
      (3)   Waste Materials.
         (a)   Liquid wastes, other than storm water, shall be discharged into
the sanitary sewerage system. A separate storm sewerage system shall be
provided to receive storm water. No waste which is inimical to sewage treatment
shall be discharged into any sewerage system. No waste which is deleterious to
the sewerage system or the sewage treatment process shall be discharged into
any sewerage system.
         (b)   Solid wastes shall be stored in buildings.
         (c)   Only closed commercial containers for rubbish shall be permitted
and they shall be located in the rear yard outside of buildings.
   (B)   Air Pollution.
      (1)   Smoke, Fly Ash, Dust and Dirt. No industrial operation shall
exhaust or discharge into the air any quantity of fly ash, dust, dirt or
similar forms of air pollution which may become discernible as settlement at or
beyond the boundaries of the lot occupied by the use.
      (2)   Noxious or Toxic Matter. The emission of toxic, noxious or
corrosive fumes or gases which may be demonstrably injurious to property,
vegetation, animals or human health at or beyond the boundaries of the lot
occupied by the use shall not be permitted.
      (3)   Odorous Matter. The emission of odorous gases or other odorous
matter in such quantities as to produce a public nuisance or hazard beyond the
lot occupied by the use shall not be permitted.
   (C)   Noise. The sound pressure level at the nearest residential street of
any operation on a lot, other than the operation of autocalls, bells, sirens or
whistles, shall not exceed the average intensity of the street traffic noise at
the nearest residential district and no sound shall be objectionable due to
intermittance, beat frequency or shrillness.
   (D)   Vibration. Vibrations shall not be permitted beyond the lot line
occupied by the use if such vibrations would be perceptible without the aid of
instruments.
   (E)   Radioactive or Electrical Disturbance. Radioactive or electrical
disturbances which adversely affect any form of life or equipment at or beyond
the boundaries of the lot occupied by the use shall not be created.
   (F)   Heat and Glare. No industrial operation that produces heat or glare
perceptible from any property line of the lot on which the operation is located
shall be permitted. Industrial and exterior lighting shall be used in a manner
that produces no glare on public highways and neighboring property.
   (G)   Industrial Wastes. No industry shall discharge any treated or
untreated sewage or industrial waste into any reservoir or lake or discharge
any untreated sewage or industrial waste into any stream. All methods of sewage
and industrial waste treatment and disposal shall be approved by the State
Department of Health and all effluent from a treatment plant shall, at all
times, comply with the requirements of the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency
or a succeeding authority.
   (H)   Soil Removal. No mining, extracting, filling or soil-stripping
operations shall be conducted in such a manner as to leave unsightly or
dangerous excavations or soil banks, or in such a manner as to increase
erosion.
(Ord. 88-137, passed 9-6-1988; Ord. 142-98, passed 8-24-1998; Ord. 137-12,
passed 9-17-2012)
§ 1280.12  DEVELOPMENT PLANS.
   Preliminary and final development plans shall be required for all proposed
development in a Class E Industrial District. Plans shall include:
   (A)   Preliminary Plans.
      (1)   Plan Requirements.
         (a)   Survey. A survey of the property and topography, performed by a
registered surveyor, showing the land owned and proposed for development;
         (b)   Buildings. The locations, size, height and use of all main and
accessory buildings and their general design, color and exterior materials;
         (c)   Streets. The proposed pattern of vehicular circulation,
including estimated traffic volumes, service access and relationship to
existing streets. Such street plan shall be forwarded to the City Engineer for
review and approval;
         (d)   Utilities. Evidence of adequacy of all required utilities and
services;
         (e)   Parking. General layout and estimate of spaces provided, both
open and enclosed;
         (f)   Outdoor Storage and Screening. The location, size, height and
use of all outdoor storage facilities and proposed screening, which shall be
reviewed by the Planning Commission;
         (g)   Miscellaneous. Other site improvements including the general
landscape plan; and
         (h)   Grading, Drainage and Improvements. The grading, general
drainage pattern and site improvements, which shall be reviewed and approved by
the City Engineer prior to final approval by the Planning Commission. The
construction of all site improvements shall be inspected by the City Engineer.
All costs for the above reviews, approvals and inspections shall be paid by the
developer.
      (2)   Submittal of Plans.
         (a)   Presentation of preliminary plans shall be made concurrently to
the Building Department (to file an application for construction), to the
Planning Commission and to the City Engineer.
         (b)   The Planning Commission shall submit plans to the appropriate
departments within the city for their comments, i.e., the Fire, Police and
Public Service Departments.
      (3)   Approval of Plans.
         (a)   If preliminary plans are not acceptable to both the Planning
Commission and Council, based on the requirements and intent of this section, a
revised preliminary plan may be submitted.
         (b)   If preliminary or revised preliminary plans are acceptable to
both the Planning Commission and Council with slight modification, final plans,
including such modification, may be submitted.
   (B)   Final Development Plans.
      (1)   Plan Requirements.
         (a)   Site Plan. All items submitted for preliminary approval, with
modification as requested;
         (b)   Utilities Plan.  Detailed drawings of all required utilities,
including water, sewers and underground electric and telephone systems;
         (c)   Fire Protection Plan. Water mains, hydrants and other
appurtenances;
         (d)   Landscape Plan.  Landscaping, buffers, drainage and grading; and
         (e)   Miscellaneous.  The construction schedule and disposition
program and any other information specifically required by the Planning
Commission.
      (2)   Submittal of Plans.
         (a)   Presentation of final plans shall be made to the Planning
Commission.
         (b)   The Planning Commission shall submit plans to the appropriate
departments within the city for their comments, i.e., the Fire, Police, Public
Service and Building Departments.
         (c)   When the development given preliminary approval is to be
constructed in two or more phases, final plans shall be submitted separately
for each phase, prior to scheduled construction.
      (3)   Approval of Plans.
         (a)   If final plans are not acceptable to both the Planning
Commission and Council, based upon the requirements and intent of this section,
revised final plans may be submitted.
         (b)   Only when final or revised final plans are acceptable to
Council, having first received the recommendation of the Planning Commission,
shall final approval be given.  If the Planning Commission recommends that said
final or revised final plans should not be accepted by Council, said plans
shall only be approved upon the concurrence of at least two-thirds of the
members of Council.
   (C)   Time Limitation for Construction.  The development of the development
area shall commence as provided in §
1448.09  of the Building and Housing Code.
(Ord. 88-137, passed 9-6-1988; Ord. 92-97, passed 6-23-1997; Ord. 189-98,
passed 3-15-1999; Ord. 137-12, passed 9-17-2012)
§ 1280.13  BUILDING AND OCCUPANCY PERMITS.
   (A)   No building permit for the improvement of a parcel or a portion
thereof or for the erection of any building shall be issued for any building or
structure in an industrial district unless and until a final development plan
has been approved by Council in accordance with the provisions of §
1280.12.  If and when any proposed final development plan has been so approved,
the Building Commissioner shall then issue the necessary building and other
permits upon payment of the required fees and compliance with applicable codes.
   (B)   An occupancy permit shall be issued by the Building Commissioner if
the use qualifies under the various restrictions of this Zoning Code and the
inspections required have been made and the work approved.
   (C)   Occupancy permits shall not be granted until all required
improvements, including landscaping, are completed in compliance with this
Zoning Code.
   (D)   If weather conditions prevent completion of some minor improvements
(i.e. landscaping, paving and the like) a returnable deposit, equal to the
estimated cost of the improvement, shall be deposited with the city, to
guarantee completion of the improvements when weather permits. 
(Ord. 88-137, passed 9-6-1988)
§ 1280.14  PERFORMANCE BONDS.
   A performance bond, issued by an insurance company licensed to do business
in the state, shall be required, guaranteeing the completion of all public
improvements required by the city before a building permit may be issued. The
scope of such improvements and the amount of such bond shall be determined by
the City Engineer.
(Ord. 88-137, passed 9-6-1988)
§ 1280.15  VARIANCES.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals, with the recommendation of the Planning
Commission, may vary or permit exceptions to any of the provisions of this
chapter if it finds that such variance or exception will not violate the spirit
or intent of this chapter and that a more harmonious and useful development
will result.
(Ord. 88-137, passed 9-6-1988)
§ 1280.16  APPLICABILITY.
   In the regulation of industrial districts, the requirements in this chapter
shall take precedence over less stringent provisions found in any other
provision of this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 88-137, passed 9-6-1988)
CHAPTER 1281:  RENTAL PROPERTIES
Section
1281.01   Housing license required
1281.02   Applications and issuance of housing license
1281.03   Time for compliance
1281.04   Fees
1281.05   Inspections and right of entry
1281.06   Posting of certificate
1281.07   Changes of housing license
1281.08   Liability
1281.09   Code adopted
1281.11   Penalties
§ 1281.01  HOUSING LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No owner, agent or person in charge of any dwelling structure, which is
used, or designed, or intended to be used, as a single- or multiple-dwelling,
shall rent or lease such structure or any part thereof for residential
occupancy unless the owner thereof obtains a housing license issued by the Code
Official for such structure.
(Ord. 61-07, passed 6-4-2007; Ord. 101-08, passed 9-2-2008)
§ 1281.02  APPLICATIONS AND ISSUANCE OF HOUSING LICENSE.
   (A)   Application for a housing license required by the provisions of the
Zoning Code shall be made annually by supplying the information and data to
determine compliance with applicable laws, ordinances, rules and regulations
for the existing use or occupancy or the intended use or occupancy on forms
supplied by the Code Official. It shall state the name and address of the
applicant, the nature and extent of his or her interest in the building for
which the license is required, the name and address of the owner of the
building, the location of the building, the number of dwelling units therein
and such other information as may be required by the Building Official.
   (B)   Upon receipt of an application for a housing license, the Building and
Zoning Department shall schedule inspections of the rental dwelling unit(s) as
necessary to determine its compliance with these regulations.
   (C)   If a rental dwelling units are found to be in compliance with this
chapter, a housing license shall be issued for said unit(s) and shall not be
valid beyond the last day of the twelfth month following the date of issuance,
unless renewed prior thereto in the same manner as required for issuance of the
original housing license.
   (D)   The Code Official, as a public record, shall keep copies of all
applications and housing licenses on file.
   (E)   If upon inspection of the rental dwelling unit it is determined that
violation of this chapter exists, notice of said violation shall be made to the
owner or agent. The owner or agent shall obtain the proper permits as required
by the Building Code to correct the noted violations. No housing license shall
be issued until the violations have been corrected and the repairs inspected
and approved.
   (F)   The Code Official shall have the power to revoke a housing license if
the applicant in connection with the issuance of such certificate makes any
false statement, or if the owner, agent or person in charge of a structure
refuses to comply with any provisions of this chapter.
   (G)   No housing license for single-family dwellings (one-, two-family
dwelling) shall be required for lawful structures occupied by the owner(s) or
immediate family member (parent, sibling, grandparent) as the owner’s principal
residence.
(Ord. 61-07, passed 6-4-2007; Ord. 101-08, passed 9-2-2008)
§ 1281.03  TIME FOR COMPLIANCE.
   To and until six months from the effective date of this chapter, upon
discovery by the Code Official that application for a housing license has not
been made for a single- or multi-family dwelling structure, notice shall be
given to the owner, agent of such structure to apply for a housing license
within 21 days. Failure to so apply will be deemed to be a violation of this
chapter and will subject the owner, agent of the structure to the legal action
and penalties prescribed herein. Six months from the effective date of this
chapter, any owner of a single-family, multiple-family dwelling structure
requiring a housing license shall have made application therefor or shall be
subject to the legal action and penalties prescribed herein.
(Ord. 61-07, passed 6-4-2007; Ord. 101-08, passed 9-2-2008)
§ 1281.04  FEES.
   An application for a housing license shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable
fee in the amount of $50 for each one- or two-family dwelling structure per
year. Fees for double-family dwellings shall be $25 per unit per year. Fees for
multiple dwellings with more than three units shall be $20 per unit per year. 
A re-inspection fee of $15 per unit shall be assessed when determined by the
Code Official.
(Ord. 61-07, passed 6-4-2007; Ord. 152-07, passed 12-17-2007; Ord. 101-08,
passed 9-2-2008)
§ 1281.05  INSPECTIONS AND RIGHT OF ENTRY.
   (A)   In order to safeguard the safety, health and welfare of the public,
the Code Official is authorized to enter any structure or premises at any
reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections and performing duties
under this chapter.
   (B)   The Building Official is hereby authorized to make or cause to be made
inspections once every three years to determine the condition of dwelling(s),
occupiable structures and premises located within the city. Such inspections
may also be made whenever the Building Official has reasonable cause to believe
that a violation of the Code exists therein or thereon.
   (C)   Upon presentation of proper credentials, the Code Official may enter,
with the permission of the occupant, at reasonable times or at such other times
as may be necessary in an emergency, any dwelling, building, structure or
premises in the city to perform any duty imposed on him or her by the Code;
provided, however, that if the occupant refuses permission to enter, no entry
shall be made without first obtaining a warrant.
(Ord. 61-07, passed 6-4-2007; Ord. 18-16, passed 2-8-2016)
§ 1281.06  POSTING OF CERTIFICATE.
   The Building Commissioner shall issue the housing license applied for if the
building and the uses to which it is intended to be put are found to comply in
all respect with this chapter and all other laws and ordinances. The
certificate shall be posted by the owner, agent or person in charge of any
dwelling structure at the main entrance of the building for which it is issued,
or if not possible such certificate shall be readily available for exhibition
to the Building Official.
(Ord. 61-07, passed 6-4-2007)
§ 1281.07  CHANGES OF HOUSING LICENSE.
   (A)   In the event there is a change in ownership of record, the housing
license issued under the provisions of this chapter to the former owner shall
become null and void within 30 days of the recorded date of such change of
ownership, and a new certificate must be obtained by the new owner.
   (B)   Application for new license shall be made within 30 days after such
change of ownership has occurred. A fee of $5 shall be paid upon application
for each new certificate. Such new certificate shall expire on the same date as
that of the certificate which it replaces.
(Ord. 61-07, passed 6-4-2007)
§ 1281.08  LIABILITY.
   The issuance of a housing license does not guarantee compliance with the
Housing Code, nor does the Building Commissioner or his or her agent accept any
liability for noncompliance with this chapter.
(Ord. 61-07, passed 6-4-2007)
§ 1281.09  CODE ADOPTED.
   See
Chapter 1348 (formerly Chapter 1494) - International Property Maintenance Code.
(Ord. 61-07, passed 6-4-2007)
§ 1281.11  PENALTIES.
   See referenced §
1440.99 for General Code Penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
(Ord. 61-07, passed 6-4-2007)
CHAPTER 1282:  NONCONFORMING USES
Section
1282.01   Continuation; extension
1282.02   Completion and restoration of existing buildings
Cross-reference:
   Administration, enforcement and penalty, see
Chapter 1262
   Classification of uses, see
Chapter 1266
   Districts generally and Zone Map, see
Chapter 1264
   General provisions and definitions, see
Chapter 1260
   Nonconforming signs, see §
1328.16
   Off-street parking, see
Chapter 1284
§ 1282.01  CONTINUATION; EXTENSION.
   A nonconforming use existing at the time of the passage of this Zoning Code
(Ordinance 46-68, passed February 3, 1969), or amendments thereto, may be
continued, provided that if said nonconforming use is wholly or substantially
discontinued for a period of six months or more from the date that it became a
nonconforming use, it shall be deemed to have been abandoned and thereby
extinguished. A nonconforming use shall not be extended except as authorized,
but the extension of a use to any portion of a building which portion was
arranged or designed for such nonconforming use at the time of the passage of
this Zoning Code shall not be deemed the extension of a nonconforming use. A
building arranged, designed or devoted to a nonconforming use at the time of
the passage of this Zoning Code shall not be reconstructed or structurally
altered to an extent exceeding in aggregate cost, during any ten-year period,
50% of the fair market value of the land and building, unless the use of such
building is changed to a conforming use. A nonconforming use, if changed to a
conforming use, may not thereafter be changed back to a nonconforming use.
(Ord. 89-151, passed 3-5-1990; Ord. 22-96, passed 4-15-1996)
§ 1282.02  COMPLETION AND RESTORATION OF EXISTING BUILDINGS.
   Nothing contained in this Zoning Code shall require any change in the plans,
constitution or designated use of a building for which a building permit has
been heretofore issued and the construction of which has been diligently
prosecuted within 90 days of the date of such permit, and which entire building
shall be completed according to such plans, as filed, within two years from the
date of the passage of this Zoning Code (Ordinance 46-68, passed February 3,
1969). Nothing in this Zoning Code shall prevent the restoration of a building
wholly or partly destroyed by fire, explosion, act of God or act of a public
enemy subsequent to the passage of this Zoning Code. Nothing in this Zoning
Code shall prevent the restoration of a wall declared unsafe by the Building
Commissioner.
(Ord. 46-68, passed 2-3-1969)
CHAPTER 1283:  TOWN CENTER SPECIAL PLANNING DISTRICT #1
Section
1283.01   Purposes/process
1283.02   Definitions
1283.03   Use regulations
1283.04   Schedule of permitted buildings and uses
1283.05   District boundaries
1283.06   Development guidelines
1283.07   Building design guidelines
1283.08   Supplemental provisions
Cross-reference:
   Class A Districts, see
Chapter 1268
   Class B Districts, see
Chapter 1270
   Class C Districts, see
Chapter 1276
   Class C-4 Districts, see
Chapter 1277
   Class D Districts, see
Chapter 1278
   Class E Districts, see
Chapter 1280
   Definitions, see
Chapter 1240
   Fee Schedule, see
Chapter 1449
   Fences, see
Chapter 1312
   Land improvements, see
Chapter 1248
   Off-street parking, see
Chapter 1284
   Planning Commission, see
Chapter 1220
   Planning Principals, see
Chapter 1246
   Signs, see
Chapter 1328
   Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan, see
Chapter 1334
   Street lighting, see
Chapter 1252
   Swimming and Wading Pools, see
Chapter 1332
§ 1283.01  PURPOSES/PROCESS.
   (A)   The purpose of the establishment of the Town Center Special Planning
District Zone A and Zone B is to provide a master plan as a vision for future
development within the city’s central business district through the use of
development guidelines, standards and regulations. To allow development of a
mix of assembly, mercantile, office, service, public, residential and related
uses, as well as major public open spaces that together will function as a
focal point and gathering center for the entire community. Key objectives are
to retain a sense of place, to have more human-scale and pedestrian-oriented
environment, avoid strip development along arterials; focus commercial activity
into discrete nodes, and to increase connectivity. It  is desirable to have
places that encourage informal, casual interactions and meetings. These spaces
are found in the public realm, such as sidewalks, paths, and within open spaces
or in parks as well as a variety of shopping areas. The developer shall use
these objectives to create a flexible and innovative site design for a
Traditional Town Center.
   (B)   Guiding principles for future development include:
      (1)   Emphasize Royalton and Broadview Roads as the major east/west and
north/south transportation corridors for the Town Center and establish the
Broadview and Royalton Roads intersection as a major focal point for the
District.
      (2)   Develop focal points at the end of the proposed Town Center Loop
Roads to visually anchor the street and reinforce the desired quality and
character that will allow it to be successful as a dynamic retail and
commercial district. This can be accomplished through the use of decorative
paving, landscaping or other architectural elements.
      (3)   Design internal circulation to encourage pedestrian interaction and
activity by providing wide sidewalks, numerous small gathering places, and
interesting landscape and hardscape.
      (4)   Establish gateways (or an appropriate Town Center entry experience/
identity) at the boundaries of the Town Center District. Create an SPD district
identity through the use of consistent signage, street graphics, lighting, and
landscaping.
      (5)   Develop opportunities for a variety of multi-family residential
housing types, primarily focused on market rate, for sale product.
      (6)   Improve intersection appeal and pedestrian safety by establishing
distinctive crosswalks and by making the major access points emphasize the Town
Center identity.
      (7)   Provide extensive parking area landscaping and visual screening of
vehicles from the major transportation corridors.
      (8)   Take advantage of natural site features such as stream corridors
and wetlands and provide integrated pedestrian gathering places and nature
walks as appropriate.
      (9)   Encourage sidewalk activity by developing outdoor seating, cafes
and other retail displays that are visible and accessible from the public
streets.
      (10)   Incorporate appropriate and attractive pedestrian amenities into
all major pedestrian areas. These amenities should include coordinated street
furniture, trash and recycling containers, bus shelters, paving, landscaping
and lighting.
(Ord. 194-12, passed 1-22-2013)
§ 1283.02  DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   The intent of this section is to further define words used in this
Chapter 1283 , that are shown in quotation marks.
   (B)   If the definitions in this chapter are in conflict with other chapters
of the Code of Ordinances, definitions of Codified Ordinance
Chapter 1283 take precedence.
   (C)   Terms used in this chapter are defined below.
      “Accessory building.” A detached structure such as a garage, shed,
playhouse, storage building, out-building, gazebo, pavilion, pool house, spa,
hot tub; or any other enclosed or open-air residential structure not intended
for sleeping quarters or living space. Cannot be used for any commercial use or
vehicle storage. Must be one story only.
      “Assisted living.” Housing facility for persons with disabilities or
failing health due to age or illness. These facilities provide supervision or
assistance with activities of daily living, coordination of services by outside
health care providers, and monitoring of residents’ activities to help to
ensure their health, safety, and well-being.
      “Change of occupancy and use.” A modification by an owner, developer, or
tenant which creates a change of occupancy, use, or number of occupants of a
building; or a change in land use from that listed in a proposed zoning
district.
      “Cornice.” Is generally any horizontal decorative molding that crowns a
building: the “cornice” over a door or window, for instance, or the “cornice”
around the top edge of a pedestal or along the top of an interior wall. A
“simple cornice” may be formed just with a crown molding. The function of the
“projecting cornice” of a building is to throw rain water free of the
building’s walls. In residential building practice, this function is handled by
projecting gable ends, roof eaves, and gutters. However, house eaves may also
be called “cornices” if they are finished with decorative molding. In this
sense, while most “cornices” are also eaves (in that they overhang the sides of
the building), not all eaves are usually considered “cornices” - eaves are
primarily functional and not necessarily decorative, whereas, a “cornice” has a
decorative aspect to it.
      “Development.”  As used in this Chapter 1283, refers to modifications and
improvements of land use; more specifically altering the landscape or property
which would result in neighborhood, community- wide or regional environmental
implications. References also include mixed use development which is the
practice of allowing more than one type of use in a building or district of
buildings. A “development” may also refer to a subdivision (land) which is a
parcel (or parcels) of land split or consolidated for improvements.
      “EIFS.”  Stands for exterior insulation and finish system, or the product
is commonly called synthetic stucco, and refers to a multi-layered exterior
finish. Inner layer of foam insulation board, middle layer polymer and cement
base, with an exterior layer of a textured finish coat.
      “Facade.”  Comes from the French word meaning “frontage” or “face” and
generally refers to the front exterior side of a building. But may also be
referenced to other sides. The “facade” of a building is often the most
important side from a design standpoint, as it sets the tone for the rest of
the building.
      “Fee simple ownership.” The way that real estate is owned in common law
countries and is a title in land; a form or freehold ownership. May also refer
to “fee simple absolute”. A “fee simple absolute” is the highest estate
permitted by law, and it gives the holder full possessory rights and
obligations now and in the future of the problem.
      “Gathering place.” A place where people come to congregate for
entertainment, recreation, worship or a multitude of functions. For the purpose
of this
Chapter 1283, a “gathering place” is primarily a public square, public or
private park, or courtyard.
      “Homeowners association (HOA).”  A not-for-profit organization created
initially by the developer of a subdivision or housing development for the
primary purpose of establishing rules and regulations commonly known as a set
of covenants for which the property owners of the individual sub-lots shall
follow. These covenants must cover rules that the property owners must follow
with respect to their own site as well as use of common areas owned by the
association. Such examples may include how many people can occupy the home,
color permitted for exteriors, type of landscaping permitted, storage of
vehicles on the property, use of accessory facilities permitted and regulations
for property maintenance; all of which may exceed regulations as set forth in
this
Chapter 1283.
      “Independent living facility.” A facility designed and located in a
community of age 55 and older residents, primarily for individuals with minor
disabilities, working for self-determination, self-respect and equal
opportunities. In the context of elder care, independent living is seen as a
step in the continuation of care, with assisted living being the next step.
      “Infrastructure.”  Refers to the technical structures that support a
society, community or private development, such as roads, bridges, water
supply, sewers, electrical grids, telecommunications and the like, and further
defined as “The physical components of interrelated systems providing
commodities and services essential to enable, sustain, or enhance societal
living conditions.”
      “Memory care/Alzheimer facility.”  A facility designed and operated to
care for persons with Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) which is the most common form of
dementia; a neurologic disease characterized by loss of mental ability severe
enough to interfere with normal activities of daily living, lasting at least
six months and not present from birth. Memory care facilities primarily provide
services for the elderly marked by a decline in cognitive functions such as
remembering, reasoning, and planning.
      “Mixed-use development.”  Any urban, suburban or community development,
or a single building, that blends a combination of residential, commercial,
cultural, institutional, or industrial uses, where those functions are
physically and functionally integrated, and that provides pedestrian
connections. May also refer to a development project of mixed-use buildings,
complex of buildings, or smaller section of the SPD proposed by a developer,
government agency, or any combination thereof, to benefit from: greater housing
variety/density; reduced distances between housing, workplaces, businesses;
strong neighborhood character; and pedestrian/bicycle friendly environments.
      “Nonconforming use.”  A use that was legal under the municipal laws when
it was first instituted and has been a continuing use of real property that is
permitted by the Codified Zoning Ordinances and regulations in a manner in
which other similar plots of land in the same area cannot ordinarily be
approved or permitted under the current zoning requirements. As new zoning
districts and ordinances are established, existing structures or uses in
operation may remain and the facility would become a nonconforming use, as long
as the status or use of the business or residence does not change, its status
is protected. If the conditions of business or residence are voluntarily
eliminated (vacated) for a period of 12 consecutive months or more, the
nonconforming status is revoked and the current zoning requirements must be
followed.
      “Parapet.”  A wall-like barrier at the edge of a roof, terrace, balcony,
or other structure. Where extending above a roof, it may simply be the portion
of an exterior wall that continues above the line of the roof surface, or may
be a continuation of a vertical feature beneath the roof, such as a fire wall
or party wall. Parapets were originally used to defend buildings from military
attack, but today they are primarily used to prevent the spread of fires.
      “Place of worship/religious assembly.”  An establishment or other
location where a group of people (a congregation) comes to perform acts of
religious study, honor, or devotion. The architectural term used to define the
structure for worship may be: church, temple, mosque, chapel, basilica,
cathedral, kirk, meeting house, kingdom hall, synagogue, and the like. Places
of worship (religious buildings) are offered special governmental protection by
law.
      “Plaza.”  An open urban public space, such as a city square. It can be
any gathering place on a street or between buildings, a street intersection
with a statue, fountain, and the like. A design element of landscaping (trees/
shrubbery), places to sit, walkways, and usually near urban buildings. May be
further defined as a modern version of a traditional marketplace.
      “Public square.”  A term commonly used to define a central marketplace.
Refer to definition of “plaza” above and “square” defined below.
      “Right-of-way.” A strip of land that is legally granted, through an
easement, dedicated plat, or other mechanism, for transportation and utility
easement purposes, such as for a trail, driveway, rail line or highway. A
“right-of-way” is reserved for the purposes of maintenance or expansion of
existing services and utilities within the “right-of-way”. In the case of an
easement, it may revert to its original owners if the facility is abandoned.
For the purpose of this SPD, building setbacks are based upon the street right-
of-way.
      “Riparian area.”  The interface between land and a river, stream or
waterway. “Riparian areas” or zones are significant in ecology, environmental
management and civil engineering because of their role in soil conservation,
habitat biodiversity and the influence they have on grasslands, woodland,
wetland or sometimes include non-vegetative areas. Other terms to define this
area include: riparian woodland; riparian forest; riparian buffer zone; or
riparian strip. These areas or zones may be natural or engineered for soil
stabilization or restoration.
      “Spandrel.”  A material used as a basis for glass making which is fused
to the glass using high- heat fusing methods. This material is often used in
building facades to give a uniform appearance of a totally glass envelope.
Spandrel glass conceals portions of the structural metal framing to create a
building of glass that appears to be seamless and aesthetically appealing.
      “Square (Town Square).”  An open public space commonly found in the heart
of a traditional town, city, or special district used for community gatherings.
Other common names are: civic center; city square; urban square; market square;
public square; piazza; plaza; and town green. Also, refer to definitions in
this section for “plaza” and “public square” for similar uses.
      “Town Center.”  Referred to as the Central Business District where most
of the central activities of the community occur with a heavy concentration of
retail and office buildings. Geographically at the intersection of Royalton and
Broadview Roads. Other common terms used to define the Town Center are:
Downtown; Town Square; Activity District; Plaza; or Public Square. The “Town
Center” is permitted to have a higher-than-usual population density than other
areas in the District. The “Town Center’s” two zones refer to reflect a heavy
concentration of retail and offices in Zone A, with very little residential;
whereas, Zone B encourages varying densities of housing types surrounding Zone
A.
      “Town home (town house).”  A term commonly used to define a two-story
residence lined in a row sharing sidewalls, with no neighbors above or below,
usually the living space is on the first floor with bedrooms on the second
floor. A basement is often included.
      “Tree-Save-Zone.”  An area where removing trees larger than six inches in
diameter (measured above the root ball) is prohibited unless approved by the
Tree Commission. When removing trees in this zone, or any form of development
or construction in this zone, a barrier must be constructed to protect the root
system, or trunk of a tree from damage, or from soil/material deposits. Refer
to additional regulations of the Tree Commission.
      “Use and Occupancy.”  A certificate which allows persons to take
possession of a building for its intended use as a tenant or owner of a
business per rules of the Ohio Building Code or any government authority having
jurisdiction. This certificate provides proof that a building or structure has
been inspected and has passed safety and health code requirements.
      “Vista.”  An area for aesthetic viewing, usually seen through a long,
narrow avenue or passage, as between rows of trees or houses.
(Ord. 194-12, passed 1-22-2013)
§ 1283.03  USE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Any occupancy and use that legally exists at the time of approval of
the Town Center District may continue as a nonconforming use. The existing
occupancy and use may be transferred to a new owner and continued as the same
purpose, providing the occupancy and use has not been voluntarily discontinued
for more than 12 consecutive months.
   (B)   If application has been made for a change of occupancy or use from the
nonconforming status which was granted at time of approval of this Town Center,
the applicant must follow all regulations and conditions set forth in this
Chapter 1283.
   (C)   Any one-, two-, or three-family residential facilities being converted
to a commercial facility as defined by the Ohio Building Code must follow all
requirements of the Ohio Building Code for “Change of Use”. Any residential
facility with a nonconforming existing status would be terminated at time of
“Change of Use” and may never be permitted to revert to its original status.
   (D)   Construction/development projects shall incorporate all regulations
listed in Chapters
1246 (Planning Principles),
1248 (Land Improvements),
1334 (Storm Water Pollution Prevention) and
1449 (Fee Schedule).
(Ord. 194-12, passed 1-22-2013)
§ 1283.04  SCHEDULE OF PERMITTED BUILDINGS AND USES.
   (A)   Zone A District (TC-SPD-1 A) (Approx. 107 Acres).  This Zone A is to
be the center of the Town Center Business District with all structures designed
at the intersections of Broadview and Royalton Roads as a major focal point of
the district.  The following categories list several representative examples of
uses, either Permitted (P) or Conditionally Permitted Uses (C) which require
approval of the Planning Commission. NOTE:  The percentages listed below refer
to the total area of the permanent parcel of land and not to be confused with
percentages of the square footage of the structure on the site. Acreages are
rounded to the nearest whole numbers.
      (1)   Assembly. Thirty-two acres, 0-30% of total SPD-1A.  This category
includes, among others of similar use as identified in the Ohio Building Code
for the use of buildings or structures, or a portion thereof, for the gathering
of persons for the purpose of recreation, food or drink consumption, or
education/training.
         (a)   Banquet halls (C)  0-35% - 11 acres.
         (b)   Night clubs/concert hall/theater (C)  0-35% - 11 acres.
         (c)   Restaurants (P)  0-60% - 19 acres.
         (d)   Taverns and bars (P)  0-30% - 10 acres.
         (e)   Amusement arcades (C)  0-15% - 5 acres.
         (f)   Schools/education (C)  0-30% - 10 acres.
      (2)   Business Uses. Eighty-six acres, 0-80% of total TC-SPD-1A.  This
category includes, among others of similar use as identified in the Ohio
Building Code for the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, for
offices, professional services, or service-type transactions, including storage
of records and accounting.
         (a)   Offices (P)  0-80% - 69 acres.
         (b)   Financial facilities/banks (P) (excluding check cashing)  0-30%
- 24 acres.
         (c)   Professional services (P)  0-30% - 26 acres.
         (d)   Clinics (C)  0-30% - 26 acres.
         (e)   Child day-care/adult day-care (P)  0-10% - 4 acres.
      (3)   Mercantile. One hundred and seven acres, 0-100% of total TC-SPD-
1 A.  This category includes, among others of similar use as identified in the
Ohio Building Code for the use of a building or structure, or a portion
thereof, for the display and sale of merchandise and involves stocks of goods,
wares or merchandise incidental to such purposes and accessible to the public.
         (a)   Motor fuel-dispensing facilities (C)  0-5% - 5 acres.  Not
permitted within 400 feet of the intersection of Broadview and Royalton Roads.
         (b)   Retail sales (C)  0-80% - 86 acres.
      (4)   Community. Eleven acres, 0-10% of total TC-SPD-1A.  This category
includes, among others of similar use as identified in the Ohio Building Code
for the use of a building or structure, or a portion thereof, for religious,
charitable organizations or any other facility that provides community public
access.
         (a)   Places of religious assembly (P)  0-75% - 8 acres.
         (b)   Chamber of Commerce (P)  0-50% - 6 acres.
         (c)   Charitable organizations (C)  0-50% - 6 acres.
         (d)   Government offices (C)  0-100% - 11 acres.
      (5)   Mixed use (two story max). Fifty-four acres, 0-50% of total TC-SPD-
1A.  This category includes, among others of similar use as identified in the
Ohio Building Code for the use of a two story building or structure, or a
portion thereof, for a combination of uses listed below.  The mixed use
classification is commonly found with housing or office located on the second
floor over mercantile facilities with separate independent means of egress.
         (a)   Housing units over mercantile (C)  0-75% - 41 acres.
         (b)   Offices over mercantile (C)  0-75% - 41 acres.
         (c)   Offices over assembly (C)  0-50% - 27 acres.
      (6)   Life Style Housing Apartments. (C)  0-10% - 11 acres.
   (B)   Zone B District (TC-SPD-1B) (Approximately 275 Acres).  This Zone B is
intended to surround the Town Center Business District (Zone A) with facilities
and structures that will support and complement the businesses including a
comprehensive network of accessible pedestrian and vehicular circulation.  The
following categories list several representative examples of uses, either
Permitted (P) or Conditionally Permitted Uses (C) which requires approval of
the Planning Commission.
      (1)   Assembly. Fifty-five acres, 0-20% of total TC-SPD-1B.  This
category includes, among others of similar use as identified in the Ohio
Building Code for the use of buildings and structures, or a portion thereof,
for the gathering of persons for recreation, food or drink consumption,
education/training, banquets or theaters.
         (a)   Banquet halls (C)  0-30% - 16 acres.
         (b)   Restaurants (C)  0-30% - 16 acre.
         (c)   Taverns and bars (C)  0-30% - 16 acres.
         (d)   Amusement arcades (C)  0-20% - 11 acres.
         (e)   Schools/education (C)  0-40% - 22 acres.
         (f)   Theaters/playhouse (C)  0-20% - 11 acres.
         (g)   Museums (P)  0-20% - 11 acres.
         (h)   Martial arts (P)  0-10% - 5 acres.
         (i)   Art galleries (P) - 0-20% - 11 acres.
      (2)   Business Uses. One hundred sixty-five acres, 0-60% of total TC-SPD-
1B.  This category includes, among others of similar use as identified in the
Ohio Building Code for the use of a building or structure, or a portion
thereof, for offices, professional services, or service-type transactions,
including storage of records and accounting.
         (a)   Offices (P)  0-80% - 132 acres.
         (b)   Financial facilities/banks (P) (excluding check cashing)  0-30%
- 50 acres.
         (c)   Professional services (P)  0-50% - 82 acres.
         (d)   Clinics (c)  0-40% - 66 acres.
         (e)   Child day-care/adult day-care (P)  0-10% - 17 acres.
         (f)   Auto repair (C)  0-5% - 2 acres.
      (3)   Mercantile. Eighty-three acres, 0-30% of total TC-SPD-1B.  This
category includes, among others of similar use as identified in the Ohio
Building Code for the use of a building or structure or a portion thereof, for
the display and sale of merchandise and involves stocks of goods, wares or
merchandise incidental to such purposes and accessible to the public.
         (a)   Motor fuel-dispensing facilities (C)  0-10% - 4 acres.
         (b)   Retail sales (C)  0-40% - 33 acres.
      (4)   Community. Twenty-eight acres, 0-10% of total TC-SPD-1B.  This
category includes, among others of similar use as identified in the Ohio
Building Code for the use of a building or structure or a portion thereof for
religious, charitable organizations or any other facility that provides
community public access.
         (a)   Places of religious assembly (P)  0-75% - 12 acres.
         (b)   Chamber of Commerce (P)  0-10% - 3 acres.
         (c)   Charitable organizations (C)  0-25% - 7 acres.
         (d)   Government offices (C)  0-100% - 28 acres.
      (5)   Mixed Use (Two Story Max). Fifty-five acres, 0-20% of total TC-SPD-
1B.  This category includes, among others of similar use as identified in the
Ohio Building Code for the use of a two story building or structure, or a
portion thereof, for a combination of uses listed below.  The mixed use
classification is commonly found with housing or offices located on the second
floor over mercantile facilities with separate independent means of egress.
         (a)   Housing units over mercantile (C)  0-50% - 28 acres.
         (b)   Offices over mercantile (C)  0-50% - 28 acres.
         (c)   Offices over assembly (C)  0-50% - 28 acres.
      (6)   Adult Assisted Living. Fourteen acres, 0-17% of total TC SPD-1B.
      (7)   Neighborhood/Housing. One hundred and ten acres, 0-40% of total TC-
SPD-1B.  This category includes, among others listed in Exhibit A §
1283.08 , the use of buildings and structures for single- and multi-family
housing.
         (a)   Low density (single-family detached units) (P)  0-20% - 22
acres.
         (b)   Medium density (single-family detached cluster units) (P)  0-80%
- 88 acres.
         (c)   Medium density (single-family attached cluster units) (C)  0-50%
- 55 acres.
         (d)   High density (multi-family and condominiums with two story
maximum height) (C)  0-40% - 44 acres.
   (C)   Prohibited Uses.  The following facilities are not permitted in TC-
SPD-1A and TC-SPD-1B.
      (1)   Above ground tanks/towers;
      (2)   Agricultural facilities;
      (3)   Alcohol and drug centers;
      (4)   Casino;
      (5)   Cemeteries;
      (6)   Check cashing;
      (7)   Convents/monasteries;
      (8)   Factories/industrial uses;
      (9)   Fireworks store;
      (10)   Games of chance;
      (11)   Greenhouses;
      (12)   High hazard storage;
      (13)   Hotels/motels (non-transient);
      (14)   Laser tag/paintball;
      (15)   Model agencies;
      (16)   Outdoor amusement parks;
      (17)   Pawn and title;
      (18)   Prisons/correctional facilities;
      (19)   Reformatories;
      (20)   Rehabilitation centers;
      (21)   Sexually oriented businesses;
      (22)   Store front places of worship/religious assembly;
      (23)   Storage units;
      (24)   Tanning;
      (25)   Medical marijuana (cultivation, processing or retail sale);
      (26)   Auto body shop;
      (27)   Car sales (new and used); and
      (28)   Open storage.
      (29)   Vaping sales.
      (30)   CBD sales.
      (31)   Crematoriums.
(Ord. 194-12, passed 1-22-2013; Ord. 47-16, passed 11-7-2016; Ord. 23-2020,
passed 7-6-2020)
§ 1283.05  DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
   (A)   The Exhibits provided as part of this section identify the boundaries
of the Town Center Special Planning Districts:
      (1)   Zone A, comprising approximately 107 acres; and
      (2)   Zone B, comprising approximately 275 acres.
   (B)   This Zoning District boundary is not intended to be restrictive as to
the exact location of various uses such as assembly, retail, business, housing,
and the like, but §
1283.04 provides maximum percentage of each type of use permitted in Zones A
and B accordingly. The percentages identified in §
1283.04 represent the area of the land parcels in acres and not total building
areas. The acreage is rounded to the nearest whole number.
   (C)   Special Planning District Exhibits.
      (1)   Exhibit A (SPD-1) showing district boundaries is included at the
end of this
Chapter 1283.
      (2)   Exhibit B (SPD-1) showing district boundaries, permanent parcel
numbers is included at the end of this
Chapter 1283.
(Ord. 194-12, passed 1-22-2013)
§ 1283.06  DEVELOPMENT GUIDELINES.
   (A)   General Requirements.
      (1)   Intent of the SPD. This section describes the general
characteristics of development to meet the overall intent of the SPD. One of
the most challenging tasks is to provide connections between different areas
and uses. The following categories must be incorporated: refer to §
1283.04  for a schedule of permitted buildings and uses for both Zone A
District (TL-SPD-1A) and Zone B District (TC-SPD-1B).
      (2)   Activity Center Areas.
         (a)   Description. Activity centers consist of a core focus area, with
shopping, services, recreation, and office and institutional facilities and
support areas. Activity centers are the most critical element of the SPD.
Activity centers are characterized by a distinctive identity and a compatible
mix of activities and facilities, along with functional and aesthetic unity.
         (b)   Purpose of Area.
            1.   To have all of the essential facilities for the community
concentrated in one convenient location, the focus area; and
            2.   To provide community focal points and open space and be fully
connected to adjoining neighborhoods in the support area and surrounding
neighborhoods.
         (c)   Neighborhood Activity Centers. Neighborhood activity centers
provide facilities to serve the daily needs of one or more adjoining
neighborhoods. This one convenient location contains small- scale facilities
such as a supermarket, a drug store, service stations, small offices and a day-
care center.
         (d)   Community Activity Centers. Community activity centers serve a
wider area and therefore are larger and more diverse than neighborhood activity
centers. They can contain such facilities as a large supermarket, large drug
store, large chain retail/discount store, specialty shops, service stations,
places of worship/religious assembly, parks, mid-size offices, and perhaps, a
school.
         (e)   Regional Activity Centers. Regional activity centers serve an
entire region. Regional shopping malls, a number of major employers; restaurant
and entertainment facilities; and a high school or community college; are the
kinds of facilities that anchor regional activity centers. Regional centers
take up the most land, have the most diverse uses, and are the most intensely
developed of the three levels of activity centers.
      (3)   Office Parks and Transitional Office Areas.
         (a)   Description.  Office parks are planned concentrations of office
development. These areas accommodate additional office growth outside of
activity centers. They include space, for example, for large firms or those
that by size or function are incompatible with the residential, office, and
commercial uses in activity centers. Office parks have primarily office uses
such as corporate offices.
         (b)   Purpose of Area.  Office parks provide space for substantial
employment centers. They accommodate uses that do not fit the compact,
pedestrian orientation of activity centers. Office parks are unified
developments, often in campus-like settings with an internal road network and
shared open space. The buildings generally relate to each other and share
design characteristics.
      (4)   Other Nonresidential Use Areas, Not in Activity Centers or Office
Parks.
         (a)   Description.  These sites provide isolated commercial, office,
and institutional uses that may not fit into activity centers or office parks.
Examples include miscellaneous uses such as veterinary clinics, furniture
stores, and vehicle dealerships. These are the categories of nonresidential
development:
            1.   Commercial uses outside of activity centers;
            2.   Office and institutional uses outside of activity centers;
            3.   Industrial uses outside of activity centers;
            4.   Commercial low-intensity uses; and
            5.   Transitional office uses. These categories can be applied to
infill sites and at the intersections of some arterials not designated as
activity centers.
         (b)   Purpose of Area.  The purpose of these areas is to accommodate
the wide range of miscellaneous uses that do not logically fit into activity
centers or exist outside of activity centers for other reasons.
      (5)   Corridor Conversion and Redevelopment Areas.
         (a)   Description.  If corridors in the SPD are slated for
redevelopment, primarily because of roadway widenings, these expanded roadways
can cause significant changes and challenges for the adjoining sites, many of
which may contain existing single-family dwellings. Their continued residential
use may be obsolete due to the impact of the widened corridor and must be
incorporated into the overall development plan.
         (b)   Purpose of Area.  This category identifies areas that likely
will undergo changes. The intent is to provide guidance for new uses or designs
or adaptations that serve the function of the area and needs of individual
property owners.
      (6)   Circulation. 
         (a)   Description.  Circulation includes all of the elements that
connect places in the community: streets; pedestrian walks and paths; bicycle
routes; public transit; and streetscape features.
         (b)   Streets.  The hierarchy of roads in the SPD is as follows:
            1.   Arterials are the primary high-volume, multi-lane routes
through the Central Business District (Broadview and Royalton Roads);
            2.   Collectors carry traffic between arterials, from lower-order
roads to arterials and are in the major routes within a development. They also
form a secondary network of cross-town connectivity; and
            3.   Local streets carry traffic from destinations to collector
roads. They include cul- de-sacs, loop streets, and alleys.
         (c)   Pedestrian/Vehicular Movement.
            1.   All streets must be designed with a strong sensitivity to
pedestrian/vehicular movement;
            2.   Provide more than one route between most destinations using
streets of varying sizes and types. Assure that future development and
redevelopment provides a more connected street system;
            3.   For major arterials that handle large volumes of traffic:
               a.   Provide frequent collector roads connecting arterials and
developments;
               b.   Limit local street and driveway access points. Instead,
provide frequent collector streets that, in turn, provide access to local
roads;
               c.   Avoid using continuous center two-way turning lanes; and
               d.   Provide planted medians wherever possible.
            4.   Where arterials enter activity centers, provide:
               a.   Treatments to announce arrival at activity centers, such as
decorative lighting, special landscaping, and plazas;
               b.   Traffic calming devices to slow traffic, such as street
trees, paving changes, or pedestrian crosswalks;
               c.   Collector streets between developments for a secondary
means of cross-town connectivity and for alternate routes between destination
points;
               d.   Avoid having individual developments connect to arterial
roads only; and
               e.   Whenever possible, link to or extend existing or planned
arterials, collectors and local streets.
            5.   Provide street system of collectors and local streets that:
               a.   Provides multiple access routes to arterial and other
collector streets;
               b.   Has a logical pattern;
               c.   Allows direct connections to adjoining developments;
               d.   Connects outparcels; and
               e.   Accommodates pedestrian and bicycle access.
            6.   Provide local streets within developments that keep to the
minimum required widths and number of lanes in order to slow traffic and
maintain pedestrian scale. Reduce the use of cul-de- sacs. Alternative designs
to the conventional cul-de-sac can make connections while still limiting
traffic and providing privacy. Consider the following specific options:
               a.   Loop roads and circuitous through streets. These types of
roads allow residents two means of egress off of a local street, but because of
their limited access and size, discourage through traffic. Some smaller scale
developments could use single-lane versions of these street types, allowing
more green space and less roadway;
               b.   Consider using alleys in small-lot residential areas and in
commercial sites to provide access to service areas while retaining the visual
integrity of the facades;
               c.   Adapt cul-de-sac streets to provide, where topographically
feasible, at least one additional connection to the development, such as a
pedestrian pathway and/or bike path. Consider limiting the paved turn around
area of cul-de-sacs with a landscape island; and
               d.   Refer to Chapter 1246 for street right-of-way widths,
street paving widths and construction requirements.
         (d)   Pedestrian Routes.  The pedestrian network includes sidewalks,
designated road crossings, off-road paths, and shared bicycle paths:
            1.   Provide, where feasible, unbroken pedestrian routes between
developments. Place paths in a logical pattern where people will want to walk.
Place sidewalks on both sides of streets;
            2.   Within developments, identify a complete pedestrian pathway
system linking all buildings, green spaces and other destinations. Design with
emphasis on pedestrian convenience and safety;
               a.   Link buildings to the public sidewalk and to each other as
appropriate;
               b.   Add walk-throughs in parking lots;
               c.   Provide crosswalks in front of building entrances;
               d.   Provide breaks in large building masses to allow
pedestrians to pass through, particularly through shopping centers;
               e.   Place special emphasis on connecting to pedestrian pathways
that link schools, transit, recreation areas, and other major destinations;
               f.   Place sidewalks throughout residential areas;
               g.   Place sidewalks on both sides of streets whenever possible;
and
               h.   Include off-road walking paths that will provide direct
routes between destinations if the roadside sidewalks cannot provide direct
access.
            3.   At busy intersections, between major pedestrian destinations,
between shopping centers and their parking, and at mid-block points where
feasible, employ techniques to signal a pedestrian zone both to the automobile
and the pedestrian. These techniques include:
               a.   Crosswalks that are slightly raised;
               b.   Crosswalks that are a material other than asphalt and are
textured;
               c.   Crosswalks that are wide, at least ten feet;
               d.   Bulb-out corners that reduce the length of the crosswalk
for the pedestrian.
            4.   Design sidewalks appropriately for the site and the expected
amount of foot traffic. In commercial areas where foot traffic is expected,
sidewalks should be a minimum of ten feet. Sidewalks in residential areas can
be six feet and under, depending on the type of street and size of road.
            5.   Provide pedestrian paths/bike connections between streets,
especially to connect cul-de-sacs and at mid-block points.
         (e)   Bicycle Routes.
            1.   Bicycle routes include:
               a.   Designated bike paths;
               b.   Shared pedestrian-and-bike facilities such as greenways,
paths, and sidewalks; and
               c.   On-street bike lanes.
            2.   It is a goal to conveniently and safely provide bicycle
connections between most destinations:
               a.   Provide for bicycle traffic along major commuting corridors
and between major destinations, with particular emphasis on connecting
residential areas to schools, recreation areas, and activity centers;
               b.   Provide new bike paths to connect to planned or existing
municipal paths or paths of adjoining developments;
               c.   Provide facilities to store or lock bicycles at appropriate
sites, including schools, major recreation areas, transit stations, office
parks, public institutions, and activity center focus areas; and
               d.   Develop an easily identifiable marking system of signs and
road markings to designate bicycle routes and crossings.
         (f)   Public Transit.
            1.   Public transportation routes to be incorporated to include
buses, vans and other services as follows:
               a.   Continuous street networks with frequent connector streets
provide the best environment for transit systems; and
               b.   Sidewalks are necessary to connect transit stops with
destinations.
            2.   Along potential transit routes, primarily along major
commuting arterials and collector streets, plan for transit stops/bus pullover
sites:
               a.   In particular, provide sites at activity centers and major
commercial developments;
               b.   Provide sites close to the entrances of major destinations
such as industrial and office parks;
               c.   Provide sites at entrances to residential developments,
particularly medium and high-density residential developments; and
               d.   Locate sites at pathway connections and park-and-ride lots.
            3.   Ensure that the width and design of the roads can accommodate
pullover and turning movements of the transit vehicle anticipated. These
specifications will vary depending on the type of transit used;
            4.   Provide a sign system for pedestrians, bicyclists, and transit
users; and
            5.   Include amenities appropriate to the projected boarding sites.
At major stops, include shelter from the weather, seating, bike storage areas,
signs and information boards, newspaper stands, trash receptacles, and
lighting.
      (7)   Streetscape Environment.
         (a)   “Streetscape” is the general term applied to all of the elements
that make up the public realm surrounding thoroughfares: street paving;
sidewalks; planting strips; lighting; traffic signals; outdoor street
furniture; public signs; and utilities. Streetscapes act as connective outdoor
space and help to weave a common community fabric. Streetscape elements lend to
human scale, contribute to a sense of place, and help to link destinations such
as:
            1.   Sidewalks along the edge of buildings where there is retail
and commercial activity;
            2.   Tree-lined sidewalks and paths that provide enclosure; and
            3.   Paving materials and landscaping that give texture and visual
definition to public spaces.
         (b)   Along arterials that connect activity centers to each other or
to other major developments, use street trees, streetlights, planted medians,
underground utilities and other features to strengthen the visual and physical
link between destinations. Ensure that all site distance requirements are met
as plans are made.
         (c)   Announce gateways to activity centers, and possibly
neighborhoods, with distinctive streetscape elements. These can include signs,
special paving at crosswalks, grouped plantings, fountains, and other signature
features.
         (d)   In activity center cores, use coordinated streetscape elements
to give the area a distinctive identity. These elements can be repeated but
perhaps spaced less frequently as developments move away from the center of the
activity center. Pedestrian-scaled lighting may be spaced more frequently and
have more powerful illumination to allow higher light levels. As development
moves out to residential areas, lighting may be less intense with wider
spacing, but the same light fixture could be used. Likewise, taller auto-
oriented lights used on arterials approaching activity centers can use similar
pole and base design as pedestrian lights in activity centers.
         (e)   In residential settings, provide street trees, sidewalks, paths
and pedestrian-scaled lighting to fit the style of architecture of the
development. Provide planting strips that are in proportion to street width and
type. For instance, planting strips along arterials may be wider than planting
strips along residential local streets. Coordinate strips with utility
requirements as well.
         (f)   Coordinate the total visual effect of all streetscape elements
within a development or along an arterial or major collector, including paving,
sidewalks, street trees and plantings, lighting, traffic signals, signs, street
furniture, and utilities. Develop and use a common palette of colors,
materials, and design.
         (g)   Coordinate streetscape elements of individual developments with
adjacent developments. While they need not match, they should coordinate and
not clash.
      (8)   Parking.
         (a)   Description.  Automobiles are a valuable part of everyday life
and provisions must be made for them wherever people live, work, and play. At
the same time, every effort must be made to address how parking can be
adequate, convenient but unobtrusive.
         (b)   Reduce the Scale of Parking Lots.
            1.   Break parking lots into modules or multiple smaller lots using
techniques such as the natural topography, logically placed landscaped
pedestrian paths to destinations, and by linear aisles of plantings. Avoid
large expanses of asphalt;
            2.   Reduce the amount of parking lots through such methods as
providing on-street parking, using off-site parking such as municipal lots,
sharing parking among complementary uses, providing pull-in spaces in front of
shops and creating overflow lots. These techniques may require some flexibility
when applying parking standards; and
            3.   Consider parking structures in high-density areas such as
activity centers to create closer knit development and reduce parking impacts.
Use attractive architectural designs.
         (c)   Site a Portion of Parking out of View.
            1.   Site a minimum of 20% to 40% of parking to the rear and sides
of buildings;
            2.   Limit the amount of parking between the street and principal
buildings oriented to streets, (such as outparcels in shopping centers) to no
more than one double row of nose-in parking between the building and the street
to which it is oriented; and
            3.   Screen parking lots from the street and from adjoining
development, using low fences or walls, berms, or year-round landscaping. Refer
to
Chapter 1312 for fence regulations.
         (d)   Reduce the Visibility of Garages.
            1.   Avoid allowing a garage to become the primary architectural
feature when a home is viewed from the street, especially for small-lot and
attached housing;
            2.   Orient garages for townhouses and very small lot detached
homes to the rear. Avoid placing them on the first floor front facade;
            3.   Consider placing the garage behind the building setback,
preferably facing to the side or rear of detached homes;
            4.   Consider placing garages and parking in the rear with alley
access; and
            5.   Consider ways to reduce overall visual impact such as placing
driveways side-by- side on adjoining lots.
         (e)   Accommodate Pedestrian Needs Around Parking Areas.
            1.   Provide clear pedestrian paths and crossings from parking
spaces to main entrances and the street; and
            2.   Plan parking so that it least interferes with appropriate
pedestrian access and connections to adjoining developments.
         (f)   Provide Landscaping Within Parking Areas.
            1.   Separate parking aisles with medians planted with shade trees
along the length of the islands. Include pedestrian walkways with medians to
reinforce connectivity and separate pedestrians from vehicular traffic;
            2.   Avoid isolated islands of single trees. In general, provide
landscaped tree aisles between every other row of cars; and
            3.   Use shade trees of sufficient number and size at maturity to
shade a substantial portion of the lot. Consider orientations that would
provide the greatest shade during summer months. Smaller, more decorative trees
can be used closest to buildings.
         (g)   Standard Parking Spaces Shall Be Regulated by §
1284.04. Handicapped spaces shall meet ADA regulations, as required by the Ohio
Building Code and City Zoning Code. Ten-foot wide spaces are permitted but
nine-foot wide spaces are preferred in order to minimize the area of pavement
needed for parking areas. Angled parking may be permitted if in compliance with
§
1284.04  unless noted otherwise. For a number of parking spaces required refer
to §
1284.05 .
      (9)   Building Setback and Arrangement.
         (a)   Building setback and arrangement are critical elements for
creating the kind of community envisioned for this SPD. They create spaces for
pedestrians to move and congregate as well as for parking, and they create
continuity between developments. Building arrangement and setbacks help
establish an architectural presence at important intersections. They are
defined as follows.
            1.   “Setback” is generally the space between a building and the
property line.
            2.   “Building arrangement” refers to the way that buildings are
oriented to each other and to the street and how they are sited and arranged on
a parcel.
            3.   Unless noted otherwise in this chapter, refer to
Chapter 1246 (Planning Principles) for setback requirements.
         (b)   Arrange buildings to help define the street, to frame corners,
to encourage pedestrian activity and define spaces, particularly at activity
centers:
            1.   Minimize setbacks at major intersections so that the
architecture can define the area;
            2.   Use compact building arrangements when a project is close to a
core of an activity center to reduce the feeling of seas of parking; encourage
pedestrian activity to define space; and
            3.   Strive for contiguous building arrangement along the street-
face and avoid large breaks between buildings.
         (c)   Site new buildings so that they relate to adjoining buildings
and developments:
            1.   If existing buildings front the street, new buildings should
have a similar orientation;
            2.   Relate setbacks of new construction to setbacks of existing
buildings or developments;
            3.   Orient a portion of shopping centers to adjoining
neighborhoods and to local streets leading into the adjoining neighborhoods;
            4.   Provide breaks in large developments and building masses to
allow pedestrian connections between developments; and
            5.   Avoid orienting service areas toward primary elevations of
adjoining developments.
         (d)   Limit setback variation to 20% of average setback of existing
development on a street for both residential and nonresidential development;
         (e)   Around common open space, use buildings to define edges and
provide a comfortable scale; and
         (f)   Choose building arrangements that offer an attractive
termination of vistas.
      (10)   Landscaping.
         (a)   Landscaping in an urban environment has many roles. It provides
scale and enclosure; it provides shade and buffers; and it creates cool,
inviting, gathering places in commercial districts and residential areas alike.
It can reinforce connections between neighborhoods, as well as being the
barrier to unsightly views.
         (b)   Attempt to maintain existing topography and plantings in new
development:
            1.   Use indigenous species appropriate for site conditions;
            2.   Along thoroughfares and corridors, preserve a “tree-save zone”
of natural vegetation or add significant landscaping. In the core of activity
centers, street trees and more formal urban plantings may be more appropriate;
            3.   In residential areas, attempt to provide significant tree
cover, using species that will provide a canopy at maturity. When feasible,
incorporate mature trees into subdivision and lot design;
            4.   On commercial and office sites, include trees, shrubs, and
other landscaping to provide beauty as well as shade and screens for parking,
pedestrian gathering places, and for screening utilities, and other service
areas;
            5.   In pedestrian zones, use street trees to provide shade and
enclosure; and
            6.   When feasible, incorporate mature specimen trees into
streetscape, subdivision and site design.
         (c)   Provide natural areas in development plans:
            1.   Incorporate existing vegetation and large specimen trees into
site design to the extent possible;
            2.   Consider reserving from development such features as mature
woods and riparian areas;
            3.   Use storm water control ponds to create new park-like settings
or natural areas within a development. Take measures such as creating pathways
around the ponds and adding landscaping to enhance the park-like setting.
Generally, avoid fencing around ponds; however, in some cases, limited
architectural fencing of modest height may be included to enhance the park-like
setting. Unless noted otherwise in this chapter, refer to
Chapter 1312 for fence regulations; and
            4.   Use trees and other landscaping features to help enclose
spaces such as parks and gathering places.
         (d)   Detailed landscaping plans must be submitted to the Planning
Commission by the developer for review and approval. Plans will include
landscaping strategies for the public areas as well as public open spaces such
as the intersections of streets, major parking lots, outdoor recreation areas,
and all other items noted above in this section.
      (11)   Fences and Walls.
         (a)   Fences and walls are to be used to define edges along major
roadways and property lines and to provide screening when landscaping alone is
insufficient. Built edges range from fences in neighborhoods to brick walls
defining enclosure for office parks.
         (b)   When walls or fences stretch longer than 50 feet, use designs
with texture and modulation to provide a regular rhythm without being
monotonous. For example, use vertical piers, generally spaced no more than 25
feet apart, of a different material or width or height. Landscaping shall be
used in conjunction with a wall or fence to break up a long expanse.
         (c)   When a wall is an integral part of an office or commercial
development project, use materials from the material palette of the project.
         (d)   Fence design along major roadways should be aesthetically
pleasing and can be made of a variety of materials. Wood stockade, chain link
and other utilitarian fences along major roadways are not permitted.
         (e)   Unless noted otherwise throughout this chapter, refer to
Chapter 1312 for fence regulations.
      (12)   Utilities.
         (a)   Locate utilities so that they have the least negative visual
impact from the street and adjoining development. When multiple sides of a
building have entrances or are highly visible, electrical transformers and
utilities must be screened.
         (b)   All utility lines, structures, parking areas, and service areas
must be direct burial at depths required by applicable codes and regulations.
      (13)   Service Areas/Screening.
         (a)   All service areas must be screened from view from a public
street or public parking area.
         (b)   A building mass, portion of a building mass, garden wall,
landscaping, or an ornamental fence with landscaping are among the methods that
can be used to screen a service area.
         (c)   Dumpsters, transformers, generators, and other mechanical units
must be screened from view from a public street or public parking area, using
the methods described above.
         (d)   Rooftop equipment does not need to be screened if it is located
so that it cannot be seen from a public street or parking area.
         (e)   Screening does not need to occur at the point of access to a
service area.
      (14)   Noise Barriers.
         (a)   Site noise-generating features away from neighboring properties,
especially residences, or use barriers or other means of reducing the impact.
         (b)   Place mechanical equipment for nonresidential buildings so that
they have minimum impact on adjacent residential uses.
         (c)   Place noise-generating utilities on rooftops where possible.
Screen them from view along major thoroughfares and from neighborhoods and
parking lots.
      (15)   Exterior Lighting.
         (a)   Provide appropriate exterior lighting for the particular use and
area;
         (b)   Light pedestrian areas with ten to 14-foot pedestrian scaled/
designed poles;
         (c)   Provide pedestrian lighting at transit stops and along paths to
parking lots and other destinations;
         (d)   Provide extra lighting and electrical hookups at gathering
areas;
         (e)   Provide lighting under arcades;
         (f)   Provide lighting of intersections in high traffic areas. This
type of general lighting can be provided from taller poles with more powerful
lights. In high pedestrian use areas, provide lower, pedestrian level lighting.
This situation may occur at the core of activity centers in particular;
         (g)   Coordinate the lighting plan with the landscaping plan to ensure
pedestrian areas are well lit and that any conflict between trees and lighting
is avoided;
         (h)   Avoid using building accent lighting that is too bright and
draws too much attention to the building. Reasonable levels of accent lighting
to accentuate architectural character are recommended;
         (i)   The developer must submit an ornamental pole-mounted light
fixture or wall-mounted light packs to the Planning Commission for approval.
Pedestrian area location and spacing of light poles should be consistent with
existing ordinances of the city for all other conditions relating to street
lighting, per
Chapter 1252. The lighting must be of the style of "The Beacon Urban Luminaire"
or other similar style approved by Planning Commission;
         (j)   Parking areas and service areas must be lit with ornamental
lighting poles up to 25 feet in height;
         (k)   Building wall lights may be used to illuminate parking areas at
the approval of the Planning Commission; and
         (l)   Lighting Levels. Refer to
Chapter 1252  for a schedule of footcandle requirements.
      (16)   Signs.
         (a)   Follow the general guidelines for signs as identified in
Chapter 1328, unless noted otherwise throughout this chapter.
         (b)   Coordinate the colors and styles of signs within each
development area;
         (c)   Keep signs to the minimum number and size necessary for each
development area; and
         (d)   Place signs for both automobile traffic and pedestrians in areas
that will not obstruct visibility.
      (17)   Open Spaces.
         (a)   Open spaces include preserved natural areas, parks, plazas,
playgrounds, squares, greens, and yards. Attractive and convenient outdoor
spaces must be provided throughout the SPD for everyday use, special events,
passive enjoyment and as an attractive visual backdrop for the community.
         (b)   In activity centers, office parks, and other nonresidential
areas, open space provides areas for gatherings, events and functions such as
dining or meetings. In other parts of the SPD, open space may be used for
recreation such as organized sports. Natural areas are preserved for passive
recreation such as walking and picnicking.
         (c)   In neighborhoods, open space includes yards and shared areas for
playgrounds and neighborhood recreation.
         (d)   A grassy area used as a natural amphitheater may be an integral
part of an open space.
         (e)   An outdoor café may be part of the open space in a commercial
area.
         (f)   A fountain may be used as an open space in an office complex.
Such open space shall include benches and shade trees.
      (18)   Gathering Places.
         (a)   Public gathering spaces create the opportunity for informal
interactions that help build a community. They can vary widely in size, in
type, and in degree of amenities. “Gathering places” include plazas, squares
and greens that are integral design components of development plans.
         (b)   Public gathering spaces are required to be used as central
organizing elements in activity centers and should be conveniently located
within an easy five-minute walking distance of any major building. Gathering
places must occur in employment centers and office parks outside of activity
centers. The opportunity for outdoor dining in gathering places in commercial
areas should be considered.
         (c)   Create appealing and comfortable outdoor spaces and orient
buildings to form such areas rather than isolating them in landscaped pods. Use
trees, walls, topography, and other site features to further define the space
and lend a human scale to the area. Provide shade with trees or overhangs from
the buildings.
         (d)   Use open space as an organizing element of the site plan. A
gathering place can become a focal point for a development scheme.
         (e)   Provide amenities as needed including:
            1.   Street furniture, such as benches and picnic tables, lighting,
and fountains;
            2.   Bike racks;
            3.   Outdoor cafés and seating areas; and
            4.   Electrical service and lighting for public events.
      (19)   Recreation and Natural Areas.
         (a)   Recreation and natural areas are open spaces reserved for
outdoor activities and for the enjoyment of nature. Overall community
appearance should reflect the natural landscape. In addition, all residents
should be able to enjoy open space within easy walking distance of their homes.
         (b)   Recreation areas, such as mini-parks, are generally anticipated
to be small in size. They provide space and equipment for outdoor activities
within close walking distance of residences.
         (c)   Natural areas can preserve distinctive habitats or natural
vegetation, ranging from a particularly impressive mature tree to a greenbelt
along a stream corridor.
         (d)   Include private neighborhood recreation areas and children’s
playgrounds within residential areas.
         (e)   Whenever feasible, recreation and natural areas should be
centrally located within a neighborhood. Provide sufficient open space within
easy walking distance of all residents.
            1.   All residences should be within one-quarter mile walk of a
private recreation area, or a town public park.
            2.   Private mini-parks should be a minimum of one-quarter acre in
size.
            3.   In multi-building, multi-family projects, provide centrally
located versatile recreation areas on site. These can include level grassy
areas, play yards, courtyards, and natural areas, along with amenities such as
swimming pools, tennis courts and other similar features.
            4.   Link recreation and natural areas to town-wide pedestrian
systems and greenway systems as feasible.
            5.   Provide pedestrian connections between open spaces of adjacent
developments, subdivisions and multi-family sites. Seek to connect to town-wide
network of open spaces and pedestrian system.
      (20)   Permitted accessory uses listed below shall be followed unless
noted otherwise in this chapter.
         (a)   Signs as regulated by
Chapter 1328;
         (b)   Residential accessory uses or structures regulated by §
1268.02; and
         (c)   Fences as regulated by
Chapter 1312.
(Ord. 194-12, passed 1-22-2013; Ord. 23-2020, passed 7-6-2020)
§ 1283.07  BUILDING DESIGN GUIDELINES.
   (A)   Zone A District (TC-SPD-1A).
      (1)   Design Intent. The design intent for this SPD emphasizes denser
development at the core of activity centers with density decreasing as it
reaches the outlying residential area. This concept for these cores as well as
office development areas suggest buildings that will be placed closer together,
and closer to street fronts in many areas. In order to maintain the current
feel of this SPD created by mostly one- and two-story buildings, certain
techniques in building design will be required so that new development will not
be in jarring contrast to the existing built environment. Every effort must be
made to break down the appearance of facades that face a public street or
parking area. An anchor tenant store should ideally be designed to appear as a
grouping of smaller stores with the focus on anchor tenant’s main entrance.
Multiple entrances into a single anchor tenant store are encouraged,
particularly when a semi-independent use is part of that facility, (e.g., a
video store or pharmacy as part of a supermarket, or a garden center as part of
a home improvement store). All other building facades shall be designed to be
compatible to each other in architectural style.
      (2)   Entrance Orientation.
         (a)   Entrance orientation refers to the direction of prominent
entrances and front facades of a building. Generally, the entrance facade will
be the most prominent elevation of a building.
         (b)   A building may have more than one orientation. The prominent
front facade or elevation can face a major collector or corridor while
elevations facing local streets, parking or adjoining developments can have
secondary facades and entrances. Design the needed entrances with a hierarchy
to properly address the view of the building from various orientations.
      (3)   Building Mass.
         (a)   Use techniques to reduce the perceived mass of large buildings.
When making transitions to lower density areas, modulate the mass of the
building to relate to smaller buildings. Heights can be greater if the mass is
modulated and other scale techniques are adopted. Reduce height near low
density uses.
         (b)   Use building mass appropriate to the site. Place buildings of
the greatest footprint, massing, and height in activity center core areas or at
the heart of office developments where the impact on adjacent uses is the
least.
         (c)   Floor-to-floor heights of a building can have an impact on the
mass of a building. When articulating large buildings, keep these floor-to-
floor dimensions to a minimum.
         (d)   Also, utilize methods described in (A)(1) above.
         (e)   Techniques of highlighting foundations, lintels, sills and
cornices with contrasting materials and breaking up the mass of the building
with bands at floor levels or projections at entries should be incorporated.
      (4)   Building Configuration and Materials.
         (a)   Design elements that impact the exterior appearance of a
building must be incorporated into the architectural design such as:
            1.   Facade articulation;
            2.   Architectural details;
            3.   Materials and textures; and
            4.   Color.
         (b)   Develop a design theme that provides a distinctive character to
a specific area within the Special Planning District:
            1.   Establish design themes at the core of activity centers that:
have a palette of materials, forms and features; create a coordinated but
inviting mix of buildings and spaces; and establish a unique identity for each
activity center; and
            2.   Establish design themes for residential neighborhoods, such as
Colonial Revival styled houses or Neo-Victorian styled houses.
         (c)   Building Walls.
            1.   Elevations should be designed by the developer according to
the general architectural character as listed in division (A)(1) above.
            2.   Walls facing a public street or public parking area should be
designed in small sections to break up the appearance of a long horizontal
wall.
            3.   Building elements such as canopies, porches, bays or
projections should be used to break up the appearance of a long wall.
            4.   Buildings shall be clad in enduring materials of brick or
stone. Split-face block is permitted if it is screened by another building, or
on rear elevations. Additionally, split-face block may be used on front or side
elevations if it is used as a base course or accent material. Concrete products
made to simulate brick are also conditionally permitted. Precast concrete
panels should only be used on the rear or side facades of anchor tenant
buildings.
            5.   Stucco or EIFS systems are only permitted four feet above
finished floor level. If stucco is used as a primary material, it should
incorporate changes in depth, plane and other architectural features to add
detail and interest to a facade and to avoid the appearance of a monolithic
wall.
            6.   Accent materials such as tile, metal, or other appropriate
traditional regional materials are encouraged. Metal shall not be used as a
primary material on a facade.
            7.   All walls facing a public street or parking area shall be
animated by change in color, material, fenestration, or change in the depth of
material.
            8.   Brick, stone, or block shall be laid in a true bonding
pattern. No stack bond.
            9.   The maximum area of a front facade or a facade that faces a
public street that is “blank,” meaning of one contiguous material and color
without fenestration, accents, or change in material or color, is 625 square
feet. The maximum area of blank wall on a side facade that cannot be seen from
a public street but faces a public parking area is 2,400 square feet.
            10.   Where blank facades face a public street or parking area are
necessary, trees spaced less than 20 feet on center should be used in front of
these facades to gain visual interest and human scale.
            11.   Front facades and side facades that face a public street
shall be animated with changes in material and/or color. Additionally, all
facades shall be designed to have a base, middle, and top.
         (d)   Windows and Doors.
            1.   Windows shall be of square or vertical proportion. Roundtop
are permitted per approval.
            2.   The primary glass used on front facades and particularly
around entrances shall be clear glass. Glass should be used to break up the
box-like, interior-oriented character of anchor tenant buildings, and to
connect the interior of the store to the outside. Spandrel glass or display
window glass may be used to supplement clear glass areas and to animate a
facade. Where display windows occur, they shall be lit from within the store.
         (e)   Building Roofs, Parapets, and Cornices.
            1.   If a change in parapet height exceeds two feet, the parapet
shall return 90 degrees on both sides by a minimum of one foot, four inches.
            2.   Elevations or portions of elevations that are visible from a
public street or parking area shall incorporate a cornice to top the building.
Cornices may be projected brick, stone, or precast courses, or molded
fiberglass. They should be scaled appropriately to the building mass and be a
minimum of one foot in height.
            3.   All roof-top equipment in excess of two feet high shall be
screened from the street level.
         (f)   Building Height/Area. Maximum building height is 35 feet above
ground level finish floor. This includes entrance parapets, architectural
elements, and other accent features. Total building areas shall not exceed
100,000 gross square feet (combined floors).
         (g)   Building Entrances and Exits. All entrances and exits intended
for uses by the public shall incorporate glass areas, using clear glass,
exclusive of the doors facing a public street or public parking area.
         (h)   Additions and Expansions. Any additions or expansions to an
existing store must be architecturally consistent to the existing structure in
the use of color, materials, fenestration, scale, and other architectural
features as approved by the Planning Commission.
      (5)   Setback Schedule. Refer to Codified Ordinance Chapters
1268 ,
1271 ,
1276 ,
1277 ,
1278  and
1280  for setback requirements for similar facilities and use groups.
      (6)   Outdoor Displays.
         (a)   Items for outdoor display shall be undercover with some
screening. They may be set behind a transparent or semi-transparent wall plane.
This wall plane may be in the form of a glass/greenhouse-type wall, an arcade
with a canopy or awning above, a pavilion, a trellis, or an ornamental fence.
         (b)   An eight-foot clear minimum distance shall be maintained for
walking when outdoor displays occur at sidewalks.
      (7)   Outdoor Dining Areas. Outdoor eating areas may encroach into the
sidewalk but must leave a minimum of six feet width clear for walking. Outdoor
eating areas are encouraged to establish an edge to the eating area through the
use of movable bollards, planting, or a fence with a minimum height of two
feet, six inches.
      (8)   Outdoor Sales.  Outdoor sidewalk sales, with outside cash register,
are limited to 72 hours duration and no more than two such sales are permitted
per month. This does not prohibit outdoor displays as referenced in division
(A)(6) above.
      (9)   Color. Color is an integral element of the overall design and this
Special Planning District must include the following:
            1.   A coordinated palette of colors created for each development.
This palette must be compatible with adjacent developments;
            2.   Set the color theme by choosing the color for the material
with the most area. If there is more roof than wall area in a development, roof
color will be the most important color choice and will set the tone for the
rest of the colors;
            3.   Limit the number of color choices. Generally, there is a wall
color, trim color, accent color, and roof color;
            4.   Use natural tints of materials such as reds, browns, tans,
grays, and greens as primary colors. Save bright accent colors for awnings and
signs on commercial buildings; and
            5.   Use color variation to break up the mass of a building and
provide visual interest.
   (B)   Zone B District (TC-SPD-1B).
      (1)   Design Intent. This district of assembly, business mercantile,
community, mixed use, institutional, combined with different densities of
residential and lifestyle community housing is to be designed with strong
consideration given to controlled pedestrian and vehicular circulation. Homes
are to be oriented to have natural views and connection to land that must be
preserved as an open public green space for recreation. Site designers and
developers are to use ingenuity and imagination in keeping with the overall
land use and open space objectives of the district. This SPD allows more
creative and flexible design of the built environment than possible with
existing zoning, and allows creative use of the clustering and density
averaging concepts to concentrate homes on the site in order to maximize common
open space. Every effort should be made to connect pedestrian trails with other
public amenities for public access. Residential neighborhoods should
incorporate pavilions and indoor recreation facilities. The design should
include curvilinear streets and irregular shaped blocks. Cluster type homes
should be designed with front porch neighborhood style with garages being in
the rear, serviced by alleys for parking and service vehicles.
      (2)   Building Setbacks. Refer to Chapters
1268 ,
1270 ,
1276 ,
1277 ,
1278  and
1280  for similar setbacks unless noted otherwise in this chapter.
      (3)   Building Configuration and Materials.
         (a)   Specific Types of Buildings. For all assembly, business,
mercantile, community, mixed use and institutional, refer to division (A)(4)
above unless noted otherwise below.
         (b)   Building Height/Size. Maximum building height is 35 feet above
ground level finish floor. This includes entrance parapets, architectural
elements, and other accent features. Building areas shall not exceed 60,000
gross square feet (total of all floors combined) unless noted otherwise in this
chapter.
         (c)   Low-Density Single-Family Conventional Detached Residential
Dwellings.
            1.   Density. The maximum density permitted in this district is two
units/acre with a minimum lot width of 100 feet.
            2.   Landscaping. Detailed landscaping plans to be submitted to the
city by the developer. Plans will include landscaping strategies for the public
areas, as well as public open spaces such as a neighborhood park. In addition,
general minimum requirements for landscaping of private yards will be submitted
to the city for approval.
            3.   Infrastructure. Provide drawings of proposed infrastructure
per current Residential Building/Zoning Codes.
            4.   Screening/Fencing. A tree line shall be maintained. A minimum
distance of 25 feet from these property lines shall be established as a “do not
disturb” zone.
            5.   Exterior Lighting.  The developer must have gas ornamental
lighting standard for use in the public right-of-way to the city for approval.
Light fixtures should be pole-mounted and should not exceed 15 feet in height.
If alleys are proposed, they should be lit with automatically-timed light
fixtures that are mounted to garages. Location and spacing of light poles as
well as light levels should be in accordance with the city’s standards.
            6.   Homeowners Association (HOA)/Design Review Committee.
               a.   A homeowners or condominium association must be established
prior to the transfer of title of any lot or unit as the case may be and
approved by the Director of Law.
               b.   A Design Review Committee shall be established as part of
the homeowners association, set up by the developer. This Committee shall have
the authority to review changes to the exterior of buildings. No changes to the
exterior of buildings shall occur without the approval of the Design Review
Committee.
            7.   Floor Area Requirements.
               a.   Units shall have a minimum floor area of 1,800 square feet
of living space on the first floor of ranch style homes and a minimum 1,200
square feet on the first floor for two-story homes with a total minimum living
area of 2,000 square feet.
               b.   All units shall have full basements.
               c.   Refer to §
1268.02 for accessory uses permitted.
            8.   Building Materials/Elements.
               a.   Buildings may be clad in vinyl siding, wood siding, cement
siding, brick, or stone. EIFS or stucco may be used from the second floor level
up.
               b.   No vinyl lap siding on front facade (horizontal or
vertical) is permitted.
               c.   When using brick, a standard modular brick shall be used.
No split-face masonry permitted in front facade.
               d.   Window trim is required around all windows on front
elevations of non- masonry walls and should be a minimum of three and one-half
inches wide.
               e.   Frieze trim is required under overhands and gables on front
elevations.
               f.   Porch columns shall have a six-inch by six-inch minimum
cross-section or diameter with a base and capital. Railing/column details in
combination are encouraged to vary from house to house.
               g.   Lintels in masonry walls should be brick soldier courses,
stone, or precast concrete.
               h.   Trim and corner boards may be wood, vinyl, EIFS, or pre-
formed composite materials.
               i.   No exposed wolmanized wood is permitted on front facades.
               j.   No two houses in a row should have the same color
combination of wall, brick and stone.
               k.   Where direct-vent fireplaces occur, the exterior shed shall
be designed to be integrated into the architecture.
            9.   Windows and Doors.
               a.   Rear elevations should have a minimum of two windows per
elevation.
               b.   Windows shall be of square or vertical proportion.
               c.   Accent windows may be circular, half-round, or octagonal.
One accent window maximum per elevation is permitted, unless used in a pair.
            10.   Building Roofs. Primary roofs shall have a minimum 6:12 roof
pitch. Porches shall have a minimum 3:12 roof pitch.
            11.   Building Height. Maximum building height is 35 feet above
grade for primary structure.
            12.   Building Entries/Porches.
               a.   All homes shall provide an identifiable entry.
               b.   Where overhangs occur at a front door, a four-foot deep
overhang is encouraged.
               c.   All full porches shall be a minimum of six feet deep. Entry
coverings and stoops shall be a minimum of three feet deep.
            13.   Garages.
               a.   Garages must be attached.
               b.   Front elevations shall be designed to de-emphasize the
visual impact of the garage. Front-access garage should be set back a minimum
of two feet from the primary mass of the house. Second floors may project over
the garage. Porches and other architectural elements may project beyond the
face of the garage. Single-car garage doors are encouraged to lessen the scale
of a two-car garage door. A minimum two-car garage is required. Maximum garage
size is 840 square feet for two-car and 1,200 square feet for three-car
garages.
            14.   Accessory Buildings.
               a.   One detached accessory building is permitted and shall be
limited to the rear yard, shall not be greater than 144 square feet, shall be
designed with materials and style similar to the principal dwelling on the
property, and shall otherwise be in accordance with §
1268.02.
               b.   The total area of the lot that is covered with principal
and accessory buildings shall not exceed 20% of the lot area.
            15.   Swimming Pools.  Only in-ground swimming pools are permitted
as defined and regulated by
Chapter 1332 . These pools are not subject to the 20% coverage and the square
foot limitations listed above. Setback requirement for pools are established in
Chapter 1268 .
            16.   Fences.  Fences are permitted in the rear yards only and as
specified in
Chapter 1312 . No chain-link fences are permitted in the Special Planning
District.
            17.   Rear Paved Areas.  Rear yards may have paved areas intended
for active recreational purposes such as basketball or similar activities, but
must stay within the existing extended side yard setbacks of the house and a
minimum of 25 feet from the rear lot line.
            18.   Brick Exposed Foundations.  There shall be a minimum of 16
inches between exterior wall finishes and the final grade. On elevations facing
a street, the exposed foundation shall be covered with brick or stone (no
split-face masonry is permitted). On the other elevations exposed foundation
walls shall be covered with brick, stone or masonry with a surface design.
Textured or patterned poured walls shall be permitted.
            19.   Principal Frontage. Conventional lots shall have their
principal frontage on interior street.
            20.   Chimneys.  Chimneys for all gas or wood burning fireplaces
shall have brick or stone exteriors, with the exception of direct-vent
fireplaces.
            21.   Overhangs.  All homes shall have overhangs at the soffit and
gutter with a minimum of 12 inches.
            22.   Front Face Materials.  Twenty-five percent of all homes shall
have 100% of the surface area of walls facing the street clad with brick or
stone to add interest, value, and character to the streetscape. Seventy percent
of the remaining conventional single-family homes will have some brick or stone
treatment or accent to enhance interest, value, and character. Such treatment
shall approximate 20% of total surface area facing the streetscape. This
provision shall apply to both exposed foundation walls facing the street for
corner lots.
            23.   Tree Lawn.  Trees shall be planted in the street right-of-way
in front of each conventional single-family home. Tree plans showing
characteristics of acceptable varieties, sizes, spacing and planting
requirements shall be prepared by a landscape architect or certified arborist
and approved by the Planning Commission. Tree plans may specify that specific
varieties shall be uniformly planted on an entire street or neighborhood.
            24.   Basements.  All homes shall have full basements, under the
main part of the structure, unless such basements are not practicable because
of the unique environmental characteristics of the site in relationship to the
proposed location of the dwelling units and are adjacent to a floodplain. Add-
on family rooms, garages and similar structures beyond the basic habitable area
of the home shall not require full basements. The main part of the structure
shall be the standard floor plan of any given model, with a minimum of a
basement of 900 square feet.
         (d)   Medium Density Single-Family Detached & Attached Cluster
Residential Dwelling.
            1.   Density.  The maximum density permitted in this district is
four and one-half units/acre, with a minimum lot width of 65 feet.
            2.   Landscaping.  Detailed landscaping plans to be submitted to
the Building Commissioner by the developer and forwarded to the Planning
Commission for approval. Plans will include landscaping strategies for the
public areas, as well as public open spaces such as a neighborhood park. In
addition, general minimum requirements for landscaping of private yards will
also be submitted for approval.
            3.   Infrastructure. Developer must submit drawings of proposed
infrastructure per current residential building regulations and zoning codes.
            4.   Fencing. Fencing must be approved by the Planning Commission
and installed by the developer. Fences must be maintained by the homeowners
association. Refer to division (B)(3)(d)6. of this section for HOA
requirements. No other fencing is permitted. A tree line shall be maintained. A
minimum distance of 25 feet from these property lines shall be established as a
“do not disturb” zone.
            5.   Exterior Lighting.  The developer must submit gas ornamental
lighting standard for approval and use in the public right-of-way. Light
fixtures must be pole-mounted and should not exceed 15 feet in height. If
alleys are proposed, they should be lit with automatically-timed light fixtures
that are
mounted to garages. Location and spacing of light poles as well as light levels
should be in accordance with the city’s standards.
            6.   Homeowners Association (HOA) Design Review Committee.
               a.   A homeowners association must be established prior to the
transfer of title of any lot or unit as the case may be and approved by the
Director of Law.
               b.   A Design Review Committee shall be established as part of
the homeowners association, set up by the developer. This Committee shall have
the authority to review changes to the exterior of buildings. No changes to the
exterior of buildings shall occur without the approval of the Design Review
Committee.
            7.   Floor Area Requirements.
               a.   Units shall have a minimum floor area of 1,200 square feet
of living space on the first floor of ranch style homes and a minimum 1,000
square feet on the first floor for two-story homes with a total minimum living
area of 1,500 square feet.
               b.   Partial basements are required.
               c.   Refer to §
1268.02 for accessory uses permitted.
            8.   Building Materials/Elements.
               a.   Unity in groups of single-family cluster units shall be
created through use of common architectural and design elements such as color,
building mass, roof lines, facade treatment, color, landscaping, setbacks and
related features are the same as low-density housing in this division (B).
However, these same elements shall also be used to prevent excessive uniformity
in design elements within a cluster.
               b.   Buildings may be clad in vinyl siding, wood siding, cement
siding, brick, or stone. EIFS or stucco may be used from the second floor level
up.
               c.   When using brick, a standard modular brick shall be used.
No split face masonry is permitted in the front facade.
               d.   Window trim is required around all windows on front
elevations of non- masonry walls and should be a minimum of three and one-half
inches wide.
               e.   Corner boards are required on non-masonry walls on front
facades and should be a minimum of four inches wide.
               f.   Frieze trim is required under overhangs and gables on front
elevations.
               g.   Porch columns shall have a six-inch by six-inch minimum
cross-section or diameter with base and capital.
               h.   Railing/column details in combination are encouraged to
vary from house to house.
               i.   Lintels in masonry walls should be articulated with
elements such as brick soldier courses, stone, or precast concrete.
               j.   Trim and corner boards may be wood, vinyl, EIFS or pre-
formed composite materials.
               k.   Overhangs at eaves shall be a minimum of 12 inches.
               l.   No exposed wolmanized wood is permitted on front facades.
               m.   No two houses in a row should have the same color
combination of wall, trim, windows, and shutters.
               n.   Where wood-burning fireplaces occur, chimneys shall be
faced with brick or stone. No split-face masonry shall be permitted.
               o.   Where direct-vent fireplaces occur, the exterior shed shall
be designed to be integrated into the architecture style and of similar
materials.
            9.   Windows and Doors.
               a.   Rear elevations shall have a minimum of two windows per
elevation.
               b.   Windows shall be of square or vertical proportion.
               c.   Accent windows may be circular, half-round, or octagonal.
One accent window maximum per elevation is permitted, unless used in a pair.
            10.   Building Roofs. Primary roofs shall have a minimum 4:12 roof
pitch. Porches have a minimum 3:12 roof pitch.
            11.   Building Height. Maximum building height is 35 feet above
grade for primary structure.
            12.   Building Setbacks.
               a.   Twenty-five feet minimum from front of foundation line to
right-of-way line.
               b.   Fifteen feet minimum rear yard.
               c.   Ten feet minimum building separation providing no windows
on opposing sides.
               d.   Ten feet minimum side yard.
               e.   No directly opposing windows on side yards.
            13.   Building Entries/Porches.
               a.   All homes shall provide an identifiable entry.
               b.   Where overhangs occur at a front door, a two-foot deep
minimum overhang is encouraged.
               c.   All full porches shall be a minimum of six feet deep. Entry
coverings and stoops shall be a minimum of three feet deep.
            14.   Garages.
               a.   Garages shall be attached.
               b.   Front elevations shall be designed to de-emphasize the
visual impact of the garage. A garage shall be set back a minimum of two feet
from the primary mass of the house. Second floors may project over the garage.
Porches and other architectural elements may project beyond the face of the
garage. Single-car garage doors are encouraged to lessen the scale of a two-car
garage door.
               c.   No accessory buildings are permitted.
               d.   Driveways must be long enough to park two full-size
automobiles without overlapping the sidewalk.
            15.   Parking.  A minimum of one space per each two units is
required for guest parking in addition to the driveway parking.
            16.   Private Outdoor Space. Each unit must have 100 square feet
minimum.
            17.   Ownership. Owner holds a fee simple title to the dwelling and
individual lot.
            18.   Common Space. Thirty percent of the net acreage, excluding
right-of-way, shall be common space for recreation facilities (e.g., tennis
courts, pools, pavilions, club house).
         (e)   High-Density Single-Family Attached Cluster Residential
Dwelling.
            1.   Rear Alley System. This high-density development shall be
constructed with an integrated rear alley system servicing the garage access,
utilities, and trash removal.
            2.   Density.  The maximum density permitted in this district is
six units/acre, with a minimum distance between non-attached dwellings of ten
feet.
            3.   Landscaping. Detailed landscaping plans to be submitted to the
Building Commissioner by the developer for approval by the Planning Commission.
Plans will include landscaping strategies for the public areas, as well as
public open spaces such as a neighborhood park. In addition, general minimum
requirements for landscaping of private yards will also be submitted for
approval.
            4.   Infrastructure. Provide drawings of proposed infrastructure
per the current residential building regulations and zoning codes.
            5.   Fencing. Fencing must be approved and installed by the
developer. Fences must be maintained by the homeowners association. No other
fencing is permitted. A tree line shall be maintained. A minimum distance of 25
feet from these property lines shall be established as a “do not disturb” zone.
            6.   Exterior Lighting.  The developer must have gas ornamental
lighting standard for use in the public right-of-way to the city for approval.
Light fixtures must be pole-mounted and must not exceed 15 feet in height. If
alleys are proposed, they should be lit with automatically-timed light fixtures
that are mounted to garages. Location and spacing of light poles as well as
light levels should be in accordance with the city’s standards.
            7.   Homeowners Association (HOA)/Design Review Committee.
               a.   A homeowners association must be established prior to the
transfer of title of any lot or unit, as the case may be, and approved by the
Director of Law.
               b.   A Design Review Committee shall be established as part of
the homeowners association, set up by the developer. The guidelines for the HOA
must be defined in the required developers agreement. This Committee shall have
the authority to review changes to the exterior of buildings. No changes to the
exterior of buildings shall occur without the approval of the Design Review
Committee.
            8.   Floor Area Requirements. 
               a.   Units shall have a minimum floor area of 1,000 square feet
of living space on the first floor of ranch style homes and a minimum 800
square feet on the first floor for two-story homes with a total minimum living
area of 1,200 square feet.
               b.   Partial basements are required.
            9.   Building Materials/Elements.
               a.   Unity in groups of single-family cluster units shall be
created through use of common architectural and design elements such as color,
building mass, roof lines, facade treatment, landscaping, setbacks and related
features are the same as Low-Density Housing, this division (B). However, these
same elements shall also be used to prevent excessive uniformity in design
elements within a cluster.
               b.   Buildings may be clad in vinyl siding, wood siding, cement
siding, brick, stone. EIFS or stucco may be used from the second floor level
up.
               c.   When using brick, a standard modular brick shall be used.
No split-face masonry is permitted in the front facade.
               d.   Window trim is required around all windows on front
elevations of non- masonry walls and should be a minimum of three and one-half
inches wide.
               e.   Corner boards are required on non-masonry walls on front
facades and should be a minimum of four inches wide.
               f.   Frieze trim is required under overhangs and gables on front
elevations.
               g.   Porch columns shall have a six-inch by six-inch minimum
cross-section or diameter with base and capital.
               h.   Railing/column details in combination are encouraged to
vary from house to house.
               i.   Lintels in masonry walls should be articulated with
elements such as brick soldier courses, stone, or precast concrete.
               j.   Trim and corner boards may be wood, vinyl, EIFS or pre-
formed composite materials.
               k.   Overhangs at eaves shall be a minimum of 12 inches.
               l.   No exposed wolmanized wood is permitted on front facades.
               m.   No two houses in a row should have the same color
combination of wall, trim, windows, and shutters.
               n.   Where wood-burning fireplaces occur, chimneys shall be
faced with brick or stone. No split-face masonry shall be permitted.
               o.   Where direct-vent fireplaces occur, the exterior shed shall
be designed to be integrated into the architecture style and of similar
materials.
            10.   Windows and Doors.
               a.   Rear elevations should have a minimum of two windows per
elevation.
               b.   Windows shall be of square or vertical proportion.
               c.   Accent windows may be circular, half-round, or octagonal.
One accent window maximum per elevation is permitted, unless used in a pair.
            11.   Building Roofs. Primary roofs shall have a minimum 4:12 roof
pitch. Porches have a minimum 3:12 roof pitch.
            12.   Building Height.  Maximum building height is 35 feet above
grade for primary structure.
            13.   Building Setbacks.
               a.   Twenty-five feet minimum from front of foundation line to
right-of-way line;
               b.   Fifteen feet minimum rear yard;
               c.   Ten feet minimum building separation providing no windows
on opposing sides; and
               d.   No directly opposing windows on side yards.
            14.   Building Entries/Porches.
               a.   All homes shall provide an identifiable entry.
               b.   Where overhangs occur at a front door, a two-foot deep
minimum overhang is encouraged.
               c.   All full porches shall be a minimum of six feet deep. Entry
coverings and stoops shall be a minimum of three feet deep.
            15.   Garages.
               a.   Garages shall be attached and rear facing.
               b.   Front elevations shall be designed to de-emphasize the
visual impact of the garage. A garage shall be set back a minimum of two feet
from the primary mass of the house. Second floors may project over the garage.
Porches and other architectural elements may project beyond the face of the
garage. Single-car garage doors are encouraged to lessen the scale of a two-car
garage door.
               c.   No accessory buildings are permitted.
               d.   Driveways must be long enough to park two full-size
automobiles without overlapping the sidewalk.
            16.   Parking.  A minimum of one space per two units is required
for guest parking in addition to the driveway parking.
            17.   Private Outdoor Space.  Each unit must have 100 square feet
minimum.
            18.   Ownership.  Owner holds a fee simple title to the dwelling
and land within the outside foundation walls.
            19.   Common Space.
               a.   Forty percent of the net acreage, excluding right-of-way,
shall be common space for recreation facilities (e.g., tennis courts, pools,
pavilions, club house). Open common space shall be available and accessible to
all residents and for their primary use;
               b.   Green space shall not be less than 2,500 square feet;
               c.   Preserve natural amenities such as outcroppings, tree
stands, ravines, ponds, and stream channels; and
               d.   Provide pedestrian access to all areas.
         (f)   Lifestyle Community Housing.
            1.   Purpose.
               a.   The Lifestyle Community Housing is proposed to accommodate
(in one unified development) creatively planned types of facilities that
functionally meet the housing needs of our increasingly aging population.
               b.   With our life expectancies continually rising and the
upcoming retirement of the healthy Baby Boomers generation, housing needs have
changed over the last several decades, thus requiring municipalities to be
proactive in zoning regulations to accommodate population and provide choices.
            2.   Definition. “Lifestyle Community Housing” is defined as a
self-contained development to accommodate two basic types of residents:
               a.   Type 1 (Apartments): individuals who (regardless of age)
choose to live in a community of rental units comprising a structure of
multiple levels with shared hallways and enclosed means of egress.
               b.   Type 2 (Apartments and age restricted housing): individuals
who are 55 years of age and older, or for individuals less than 55 years of age
when residing with a family member 55 years of age or older.
            3.   Development Goals.  This District provides for:
               a.   Higher densities;
               b.   Increased green space;
               c.   ADA accessibility;
               d.   Pedestrian access to activities, shops and restaurants;
               e.   Adult activities;
               f.   Campus level security;
               g.   High level security; and
               h.   Variety of housing types.
            4.   Types of Housing.
               a.   Apartments (no age limit);
               b.   Independent housing (55 and older);
               c.   Assisted living (55 and older);
               d.   Memory care/Alzheimer; and
               e.   Skilled nursing (not permitted in Special Planning
District, but permitted in other parts of the city).
            5.   Development Density.
               a.   Apartments shall be constructed with a maximum 12 units/
acre.
               b.   Types of apartments include:
                  (i)   Multi-family structures with central hallways;
                  (ii)   Townhouse style structures (maximum 12 units/bldg.);
and
                  (iii)   Single-level attached structures (maximum eight
units/bldg.).
               c.   Independent housing shall not exceed 18 units/acre.
               d.   Assisted living and memory care/Alzheimer facilities shall
not exceed 20 units/acre.
            6.   Lot Sizes. Lifestyle Community Housing Developments shall have
a five-acre minimum site area.
            7.   Building Height.  Story maximum with a 45-foot maximum height
above finish grade.
            8.   Unit Minimum Floor Areas.
               a.   Apartments: one bedroom:  650 square feet plus 120 square
feet/each additional bedroom.
               b.   Independent housing:
                  (i)   Studio unit: Four hundred square feet maximum, limited
to 10% of facility; and
                  (ii)   One bedroom:  Six hundred and fifty square feet plus
120 square feet/each additional bedroom.
               c.   Assisted living (maximum 20 units/acre):
                  (i)   Studio unit: three hundred square feet, limited to 50%
of facility;
                  (ii)   Four hundred square feet minimum floor area per
bedroom; and
                  (iii)   Memory care/Alzheimer: 20 units/acre.
            9.   Building Setbacks.  Front yard setback shall be a minimum 30
feet. Corner lots shall comply with the minimum for each street.
            10.   Side Yard Setback.  Shall be a minimum 15 feet and 50 feet
when adjacent to a residential district or use only.
            11.   Rear Yard Setback.  Shall be a minimum 25 feet and 100 feet
when adjacent to a residential district or use.
            12.   Parking.
               a.   Apartments shall have a minimum one space plus one garage/
unit.
               b.   Independent housing shall have a minimum one and one half
spaces plus one garage/unit.
               c.   Assisted living shall have a minimum one space per every
two units.
               d.   Memory care/Alzheimer shall have one space per every two
units.
            13.   Landscaping.
               a.   Detailed landscaping plans shall be submitted to the
Building Commissioner by the developer for approval by the Planning Commission.
               b.   Plans shall include landscaping strategies for the public
areas, as well as public open spaces such as a neighborhood park.
               c.   General minimum requirements for landscaping of private
yards shall also be submitted for approval.
            14.   Infrastructure. Provide drawings of proposed infrastructure
per the current Ohio Building Code, local building regulations, and zoning
codes.
            15.   Fencing.
               a.   Fencing must be approved and installed by the owner as part
of the original site development.
               b.   Fences must be maintained by the homeowners association.
               c.   No other fencing is permitted.
               d.   A tree line shall be maintained.
               e.   A minimum distance of 25 feet from these property lines
shall be established as a “do not disturb” zone.
            16.   Exterior Lighting.
               a.   The developer must have gas ornamental lighting standard
for use in the public right-of-way to the city for approval.
               b.   Light fixtures must be pole-mounted and must not exceed 15
feet in height.
               c.   If alleys are proposed, they should be lit with
automatically-timed light fixtures that are mounted to garages.
               d.   Location and spacing of light poles as well as light levels
should be in accordance with the city’s standards.
            17.   Building Materials/Elements.
               a.   Unity in housing units shall be created through use of
common architectural and design elements such as color, building mass, roof
lines, facade treatment, landscaping and setbacks.
               b.   Buildings may be clad in vinyl siding, wood siding, cement
siding, brick, or stone. EIFS or stucco may be used from the second floor level
up.
               c.   When using brick, a standard modular brick shall be used.
No split face masonry is permitted in the front facade.
               d.   Window trim is required around all windows on front
elevations of non- masonry walls and should be a minimum of three and one-half
inches wide.
               e.   Corner boards are required on non-masonry walls on front
facades and should be a minimum of four inches wide.
               f.   Frieze trim is required under overhangs and gables on front
elevations.
               g.   Porch columns shall have a six-inch by six-inch minimum
cross-section or diameter with base and capital.
               h.   Railing/column details in combination are encouraged to
vary from unit to unit.
               i.   Lintels in masonry walls should be articulated with
elements such as brick soldier courses, stone, or precast concrete.
               j.   Trim and corner boards may be wood, vinyl, EIFS or pre-
formed composite materials.
               k.   Overhangs at eaves shall be a minimum of 12 inches.
               l.   No exposed wolmanized wood is permitted on front facades.
            18.   Building Entries/Porches.  All units shall provide an
identifiable entry.
            19.   Preservation.
               a.   Preserve natural amenities such as outcroppings, tree
stands, ravines, ponds, stream channels.
               b.   Provide pedestrian access to all areas.
            20.   Open Green Space.
               a.   Common open space at a minimum 40% of the total development
area shall include, but not limited to:
                  (i)   Outdoor areas;
                  (ii)   Enclosed recreation areas;
                  (iii)   Natural undisturbed areas;
                  (iv)   Paved terraces; and
                  (v)   Sitting areas.
               b.   Vehicle parking and circulation are not part of an open
area.
               c.   Private Open Space.  Each apartment unit must have a
private open outdoor space of a minimum of 60 square feet. Private open spaces
must be designed to provide privacy for the intended user through screening,
landscaping, wall orientations, and the like. Upper level spaces must be
provided with balconies of same space restrictions.
            21.   Ancillary Facilities.
               a.   Private open space is mandatory in all housing types.
               b.   The following amenities are preferred and should be given
consideration in independent housing, assisted living and memory care/Alzheimer
facilities:
                  (i)   Health and counseling offices;
                  (ii)   Craft and meeting rooms;
                  (iii)   Lounge area;
                  (iv)   Areas for recreation/games;
                  (v)   Small kitchen for family gatherings;
                  (vi)   Exercise area;
                  (vii)   Integrated technology (wifi, pure devices); and
                  (viii) Lifelong learning.
(Ord. 194-12, passed 1-22-2013; Ord. 04-14, passed 2-24-2014; Ord. 23-2020,
passed 7-6-2020)
§ 1283.08  SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS.
   (A)   Planning Commission Modification.
      (1)   The Planning Commission may modify the strict requirements of the
development and design guidelines if it finds that privacy, light and openness
are improved because of skillful design in the arrangement of buildings, open
spaces, landscaping or other site features. The Planning Commission may also
require wider yards where an adjoining building is near a lot line, and may
require such features as fences and planting to protect adjoining residences.
      (2)   The Planning Commission shall not decrease the lot areas, yard
widths, common space, or private open space requirements to allow the maximum
number of units, permitted in this TCSPD-1, nor shall the Planning Commission
increase the maximum allowable density permitted in this TCSPD-1.
   (B)   Supplemental Requirements.
      (1)   This TCSPD-1 shall be reviewed and approved according to the
procedures in:
         (a)   Chapter 1246, Planning Principles;
         (b)   Chapter 1248, Land Improvements;
         (c)   Chapter 1250, Plans and Plats;
         (d)   Chapter 1252, Street Lighting;
         (e)   Chapter 1260, General Provisions and Definitions;
         (f)   Chapter 1284, Off-Street Parking;
         (g)   Chapter 1312, Fences;
         (h)   Conceptual development plan and these development guidelines;
and
         (i)   All other sections cross referenced in this
Chapter 1283.
      (2)   In approving the conceptual development plan, or any portions
thereof, the Planning Commission may attach written supplemental requirements
to the plan.
   (C)   Site Plan Review.
      (1)   Site plans shall be further reviewed according to the procedures
and requirements of
Chapter 1334, Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan.
      (2)   Site plan to be reviewed by the City Engineer including approval by
City Council. Site plans shall clearly depict the required common open space
and private open space areas, including proposed improvements thereto, required
by the development guidelines.
      (3)   Site plans shall also comply with all the provisions of the Zoning
Code, Parking and Site Design, and Landscaping/Screening.
(Ord. 194-12, passed 1-22-2013)
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28880f249272a2a879d6f6324ba48728a75cc96f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4235.jpg]
 
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28880f249272a2a879d6f6324ba48728a75cc96f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4233.jpg]
 
CHAPTER 1284:  OFF-STREET PARKING
Section
1284.01   Purposes
1284.02   Facilities required
1284.03   General requirements
1284.04   Measurement and design standards
1284.05   Space schedule for off-street parking
1284.06   Modification of schedule
1284.07   Location of parking facilities
1284.08   Access to parking areas
1284.09   Surface improvements
1284.10   Yard regulations and protection of adjacent areas
1284.11   Parking signs and illumination
1284.12   Off-street loading space
1284.13   Exterior lighting
Cross-reference:
   Administration, enforcement and penalty, see
Chapter 1262
   Classification of uses, see
Chapter 1266
   Districts generally and Zone Map, see
Chapter 1264
   General provisions and definitions, see
Chapter 1260
   Nonconforming uses, see
Chapter 1282
   Off-street parking and loading facilities and buildings, see §
1348.08
   Off-street parking and loading facilities in Class E Districts, see §§
1280.08,
1280.09
Editor’s note:
   This chapter was repealed and re-enacted in its entirety by Ordinance 88-
187, passed February 27, 1989.
§ 1284.01  PURPOSES.
   Off-street parking and loading requirements and regulations are established
in order to achieve, among others, the following purposes:
   (A)   To relieve congestion so that streets can be utilized more fully for
the movement of vehicular traffic;
   (B)   To promote the safety and convenience of pedestrians and shoppers by
locating parking areas so as to lessen car movements in the vicinity of
intensive pedestrian traffic;
   (C)   To protect adjoining residential neighborhoods from on-street parking;
and
   (D)   To promote the general convenience, welfare and prosperity of
business, service, research, production and manufacturing developments which
depend upon off-street parking and loading facilities.
(Ord. 88-187, passed 2-27-1989)
 
§ 1284.02  FACILITIES REQUIRED.
   Off-street parking and loading facilities are required in accordance with
this chapter as a condition precedent to the exercise of any use permitted in
this Zoning Code.
(Ord. 88-187, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 1284.03  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   An off-street parking facility shall be required when a new building is
constructed, when a new use is established, when an existing building is
altered or an existing use is enlarged so that there is an increase in the
number of dwelling units, seating capacity or floor area or when the changed
use requires different measuring standards. An off-street parking facility
shall continue unobstructed in operation and shall not be used for any other
purpose than parking, except that in residential districts a garage with the
customary uses incident to the dwelling is permitted. Parking facilities once
established shall not be changed to another location, nor shall they be
reduced, without the approval in writing of the Board of Zoning Appeals upon
written application made therefor. Should such parking facility be reduced
without such approval, then the main use of the premises shall cease, which
shall be in addition to other remedies provided for violations of this Zoning
Code. A parking space means an open or enclosed area accessible from the street
for parking of a motor vehicle of an owner, occupant, employee, customer or
tenant of the main use.
(Ord. 88-187, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 1284.04  MEASUREMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS.
   For the purpose of determining the off-street parking and loading facilities
required as accessory to a use, the following design and measurement standards
shall be met.
   (A)   Dimensions. Each off-street parking space must meet the following
dimensions exclusive of all drives, aisles and turning places:
      (1)   For 90-degree parking, a parking space shall have not less than
nine feet in width and 19 feet in length;
      (2)   For 60-degree parking, a parking space shall have not less than
nine feet in width and 19 feet in length;
      (3)   For 45-degree parking, a parking space shall have not less than 12
feet in width and 19 feet in length;
      (4)   For parallel parking, a parking space shall have not less than nine
feet in width and 23 feet in length; and
      (5)   Aisles which access any parking spaces must be 24 feet in width
minimum.
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28880f249272a2a879d6f6324ba48728a75cc96f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4237.jpg]
 
   (B)   Surfacing. All off-street parking shall be hard-surfaced and shall be
provided with proper drainage so that no water drains into the street or
adjacent property.
   (C)   Standards of Measurement. Where floor area is used as the standard, it
shall mean the total area of all floors measured from the interior faces of the
building, excluding the floor or part thereof used for the storage or parking
of merchandise and not used by the public, or, if so provided in the schedule,
only the floor area used by the public for a specific use.  Where seating
arrangement is used as the standard, it shall mean 24 linear inches of benches,
pews or spaces for loose chairs or similar seating facilities. The spacing of
pews shall be 30 inches on center.  Where the number of employees is used as
the standard, it shall mean the maximum number of employees on any two
successive shifts.
(Ord. 88-187, passed 2-27-1989; Ord. 220-98, passed 3-15-1999; Ord. 54-99,
passed 4-19-1999; Ord. 9- 2017, passed 5-15-2017)
§ 1284.05  SPACE SCHEDULE FOR OFF-STREET PARKING.
   Off-street parking shall be required as provided in the following schedule:
 
Use of Activity Minimum Spaces Required
Residential
Apartment*                             2-1/4 spaces per dwelling unit
Hotel, motel                           1 space per guest room, plus 1 for each
                                       employee
One-family                             2 spaces per dwelling unit (enclosed)
One-family cluster*                    2 spaces per dwelling unit (enclosed)
Townhouse condominiums                 2 spaces per dwelling unit (enclosed)
Two-family                             2 spaces per dwelling unit (enclosed)
*Additional guest off-street parking as determined by the Planning Commission
Community Facilities
                                       1 space per 4 seats of seating capacity
Civic: Art galleries, libraries,       of area used for assembly or 1 space for
museums, churches, club and community  each 48 sq. ft. of assembly floor area;
centers                                plus 1 space per full-time facility and
                                       staff member; plus 1 space per 500 sq.
                                       ft. of other floor area
                                       1 space per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area
                                       and space per 4 seats of seating
Educational: Public and private,       capacity or area used for assembly or 1
primary and secondary schools          space for each 48 sq. ft. of assembly
                                       floor area; plus 1 space per full-time
                                       facility and staff member
Governmental: Municipal, county, state 1 space per 4 seats of area used for
and federal buildings, principally     public assembly, plus 1 space for each 2
administrative functions               employees; plus 1 space per 300 sq. ft.
                                       of other parts of the building
Places of assembly: Auditoriums, lodge 1 space per 4 seats
halls, gymnasiums and stadiums
Health and Welfare
General and special hospitals          1 space per 2 beds, plus 1 space for
                                       each 2 employees
Nursing home                           1 space per 3 patients, plus 1 space for
                                       each 2 employees
Medical centers                        7 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of floor area
                                       devoted to the activity
Recreation; Community and Commercial
Gymnastics, gymnastics training school 1 space per 225 sq. ft. of floor area
and body conditioning
                                       1 space per 4,000 sq. ft. of area
Playing fields                         devoted to play field and 1 space per 3
                                       seats of seating capacity of area used
                                       for assembly
                                       1 space per 50 sq. ft. of the area
Skating rink, swimming pools           devoted to recreation activity and to
                                       spectators
Business
Carry-out restaurant                   12 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross
                                       floor area
Food stores                            5 spaces per 1,000 sq. ft. of gross
                                       floor area
Mortuaries                             1 space per 100 sq. ft. of floor area
New automobile sales agencies          1 space per each 200 sq. ft. of building
                                       area
                                       1 space per 50 sq. ft. of indoor
Places serving food and drinks/tavern  customer service area or 1 space per 2
                                       seats whichever is greater
Retail stores and services less than   1 space per 200 sq. ft. of floor area
4,000 sq. ft. per unit
Retail stores and services 4,000 to    20 spaces, plus 1 space per 150 sq. ft.
10,000 sq. ft. per unit                of floor area over 4,000 sq. ft.
Retail stores and services 10,000 sq.  60 spaces, plus 1 space per 125 sq. ft.
ft. or greater per unit                of floor area over 10,000 sq. ft.
Offices
Banks                                  1 space per 500 sq. ft. of floor area,
                                       plus 1 space for each employee
Medical and dental                     1 space per 200 sq. ft. of floor area
Professional, sales, administrative    1 space per 350 sq. ft. of floor area
Services and Manufacturing
                                       1 space per each employee or 1 space per
Warehouse/storage                      1,000 sq. ft. of building area, plus a
                                       minimum of 5 visitor spaces
Wholesale, distribution, laboratories, 1 space per each employee on the largest
general services, services, machine    shift or 1 space per every 800 sq. ft.
shops and similar establishments       of building area, whichever is the
                                       greater
                                       The Board of Zoning Appeals shall apply
Uses not mentioned herein              the unit of measurement most applicable
                                       from the above
 
(Ord. 88-187, passed 2-27-1989; Ord. 21-96, passed 7-22-1996; Ord. 21-00,
passed 3-6-2000; Ord. 14-10, passed 2-1-2010)
§ 1284.06  MODIFICATION OF SCHEDULE.
   (A)   Variance. The Board of Zoning Appeals may grant a variance to the
schedule provided in §
1284.05  in accordance with existing laws of the city.
   (B)   Land Bank. The Planning Commission may grant a conditional permit to
allow selected off-street parking facilities to be maintained as a lawn until
such time as such off-street parking facilities may be deemed necessary as
determined by the Planning Commission or the Building Commissioner.  At that
time, the “land banked” parking facilities shall be brought into compliance
with the regulations of this chapter and any conditions as set forth by the
Planning Commission in the conditional permit.
(Ord. 220-98, passed 3-15-1999)
§ 1284.07  LOCATION OF PARKING FACILITIES.
   For residential uses and all uses permitted in Class E Districts, the
parking facilities shall be located upon the same lot.  For institutional,
charitable and public uses, the parking facilities shall be located upon the
same lot or within 200 feet of a boundary line of such lot, but not across a
major thoroughfare.  For commercial uses, the parking facilities shall be
located upon the same lot or within 400 feet of a boundary line of such lot,
but not across a major thoroughfare.
(Ord. 88-187, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 1284.08  ACCESS TO PARKING AREAS.
   There shall be adequate provision for ingress and egress to all parking
areas. No access drives or curb cuts for driveway aisles shall be located
closer than 75 feet from the right-of-way line of an intersection. In addition,
where the lot or parking spaces do not provide direct access to a public street
or alley, an access drive shall be provided, with a dedicated easement of
access, as follows:
   (A)   For single-, two- or three-family residential dwellings, the access
drive shall be a minimum of nine feet in width.
   (B)   For all other residential uses and all other uses, except for those in
the Class E District, the access drive shall be a minimum of 18 feet in width.
   (C)   All parking spaces, except those required for single-, two- or three-
family dwellings, shall have access to a public street or alley in such a
manner that any vehicle leaving or entering the parking area from or into a
public street or alley shall be traveling in a forward motion.
(Ord. 88-187, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 1284.09  SURFACE IMPROVEMENTS.
   All parking areas and access driveways shall be concrete, asphalt or brick,
with adequate drainage so that no injury is caused to adjacent property or
water drained across a public sidewalk. Appropriate bumper guards shall be
provided to define or limit the parking facilities whenever a parking lot
extends to a property line in order to prevent any part of a parked vehicle
from extending beyond the property line.
(Ord. 88-187, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 1284.10  YARD REGULATIONS AND PROTECTION OF ADJACENT AREAS.
   Parking facilities, when adjacent to and across the street from a
residential district, must be to the rear of the building setback line. When
the same abuts a residential district, they shall have a rear and side yard of
not less than 75 feet if in a Class C District and not less than 50 feet if in
a Class E District. Parking facilities having a capacity of more than six
spaces, when abutting on the rear or sides of a residential district,  shall
have bumper guards placed to limit the parking area, and rear or side yards
landscaped with a hedge and shrubs or the facility screened by a fence at least
five feet high above the finished grade.
(Ord. 88-187, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 1284.11  PARKING SIGNS AND ILLUMINATION.
   All signs shall be limited to indicate the operator, the purpose of the
business served, or instructions for parking. Only one sign shall be permitted
for each street which abuts the area and such sign shall not exceed 20 square
feet or extend over 12 feet in height or be located outside of that part of the
lot used for parking or nearer than 25 feet to a lot line of a residential
district. Parking facilities shall be illuminated whenever a use is conducted
in the main building and the public streets are lighted, and such illumination
shall be so designed and located that the same is not of excessive brightness
to adjoining residential districts and streets.
(Ord. 88-187, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 1284.12  OFF-STREET LOADING SPACE.
   Off-street loading and unloading space is required by this chapter as a
condition precedent to the exercise of any use in a Class C or Class E
District. Such space shall not be less than ten feet in width and 25 feet in
length for a building less than 20,000 square feet in ground floor area. Each
required loading space for a building of 20,000 square feet or more of ground
floor area shall be not less than 14 feet wide by 60 feet in length. Such space
shall be located to the side or rear of the building in a Class E District and
only in the rear of buildings in a Class C District. Such space shall be
located so that during the process of unloading and loading no part of the
truck protrudes into the front yard. Each establishment shall have one such
loading space for a building up to 40,000 square feet in gross floor area and
two loading spaces for a building with a gross floor area of 40,000 to 100,000
square feet. Buildings with over 100,000 square feet of ground floor area
require three loading spaces.
(Ord. 88-187, passed 2-27-1989)
§ 1284.13  EXTERIOR LIGHTING.
   Parking and circulation area, pedestrian areas and related outdoor use areas
shall be illuminated to provide safety and security for the users of these
areas, to provide security for property, and to maintain privacy for adjacent
residential properties. Exterior lighting shall be designed, installed and
maintained according to the following standards:
   (A)   Illumination Levels.
      (1)   Except as provided to division (B) below, exterior lighting provide
minimum maintained horizontal footcandle (fc) illumination as follows:
 
Activity Type               Maintained Footcandles
Parking and pedestrian area 0.6 fc minimum
Property security only      0.2 fc minimum
Vehicle use only            1.0 fc average
 
      (2)   Exterior lighting in parking and pedestrian areas may be reduced to
the property security level during hours when these areas are not in use.
   (B)   Residential Parking.  The minimum illumination levels in division (A)
above shall not apply to residential or multiple-family parking areas with ten
or fewer parking spaces. These areas shall be provided with appropriate
residential-type luminaries as shown on site plans approved by the Planning
Commission according to the provisions of applicable chapters of the Zoning
Code.
   (C)   Uniformity Ratio. Average illumination levels shall not exceed four
times the minimum level.
   (D)   Light Trespass.  In order to maintain privacy, exterior lighting shall
be designed and maintained to provide a maximum of one horizontal footcandle
illumination at side or rear property lines which are adjacent to a residential
use or zoning district.
   (E)   Luminaire Height.
      (1)   The maximum luminaire height in A-l, A-2, B-l, B-2, B-3, and B-
4 shall be ten feet.
      (2)   The maximum luminaire height in other districts shall be 25 feet.
However, the Planning Commission may approve greater heights upon a showing by
the applicant that the additional height complies with both of the following
standards:
         (a)   The additional height is necessary to efficiently illuminate
outdoor areas; and
         (b)   The additional height will have no adverse effect on adjacent
properties.
   (F)   Glare. Exterior lighting shall be designed and maintained so that
glare is not cast on adjacent properties, regardless of use, or on adjacent
streets. All luminaries over ten feet in height shall be cut-off types which
include shields or other devices which eliminate all light above an angle of 85
degrees, as measured from the vertical axis of the light source. For the
purpose of this division, “glare” is defined as the brightness of a light
source which causes eye discomfort.
   (G)   Intermittent Light.  No intermittent, flickering, moving, strobe or
similar types of light, either inside or outside a building, shall be visible
from the street or from adjacent properties.
   (H)   Exclusions. The standards in this section do not apply to street
lighting to outdoor recreation activities lighting not being reviewed for site
plan conformity shall be excluded from the provisions of division (A) of this
section.
   (I)   Enforcement.  Site plans submitted to the Planning Commission shall
include data analyses (photometric plan), prepared by persons competent to do
so, that the proposed exterior lighting system complies with the standards in
this section.
(Ord. 130-11, passed 10-17-2011)
CHAPTER 1286:  DETENTION AND RETENTION BASIN DESIGN
Section
1286.01   Compliance required
1286.02   Findings and general standards
1286.03   Definitions
1286.04   Detention/retention basin manual
1286.05   Hydrologic and hydraulic studies
1286.06   Storm water runoff limitations
1286.07   Subdivision or development drainage system
1286.08   Easements and access
1286.09   Maintenance
1286.10   Urban sediment abatement rules
1286.11   Ohio Dam Safety Laws
1286.12   Soils map
1286.13   Drainage area map
1286.14   Soil conservation service, Technical Release No. 55, June, 1986,
Urban Hydrology for Small Watersheds
Cross-reference:
   Altering, polluting and diverting watercourses,  see §
660.04
   Flood damage prevention, see
Chapter 1314
   Land improvement regulations for detention and retention basins, see §
1248.11
   Storm sewer connections; inspections; permit, see §
1042.08
Editor’s note:
   At the request of the city, this chapter, previously codified as Chapter
1458 of the Building and Housing Code, was recodified as Chapter 1286 of the
Planning and Zoning Code, as part of the 1995 updating and revision of this
Code of Ordinances.
§ 1286.01  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   All detention and retention basins constructed in the city shall be
constructed in conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 1-7-1991)
§ 1286.02  FINDINGS AND GENERAL STANDARDS.
   (A)   The prevention of accelerated flooding and stream channel erosion in
conjunction with urban development requires control of the discharge rate and
volume of runoff prior to its release to off-site land.  The purpose of this
chapter is to: permit development without increasing the flooding of other
lands, and  provide a basis for design of storm drainage systems on lands above
or below undeveloped areas which will preserve the rights and options of both
contributing and receiving property owners and assure the long-term adequacy of
storm drainage systems.
   (B)   Accelerated channel erosion as well as increased flooding damage,
could be controlled if the predevelopment hydrograph could be maintained.  It
is usually not practical, however, to retain the predevelopment rate of
infiltration when a large part of the watershed is covered with impervious
surfaces. The concept of reducing peak flows below those of predevelopment
storms was developed as an alternative to maintaining the predevelopment
hydrograph.  The logic of this concept is to compensate for the increased
erosiveness of:
      (1)   Increased volume of runoff due to loss infiltration;
      (2)   More frequent occurrences of the same flow.  For example, a
subdivision may have the peak flow of a predevelopment five-year storm occur
once a year after development is complete; and
      (3)   Less sediment in the runoff water because the watershed is paved
with nonerosive surfaces or good grass cover.
   (C)   The two-step standard requires that:
      (1)   The peak rates of runoff from an area after development shall be no
greater than the peak rates of runoff from the same area before development for
all 24-hour storms from one- to 100-year frequency.  Designing for the one-,
two-, five-, ten-, 25-, 50-, and 100-year storms is considered adequate to meet
the requirement.  Storm water requirements must be met at each point storm
water is discharged from a development area;
      (2)   If the volume of runoff from an area after development will be
greater than the volume of runoff from the same area before development, it
shall be compensated by reducing the peak rate of runoff from the critical
storm and all more frequent storms occurring on the development area to the
peak rate of runoff from a one-year frequency, 24-hour storm occurring on the
same area under predevelopment conditions.  Storms of less frequent occurrence
(longer return periods) than the critical storm up to the 100-year storm, shall
have peak runoff rates no greater than the peak runoff rates from equivalent
size storms under predevelopment conditions.
   (D)   The critical storm for a specific development area is determined as
follows:
      (1)   Determine the total volume of runoff from a one-year frequency, 24-
hour storm, occurring on the development area before and after development;
      (2)   From the volumes determined in division (D)(1) hereof, determine
the percent of increase in volume of runoff due to development, and, using this
percentage, select the 24-hour critical storm from this table:
 
If the
Percentage of
Increase in      The 24 Hour “Critical Storm” for Discharge Limitation Will Be:
Volume Runoff
Is:
Equal
to or   and less
greater than
than
0   10  1 year
10  20  2 year
20  50  5 year
50  100 10 year
100 250 25 year
250 500 50 year
500 – 100 year
 
   (E)   The standard set forth in division (D) hereof basically requires peak
flow to be reduced in proportion to increased runoff volume.  If runoff volume
is not increased, peak flows are only required to match predevelopment peak
runoff rates for equivalent size storms for all storms from one-year to 100-
year storms.  This criterion is designed to require more control when the
change in the runoff pattern caused by development is more drastic.  The
quantity and cost of preventative control features will need to be in
proportion to the level of increase in runoff caused by the change in land use;
a fair and equitable criterion.
   (F)   Concern is frequently expressed in regard to the extremes of the
accelerated storm water control standard; the one- and the 100-year frequency
storms.  Justification for using the one-year storm is based on the erosivity
of stream flow and on what is known as the “routing problem”.  Small or
frequent storms are very erosive because they occur so often.  Damage doesn’t
have time to heal before the next storm comes.  Bankfull channel flow is
essentially the most erodible state of stream flow on the channel itself.  Any
increase spills out over the floodplain with very little increase in the
velocity of channel flow.  Any flow less than bankfull generally has a
corresponding decrease in velocity, and, therefore, causes less erosion damage
to the channel.  Where there is a significant increase in runoff volume, it is
very important to have the runoff occur at something less than bankfull flow,
especially in watersheds approaching complete development.  Longer duration of
bankfull flow than that which occurred under predevelopment conditions, can
have disastrous effects on the stream channel and resulting sediment
pollution.  Since channels generally size themselves for about a one and one-
half to a two-year frequency storm runoff event, the one-year storm was chosen
as the control storm to prevent significant channel erosion.
   (G)   The “routing problem” is the problem of channel flow downstream from
numerous smaller watersheds.  As runoff from the smaller watersheds is altered,
the effect on channel flow somewhere downstream, where all of the watersheds
come together, can be favorable or adverse.  Ideally, the entire large
watershed should be hydraulically planned and the level of control of each sub-
watershed should be based on the accumulative effects downstream.  Since
experience has proven the near impossibility, politically, of realizing that
degree of organizational control, the one-year outlet rate is further justified
in order to minimize adverse effects on the “routing problem” when compensation
is necessary to control increased flow volumes.
   (H)   Many people suppose that runoff peaks and volumes do not increase from
the large or infrequent storm because the ground is saturated by these storms
and most of the rainfall will run off whether the land is used for forest land,
cropland or urban purposes.  Urbanization can, in fact, cause an increase in
both peak and volume of runoff.  Most of the increase may be in the early part
of such a storm and perhaps the 25- or 50-year storm control may adequately
address the situation.  There are many variables which affect the storm water
runoff pattern, including soil type, slope, kind of cover, percent of
impervious cover, kind of disturbance and compaction.  The 100-year storm needs
to be examined in a development situation to determine its specific effect. 
Emergency flow areas and emergency outlets from structural work need to account
for such storms if basements are not to be full of water and structures are not
to fail.  The additional control necessary for the 100-year frequency storm is
not a highly significant factor in storm water management for accelerated
runoff control.
   (I)   In addition to controlling channel erosion, this standard should make
long range planning for storm water management easier.  Storm sewers and stream
channels can be designed in accordance with existing runoff conditions knowing
that upstream runoff rates cannot be increased.  This standard would also
prevent an increase in flood levels and frequencies below future developments
and, in many cases, reduce development costs because of reduced storm sewer
size, particularly where multiple use detention facilities can be utilized in
designated open space.
   (J)   A uniform procedure for determining runoff would be helpful in
designing to meet this standard.  The U.S. Soil Conservation Service procedures
in Technical Release No. 55, 1986 edition, are recommended.  These procedures
consider watershed area, watershed shape, change in land use, soil type,
hydrologic condition, impervious area, modification of hydraulic channels,
increased intensity of rainfall near the middle of a storm, initial abstraction
(surface storage, interception and infiltration prior to runoff), and decreased
infiltration as a storm progresses.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 1-7-1991)
§ 1286.03  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter.
   “Channel.” Means a natural or artificial watercourse, which continuously or
periodically contains moving water or which forms a connecting link between two
bodies of water.  It has a definite bed and banks which confine the water. 
“Channel flow” means the water flowing within the limits of the defined
channel.
   “Detention/Retention Basin Manual.” Means the technical design manual
prepared by the Engineer of the City of Broadview Heights.
   “Developer.” Means any person who acts in his or her own behalf or as the
agent of an owner of property and who engages in the alteration of land or
vegetation in preparation for or in connection with construction activity.
   “Development.” Means any alteration of land or vegetation in preparation for
or in connection with construction activity.
   “Drainageway.” Means a route or course along which water moves or may move
to drain an area.
   “Emergency flow way.” Means the flow routes and drainageway necessary to
convey the 100-year storm through a development.
   “Emergency spillway.” Means a spillway that must be included in all
retention/detention basin designs, SCS Methods must be utilized in its design. 
Design frequency of 100 years must be used.
   “Erosion control.” Refers to requirements documented in the Ohio Department
of Natural Resources Division of Soil and Water Conservation “Urban Sediment
Pollution Abatement Rules”.
   “Fence.” Means an enclosure that is required around all storm water
facilities as required by the Planning Commission.
   “Flood.” Means the temporary inundation of any land not normally covered by
water due to heavy rainfall or runoff or due to a temporary rise in the level
of rivers, streams, watercourses, or lakes.
      (1)   “Average annual flood.” Means a flood equal to the mean of
discharges of all the maximum annual floods during the period of record.
      (2)   “Regional flood.” Means the name applied to the 100-year flood in
floodplain information reports.  The 100-year flood has a 1% probability of
being equaled or exceeded in a period of 100 years.
      (3)   “Maximum probable flood.” Means the largest flood discharge
believed possible considering the meteorologic conditions and snow cover on the
watershed.
   “Floodway.” Means the channel of the watercourse and those portions of the
adjoining floodplain which are used to convey the regional flood.
   “Grassed waterway.” Means a broad and shallow natural course or constructed
channel covered with erosion-resistant grasses or similar herbaceous cover and
used to conduct surface water.
   “Hydrologic and hydraulic study.” Means engineering study utilizing SCS TR
55, 1986 edition, to determine rates, volumes, and distribution of storm
runoff, and its collection, storage, and conveyance.
   “Runoff.” Means the portion of rainfall, melted snow or irrigation water
that flows across the ground surface and eventually is returned to streams.
      (1)   “Accelerated runoff.” Means increased runoff due to less permeable
surface area primarily caused by urbanization.
      (2)   “Peak rate of runoff.” Means the maximum rate of runoff for any
storm.
      (3)   “Runoff volume.” Means the total quantity or volume of runoff
during a specified time period.  It may be expressed in acre-feet, in inches-
depth of the drainage area, or in other units of volume.
   “Storage.” Means the control, retention, or detention of runoff.
      (1)   “Detention storage.” Means storm runoff collected and stored for a
short period of time and then released at a controlled rate.  (Dry pond)
      (2)   “Retention storage.” Means storm runoff collected and stored for a
short period of time and which is released at a controlled rate, leaving a
minimum pool of water in the facility.  This facility is often associated with
water-related or aesthetic uses.  (Wet pond)
   “Storage facility.” Means any facility used to store, retain or detain storm
runoff, which shall include, but not be limited to, retention and detention
storage facilities, underground pipe, rooftop or parking lot storage, basins,
depressions and pools.
   “Storm drainage system.” Means the surface and subsurface system for the
removal of water from the land, including both the natural elements of streams,
gullies, ravines, marshes, swales and ponds, whether of an intermittent or
continuous nature, and human-made elements which include conduits and
appurtenant features, culverts, ditches, channels, storage facilities, streets,
and the storm sewer system.
      (1)   “Initial drainage system.” Means that part of the storm drainage
system which is used regularly for collecting, transporting, and disposing of
storm runoff, snow melt, and miscellaneous minor flows.  The initial system is
also termed the “convenience system”, the “minor system”, or the “storm sewer
system”, and may include many features ranging from curbs and gutters to storm
sewer pipes and open drainageways.
      (2)   “Major drainage system.” Means that storm drainage system which
carries the runoff from a storm having a frequency of occurrence of once in 100
years.  The major system will function whether or not it has been planned and
designed and whether or not improvements are situated wisely with respect to
it.  The major system is also termed the “emergency flow way”.  The major
system usually includes many features such as streets, ravines, and major
drainage channels. Storm sewer systems may reduce the flow in many parts of the
major system by storing and transporting water underground.
   “Storm frequency.” Means the average period of time in which a storm of a
given duration and intensity can be expected to be equaled or exceeded.
   “Stream.” Means a course of running water usually flowing in a particular
direction in a definite channel and discharging into some other stream or body
of water.
   “Watercourse.” Means a channel in which a flow of water occurs either
continuously or intermittently in a definite direction.  The term applies in
either natural or artificially constructed channels.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 1-7-1991)
§ 1286.04  DETENTION/RETENTION BASIN MANUAL.
   The Detention/Retention Basin Manual is hereby adopted by the city, and the
policies, standards, specifications, and provisions contained therein shall
apply to the development of all subdivisions in the city.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 1-7-1991)
§ 1286.05  HYDROLOGIC AND HYDRAULIC STUDIES.
   (A)   A hydrologic and hydraulic study of each subdivision or development
shall be submitted as part of the construction drawings.
   (B)   These studies will be used to establish the adequacy of the drainage
system of the development site.  As part of these studies, the adequacy of the
storm drainage facility necessary to carry the runoff from the initial storm
design shall be shown.  Also the flow routes and drainageways necessary to
convey the 100-year storm (the emergency flow way) through the development
shall be shown.  All necessary easements shall be shown.
   (C)   These studies will also be used to establish the adequacy of the
drainage system of the proposed development to receive and convey initial and
major storms from dominant (upstream) property.
   (D)   These studies will also be used to establish the adequacy of the
drainage system of the proposed development so as not to create or worsen
drainage problems downstream.  As part of these studies, storage facilities
will be located and identified by type.
   (E)   Along with the above, a construction site erosion control plan shall
be submitted along with the other reports with all Planning Commission
submittals.  Guidelines are outlined in Exhibit “E” attached to original
Ordinance 1-91, passed January 7, 1991.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 1-7-1991)
§ 1286.06  STORM WATER RUNOFF LIMITATIONS.
   (A)   If the hydrologic and hydraulic studies reveal that the proposed
development or subdivision would not increase the total volume of runoff, the
peak rate of runoff after development for all return periods of storms up to
100 years shall equal the pre-developed peak for all storm frequencies.
   (B)   If the hydrologic and hydraulic studies reveal that the total volume
of runoff is increased, the peak rate of runoff from the critical storm, after
development, shall not exceed the predevelopment peak rate of runoff from a
one-year frequency storm for a 24-hour period. The critical storm shall be
determined in accordance with the Detention/Retention Basin Manual and the peak
rate of runoff for each storm of greater or lesser frequency shall be
determined in accordance therewith. However, the peak rate of runoff after
development may not exceed the peak rate of runoff before development.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 1-7-1991)
§ 1286.07  SUBDIVISION OR DEVELOPMENT DRAINAGE SYSTEM.
   (A)   Storm drainage facilities for the subdivision or development shall be
designed to accommodate runoff from the 50-year storm frequency.  Site design
and grading plans shall provide emergency drainageways to avoid damage to a
structure and to avoid endangering public safety, which emergency drainageways
shall be designed to accommodate runoff from storms exceeding the 50-year storm
frequency, but not exceeding the 100-year storm frequency.
   (B)   If the collector facilities cannot be located in street rights-of-way,
then they shall be located adjacent to side or rear lot lines where easements
shall be provided to and along the facilities.
   (C)   All storm water flow from the proposed subdivision or development,
including flows from upstream areas passing through, and further including
increased flow attributable to changes in time of concentration or changes in
the former runoff factor (imperviousness), shall be conveyed to the proper
outlet for the entire tributary area via a natural channel or pipe/culvert
either or both of which shall be improved so as to be of adequate capacity.
   (D)   “Emergency flow way” means the flow routes and drainageway necessary
to convey the 100-year storm through a development.
   (E)   These requirements must be met at each point storm water is discharged
from a development area.
   (F)   In the event that retention or detention structures exceed specified
sizes, required inspection and permits from the Ohio Department of Natural
Resources Division of Water are required.
   (G)   In some cases, the City Engineer may require the submittal of
additional information (HEC-1 or HEC-2) on the existing and proposed drainage
system and the effects on existing drainage or natural waterways.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 1-7-1991; Ord. 15-16, passed 2-22-2016)
§ 1286.08  EASEMENTS AND ACCESS.
   Access to flood control or storm drainage facilities for emergency,
inspection, maintenance and improvement purposes, shall be provided as follows.
   (A)   Access to flood control or storm drainage ditches, channels, and
storage facilities, shall be by means of easements.  Such easements shall be
not less than 15 feet in width, exclusive of the width of the ditch, channel,
or other facility it is to serve, and an easement of this type shall be
provided on one side of a flood control or storm drainage ditch, channel, or
similar type facility.
   (B)   Access along flood control or storm drainage ditches and channels
shall be by means of easements.  Such easement shall be not less than 15 feet
in width, exclusive of the width of the ditch, channel, or other facility it is
to serve, and an easement of this type shall be provided on both sides of a
flood control or storm drainage ditch, channel, or similar facility.
   (C)   Access along the initial drainage system shall be by means of
easements.  Such easements shall be not less than 15 feet in width, with a
minimum of five feet in width on each side of the centerline.
   (D)   Access around storage facilities shall be a 25-foot easement in the
case of detention (dry) basins, and a 25-foot easement with a 25-foot level
beach in the case of retention (wet) basins, measured from the top of the bank,
and shall include the storage facility itself.
   (E)   Easements for the emergency flow ways shall be a minimum of 15 feet in
width or larger if required.
   (F)   Flood control or storm drainage easements containing underground
facilities shall have a minimum width of 15 feet.
   (G)   Those lots crossed by an easement are restricted against the planting
within said easement of trees, shrubbery or plantings with woody growth
characteristics, and against the construction therein of buildings, accessory
buildings, fences, walls or any other obstructions to the free flow of storm
water, and are also restricted against changing of the final grade from that
described by the approved grading plan.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 1-7-1991)
§ 1286.09  MAINTENANCE.
   (A)   Any portion of the drainage system, including on-site and off-site
storage facilities, that is constructed by the developer will be continuously
maintained by the owner or subsequent owners through a homeowners association
in title of the affected lands unless it is officially accepted by the city for
maintenance.  The developer shall cause the maintenance obligation to be
inserted in the chain of title to the affected lands as a covenant running with
the land in favor of the city.
   (B)   The need for maintenance can be minimized by designing low maintenance
facilities.  There are many design options which can result in nearly
maintenance-free storm water control.  Low maintenance is a priority in the
design of all facilities.
   (C)   Multi-use facilities incorporating assets such as aesthetics and
recreation can be incorporated with the design of these facilities.
   (D)   All facilities must be inspected and maintained by the homeowners
association twice yearly on May 1 and again on November 1 and periodically
throughout the year to ensure that the facilities are operational.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 1-7-1991)
§ 1286.10  URBAN SEDIMENT ABATEMENT RULES.
   The provisions of the Ohio Department of Natural Resources, Division of Soil
and Water Conservation, “Urban Sediment Abatement Rules” (O.A.C. 1501:15-1-01
through 1501:15-1-06) shall be complied with in this chapter.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 1-7-1991)
§ 1286.11  OHIO DAM SAFETY LAWS.
   The provisions of the Ohio Department of Natural Resources (Ohio Dam Safety
Laws (July 1, 1987) shall be complied with in this chapter.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 1-7-1991)
§ 1286.12  SOILS MAP.
   A soils map, at a scale of one inch equals 200 feet, shall be submitted for
review, as follows:
   (A)   Contours shall be at two-foot intervals;
   (B)   All soil types shall be noted along with all ground cover and
woodlands and all other ground conditions;
   (C)   The total drainage area tributary to the proposed project, including
the project, shall be noted.  (Before and after development conditions must be
noted);
   (D)   A legend must be provided noting the soils, area in acres, and soil
groups before and after development;
   (E)   A copy of the U.S. Department of Agriculture SCS Soil Survey of
Cuyahoga County, Ohio, 1980, showing the entire drainage area and sub-area,
shall accompany the soils map; and
   (F)   All existing drainage facilities must be noted, i.e., storm sewer
culverts, lakes and swamps, and the like.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 1-7-1991)
§ 1286.13  DRAINAGE AREA MAP.
   A drainage area map shall be submitted for review, before and after
development, as follows:
   (A)   An aerial photograph with a scale of one inch equals 100 feet must be
supplied with the entire drainage area and all sub-areas noted, along with all
existing land use conditions.  Contours shall be at a minimum of two-foot
intervals.
   (B)   All existing drainage facilities must be noted along with all
necessary field data.
   (C)   All natural waterways must be noted and cross-sections of all
waterways must be submitted along with any other data to sufficiently determine
the exact time of concentration or travel time.
   (D)   All existing and proposed modifications to the drainage system must be
noted.
   (E)   A complete storm sewer design, noting all proposed storm sewers,
culverts and other storm water management facilities, must be submitted.
   (F)   The emergency flow way must be shown on this plan, i.e., the flow
route for a 100-year storm conveyed through the proposed project.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 1-7-1991)
§ 1286.14  SOIL CONSERVATION SERVICE, TECHNICAL RELEASE NO. 55, JUNE 1986,
URBAN HYDROLOGY FOR SMALL WATERSHEDS.
   (A)   All appropriate procedures must be utilized in the design of any storm
water facility, as follows:
      (1)   Using a Type II rainfall distribution and North Royalton rainfall
data;
      (2)   Using a runoff curve summary showing pre-development and post-
development conditions;
      (3)   Using runoff calculations;
      (4)   Using travel time and time of concentration calculations;
      (5)   Using calculations on peak discharge and discharge volume;
      (6)   Using pre-hydrographs and post-hydrographs; or
      (7)   Using storage volume requirements.
   (B)   All storms must then be routed through the proposed drainage
facility.  SCS TR 20, or any other method approved by the City Engineer, may be
used to perform this routing procedure.
   (C)   SCS emergency spillway design calculations must be submitted for a
100-year storm.
   (D)   Any additional information required by the City Engineer must be
submitted at this time.
   (E)   All City Engineer’s outlet details must be used.
   (F)   The TR 55 computer programs may be utilized in this process.
(Ord. 1-91, passed 1-7-1991)
CHAPTER 1287:  EXISTING OIL/GAS WELLS
Section
1287.01   Distance required
1287.02   Variances
1287.99   Penalty
§ 1287.01  DISTANCE REQUIRED.
   No new inhabited private/commercial dwelling building or structure involving
lodging, trade, manufacturer, repair storage, traffic or occupancy by the
public shall be nearer than 100 feet to an existing gas/oil well, storage tank
or other equipment. No new traveled part of any public street, road or highway,
or parking area shall be nearer than 50 feet to an existing gas/oil well,
storage tank or other equipment. This rule does not apply to a building or
structure which is incidental to agricultural use of the land on which it is
located unless such building is used as a private dwelling, house or the
business of retail trade.
(Ord. 173-06, passed 12-18-2006; Ord. 148-07, passed 12-17-2007)
§ 1287.02  VARIANCES.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals may vary or permit exceptions to any of the
provisions of this chapter if it finds that such variance or exception will not
violate the spirit or intent of this chapter.
(Ord. 173-06, passed 12-18-2006)
§ 1287.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any of these provisions, or any
order pursuant thereto, shall be punished as provided in §
202.99 of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 173-06, passed 12-18-2006)
CHAPTER 1288:  MEDICAL MARIJUANA
Section
1288.01   Prohibited activities relating to medical marijuana
1288.02   Public nuisance; violation; remedies not exclusive; penalty
§ 1288.01  PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES RELATING TO MEDICAL MARIJUANA.
   The following prohibitions apply to all property within the boundaries of
the City of Broadview Heights, regardless of the zone, adopted specific plan,
overlay zone, or any other development or use classification or other
designation of property:
   (A)   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the indoor or outdoor
cultivation of medical marijuana or to establish or operate, or to allow,
cause, create, suffer, or permit the establishment or operation of a medical
marijuana cultivation facility.
   (B)   It is unlawful for any person to engage in the processing of medical
marijuana or to establish or operate, or to allow, cause, create, suffer, or
permit the establishment or operation of a medical marijuana processing
facility.
   (C)   It is unlawful for any person to establish or operate, or to allow,
cause, create, suffer, or permit the establishment or operation of a medical
marijuana dispensary.
   (D)   It is unlawful for any person to deliver medical marijuana, or to
allow, cause, create, suffer, or permit the delivery of medical marijuana,
except that a patient or caregiver as registered by the State Board of Pharmacy
under Ohio R.C. 3796.08 may engage in all activities allowed pursuant to Ohio
R.C. 3796.22 and 3796.23.
   (E)   No zoning permit, building permit, certificate of occupancy or any
other permit shall be granted to a business for opening, using any land or
devoting any floor area of the business for the purposes of operating a medical
marijuana cultivation facility, processing facility, or dispensary.
(Ord. 25-2019, passed 9-9-2019)
§ 1288.02  PUBLIC NUISANCE; VIOLATION; REMEDIES NOT EXCLUSIVE; PENALTY.
   (A)   Engaging in any activity or using property to engage in any activity,
prohibited under this chapter constitutes a public nuisance subject to
abatement.
   (B)   Notwithstanding any other provision of the zoning ordinances of the
City of Broadview Heights, any person who violates this chapter shall be guilty
of a misdemeanor of the first degree. Each day or any portion thereof that a
person violates any provision of this chapter shall constitute a separate
offense.
   (C)   Any enforcement action taken pursuant to this chapter shall not
prejudice or adversely affect any other action, whether administrative, civil
or criminal, that may be brought to abate the public nuisance or violation or
to seek compensation for damages suffered. An administrative, civil, or
criminal action may be brought concurrently with any other process regarding
the same public nuisance or violation.
(Ord. 25-2019, passed 9-9-2019)
APPENDIX I:  PARKING AREA BUFFERS
[https://export.amlegal.com/media/28880f249272a2a879d6f6324ba48728a75cc96f/
IMAGES/0-0-0-4258.jpg]
 
TITLE EIGHT:  MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
   
CHAP. 1300.   RESIDENTIAL ARCHITECTURE
   
CHAP. 1302.   MUNICIPAL ARCHITECT
   
CHAP. 1304.   TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMITS
   
CHAP. 1305.   USE OF PUBLIC WAYS FOR SMALL CELL WIRELESS FACILITIES AND
WIRELESS SUPPORT FACILITIES
   
CHAP. 1306.   TELECOMMUNICATIONS UNDERGROUND SERVICE LINES
   
CHAP. 1308.   AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINES
   
CHAP. 1310.   EXTERIOR MASONRY SURFACES
   
CHAP. 1312.   FENCES
   
CHAP. 1314.   FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
   
CHAP. 1316.   GRADE LEVELS
   
CHAP. 1318.   MOVING OF BUILDINGS
   
CHAP. 1320.   REMOVAL OF LOAM OR TOPSOIL
   
CHAP. 1322.   ROADWAY DITCH LINES
   
CHAP. 1324.   RURAL MAILBOXES
   
CHAP. 1326.   SATELLITE SIGNAL-RECEIVING EARTH STATIONS
   
CHAP. 1328.   SIGNS
   
CHAP. 1330.   STREET LIGHTING
   
CHAP. 1332.   SWIMMING AND WADING POOLS
   
CHAP. 1334.   STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN
   
CHAP. 1336.   TEMPORARY DRIVEWAYS AND PROTECTIVE PLANKINGS
   
CHAP. 1338.   UNSAFE BUILDINGS
   
CHAP. 1340.   SAFETY FORCES RADIO SIGNAL COMMUNICATION REQUIREMENTS
   
CHAP. 1342.   WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANTS
   
CHAP. 1344.   WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
   
CHAP. 1345.   SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS
   
CHAP. 1346.   CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES
   
CHAP. 1348.   INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
   
CHAP. 1350.   DONATION BOXES
CHAPTER 1300:  RESIDENTIAL ARCHITECTURE
Section
   
1300.01   Brick facing foundations
   
1300.99   Penalty
Editor’s note:
   This Chapter 1300 was formerly Chapter 1423 of the Building and Housing
Code, which was recodified by Ordinance 62-07, passed June 4, 2007.
§ 1300.01  BRICK FACING FOUNDATIONS.
   Any building to be occupied for residential purposes, as permitted by this
Code, shall have all exterior, above grade foundation walls completely faced
with masonry face, four-inch brick, natural face stone, or other finish
materials, which shall be approved by the Planning Commission. In no case shall
plain, painted or colored concrete block walls be permitted.
(Ord. 89-06, passed 6-5-2006; Ord. 137-12, passed 9-17-2012)
§ 1300.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalty provided in §
1440.99.
(Ord. 89-06, passed 6-5-2006)
CHAPTER 1302:  MUNICIPAL ARCHITECT
Section
   
1302.01   Appointment; qualifications
   
1302.02   Duties
   
1302.03   Service fees
   
1302.04   Approval of Council required for service on city-owned property
Cross-reference:
   Fees for Municipal Architect’s services, see §
1449.05
   Review of logging permit applications, see §§
848.03,
848.04
Editor’s note:
   This Chapter 1302 was formerly Chapter 1444 of the Building and Housing
Code, which was recodified by Ordinance 62-07, passed June 4, 2007.
Statutory reference:
   Architects, see Ohio R.C. 4703.01 et seq.
§ 1302.01  APPOINTMENT; QUALIFICATIONS.
   The Mayor is hereby authorized to appoint as the Municipal Architect an
architect who has had not less than five years experience in building
construction or design and who is registered in Ohio as an architect. Such
appointment is subject to the approval of Council, by a majority vote. In
addition thereto, the City Architect must meet the qualifications contained in
this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 35-62, passed 9-17-1962; Ord. 26-01, passed 2-20-2001)
§ 1302.02  DUTIES.
   The Municipal Architect shall be on call and available to handle all of the
city’s architectural problems, including examination of plans and assisting the
city in required approvals when the work falls within the following categories
of the Ohio Building Code:
   (A)   Residential buildings - nontransient;
   (B)   Residential buildings - transient;
   (C)   Hospitals and homes;
   (D)   Penal and correctional buildings;
   (E)   Schools and school assembly halls;
   (F)   Places of assembly;
   (G)   Places of assembly - outdoors;
   (H)   Business buildings;
   (I)   Storage buildings;
   (J)   Industrial buildings; and
   (K)   Special occupancy buildings.
(Ord. 35-62, passed 9-17-1962; Ord. 29-64, passed 7-3-1964)
§ 1302.03  SERVICE FEES.
   The fees for the services of the Municipal Architect shall be $75 per hour.
Any building permit which requires the services of the Municipal Architect
shall be charged a fee in accordance with the Fee Schedule as set forth in
Chapter 1449.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998; Ord. 18-04, passed 2-17-2004)
§ 1302.04  APPROVAL OF COUNCIL REQUIRED FOR SERVICE ON CITY-OWNED PROPERTY.
   Any service to be performed by the Municipal Architect on property owned by
the city shall have the approval of Council by resolution prior to the
commencement of such service.
(Ord. 20-77, passed 4-18-1977)
CHAPTER 1304:  TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHT-OF-WAY PERMITS
Section
   
1304.01   Granting of permit; person defined
   
1304.02   Form of permit
   
1304.03   Conflicts of laws
   
1304.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Satellite signal-receiving earth stations, see
Chapter 1326
   Threatening or harassing telecommunications, see §
636.15
   Wireless telecommunications facilities, see
Chapter 1344
Statutory reference:
   Interrupting or impairing television, see Ohio R.C. 2909.04
   Telecommunications, see Ohio R.C. Chapter 4927
   Telegraph and telephone companies, see Ohio R.C. Chapter 4931
§ 1304.01  GRANTING OF PERMIT; PERSON DEFINED.
   Council may, upon proper application, grant a telecommunications right-of-
way permit to any person applying therefor pursuant to the terms and conditions
in Exhibit “A” attached to original Ordinance 156-97, passed October 6, 1997,
and made a part hereof as if fully rewritten herein.  For purposes of this
chapter, “person” shall be as defined in § 1.8 of the telecommunications right-
of-way permit as set forth in Exhibit “A”.
(Ord. 156-97, passed 10-6-1997)
§ 1304.02  FORM OF PERMIT.
   The form of the telecommunications right-of-way permit shall be as
delineated in Exhibit “A” attached to original Ordinance 156-97, passed October
6, 1997, and made a part hereof as if fully rewritten herein.  Copies of the
telecommunications right-of-way permit may be obtained, at cost, from the
Building Department.
(Ord. 156-97, passed 10-6-1997)
§ 1304.03  CONFLICTS OF LAWS.
   In the event that any of the provisions contained in Exhibit “A” attached to
original Ordinance 156-97, passed October 6, 1997, conflict with any of the
provisions of
Chapter 1344 regarding telecommunications towers in the city, shall supersede
the provisions contained in Exhibit “A” to the extent necessary to give full
force and effect to the provisions of Chapter 1344 (formerly Chapter 1489).
(Ord. 156-97, passed 10-6-1997)
§ 1304.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter, including any provision of a
telecommunications right-of-way permit granted under this chapter, shall be
subject to the penalty provided in §
1440.99.
(Ord. 156-97, passed 10-6-1997)
CHAPTER 1305:  USE OF PUBLIC WAYS FOR SMALL CELL WIRELESS FACILITIES
AND  WIRELESS SUPPORT FACILITIES
Section
   
1305.01   Overview and purpose; definitions
   
1305.02   Consent required
   
1305.03   Permit application types
   
1305.04   Consolidated consent applications
   
1305.05   Application fee
   
1305.06   Attachment fee
   
1305.07   Required application materials
   
1305.08   Application review
   
1305.09   Permitting process, duration and termination
   
1305.10   Annual registration
   
1305.11   Nonconforming facilities
   
1305.12   Abandoned and damaged facilities
   
1305.13   Insurance requirements
   
1305.14   Indemnification
   
1305.15   Financial surety
   
1305.16   Reserved space
   
1305.17   Removal or relocation of facilities
   
1305.18   Notice of work
   
1305.19   Construction permit
   
1305.99   Penalties; equitable remedies
§ 1305.01  OVERVIEW AND PURPOSE; DEFINITIONS.
   (A)   The purpose of this chapter is to:
      (1)   Provide standards for the construction, installation, modification,
operation, and removal of facilities and wireless support structures in the
city’s right-of-way to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens
of the city;
      (2)   Preserve the character of the city, including the city’s
neighborhoods, downtown and historic districts;
      (3)   Give guidance to wireless telecommunications providers to assist
such companies in the timely, efficient, safe, and aesthetically pleasing
installation of facilities and wireless support structures; and
      (4)   Comply with, and not conflict with or preempt, all applicable state
and federal laws.
   (B)   For the purpose of this chapter, and the interpretation and
enforcement hereof, the following words and phrases shall have the following
meanings, unless the context of the sentence in which they are used shall
indicate otherwise:
      “Applicant.” Means any person or entity who submits an application
pursuant to this chapter.
      “Application.” Means all necessary documentation submitted by an
applicant to obtain a small cell use permit from the city to collocate a small
cell facility and/or to construct, maintain, modify, operate, or replace a
wireless support structure.
      “Accessory Equipment.” Means equipment used in conjunction with a small
cell facility and generally at the same location of the small cell facility,
including, but not limited to, electric meters, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation boxes, grounding equipment, power transfer
switches, cut-off switches, and vertical cable runs.
      “City.” Means the City of Broadview Heights.
      “Collocation” or “Collocate.” Means to install, mount, maintain, modify,
operate or replace wireless facilities on a wireless support structure.
      “Design Guidelines.” Means standards applicable to small cell equipment
and wireless support structures in the right-of-way, established by the city.
      “Facilities.” Means small cell facilities, accessory equipment and
wireless support structures.
      “Facilities Operator.” Means the person or entity responsible for the
installation, operation, maintenance, replacement and modification of
facilities. “Facilities Operator” includes:
         (a)   Operators;
         (b)   Applicants who applied for consent to collocate a small cell
facility or to construct, maintain, modify, operate or replace a new wireless
support structure pursuant to R.C. § 4939.031(E) and who have obtained a small
cell use permit; and
         (c)   Applicants who applied for consent to collocate a small cell
facility or to construct, maintain, modify, operate or replace a new wireless
support structure pursuant to R.C. § 4939.033 and who have obtained a small
cell use permit.
      “Eligible Facilities or Eligible Support Structure Request.”
         (a)   Means any request for modification of an existing support
structure or base station that does not substantially change the physical
dimension of such support structure involving collocation of new facilities,
removal of facilities, or replacement of facilities. A substantial change
means:
            1.   A modification that changes the physical dimension of a
wireless support structure by increasing the height of the wireless support
structure by more than 10% or more than ten feet, whichever is greater, and/or
by adding an appurtenance to the body of the wireless support structure that
would protrude from the edge of the wireless support structure by more than six
feet;
            2.   The installation of more than the standard number of equipment
cabinets for the technology involved or the installation of more than cabinets,
whichever is less;
            3.   The installation for any new ground-mounted equipment cabinets
if there are not existing ground-mounted equipment cabinets;
            4.   Any excavation or deployment outside of the current site of
the facility;
            5.   Removal of any concealment elements of the facilities or the
wireless support structure; and
            6.   Any change that does not comply with this chapter, the design
guidelines established by the city, or state or federal law and regulations.
         (b)   The threshold for measuring increases that may constitute a
substantial change are cumulative, measured from the facilities as originally
permitted (including any modifications that were reviewed and approved by the
city prior to the enactment of the Spectrum Act on February 22, 2012.)
      “Operator.” Means a wireless service provider, cable operator, or a video
service provider that operates a small cell facility and provides wireless
service, including a wireless service provider, cable operator, or a video
service provider that provides information services as defined in the
Telecommunications Act of 1996, 110 Stat. 59, 47 U.S.C. § 153(20), and services
that are fixed in nature or use unlicensed spectrum.
      “Public Way” or “Right-of-Way.” Means the surface of, and the space
within, through, on, across, above or below, any public street, public road,
public highway, public freeway, public lane, public path, public alley, public
court, public sidewalk, public boulevard, public parkway, public drive, public
easement, and any other land dedicated or otherwise designated for a comparable
public use, which is owned or controlled by the city or other public entity or
political subdivision.
      “Small Cell Facility.” Means a wireless facility that meets both of the
following requirements:
         (a)   Each antenna is located inside an enclosure of not more than six
cubic feet in volume or, in the case of an antenna with exposed elements, the
antenna and all of its exposed elements can fit within an enclosure of not more
than six cubic feet in volume; and
         (b)   All other wireless equipment associated with the facility is
cumulatively not more than 28 cubic feet in volume. The calculation of
equipment volume shall not include electric meters, concealment elements,
telecommunications demarcation boxes, grounding equipment, power transfer
switches, cut-off switches, and vertical cable runs for the connection of power
and other services.
      “Small Cell Equipment.” Means a small cell facility and all accessory
equipment.
      “Small Cell Use Permit.” Means the permit granted by the city authorizing
the applicant to collocate a small cell facility or to construct, maintain,
modify, operate, or replace a wireless support structure in the right-of-way.
      “Wireless Support Structure.” Means a pole, such as a monopole, either
guyed or self-supporting, street light pole, traffic signal pole, a 15-foot or
taller sign pole, or utility pole capable of supporting small cell facilities.
As used in this chapter, “wireless support structure” excludes all of the
following:
         (a)   A utility pole or other facility owned or operated by a
municipal electric utility; and
         (b)   A utility pole or other facility used to supply traction power
to public transit systems, including railways, trams, streetcars and trolley
buses.
(Ord. 25-2018, passed 7-2-2018)
§ 1305.02  CONSENT REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any person or entity seeking to collocate a small cell facility in the
right-of-way, or to construct, maintain, modify, operate, or replace a wireless
support structure in the right-of-way, shall first file a written application
for a small cell use permit with the Building Commissioner in accordance with
the requirements in this chapter, design guidelines established by the city,
R.C. Chapter 4939, and all applicable state and federal laws and regulations.
   (B)   Applicants are strongly encouraged to contact the Building
Commissioner and request a pre-application conference. This meeting will
provide an opportunity for early coordination regarding proposed facilities,
locations, design, application submittal and the approval process in order to
avoid any potential delays in the processing of an application and deployment
of facilities in the city.
   (C)   A small cell use permit granted under this chapter shall not convey
any right, title or interest in the right-of-way, but shall be deemed a permit
only to use and occupy the public ways for the limited purposes and term stated
in the permit, this chapter, and the design guidelines established by the city.
Further, no small cell use permit shall be construed as any warranty of title.
(Ord. 25-2018, passed 7-2-2018)
§ 1305.03  PERMIT APPLICATION TYPES.
   Applicants shall classify their application as one of the following types:
   (A)   Type 1: Eligible facilities requests.
   (B)   Type 2: Application for collocation of small cell equipment on a
wireless support structure that does not constitute an eligible facilities
request.
   (C)   Type 3: New wireless support structure. Such applications will address
construction, modification, replacement or removal of a wireless support
structure within the right-of-way. At the time of application, applicants shall
certify that small cell equipment will be placed on the wireless support
structure within 180 days from the date the small cell use permit is issued.
(Ord. 25-2018, passed 7-2-2018)
§ 1305.04  CONSOLIDATED CONSENT APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4939.0312, an applicant may file one consolidated
application for up to 30 individual small cell facilities or 30 individual
wireless support structures as long as the facilities or structures for which
consent is requested are substantially similar.
      (1)   Small cell facilities shall be considered substantially similar
when the small cell equipment is identical in type, size, appearance and
function.
      (2)   Wireless support structures shall be considered substantially
similar when the wireless support structures are identical in type, size,
appearance and function and are to be located in a similar location.
      (3)   Applications for facilities and wireless support structures cannot
be commingled.
   (B)   The city may, at its discretion, require separate applications for any
small cell facilities or wireless support structures that are not substantially
similar.
(Ord. 25-2018, passed 7-2-2018)
§ 1305.05  APPLICATION FEE.
   (A)   The fee for each application is $250. The city shall adjust the fee by
10% every five years, rounded to the nearest $5, beginning in the year 2023.
   (B)   An application shall not be deemed complete until the fee is paid.
   (C)   If applications are consolidated, then the fee shall be the sum
resulting from the fee set forth in division (A) of this section multiplied by
the total number of facilities or wireless support structures included in the
consolidated application.
(Ord. 25-2018, passed 7-2-2018)
§ 1305.06  ATTACHMENT FEE.
   (A)   In addition to the application fee, an annual fee shall be paid to the
city for each small cell facility attached to a municipally-owned wireless
support is $200. The city shall adjust the attachment fee by 10% every five
years, rounded to the nearest $5, beginning in the year 2023.
   (B)   The first-year attachment fee shall be paid when the collocation is
complete, and no later than January 1 each year thereafter. The first-year
attachment fee shall not be prorated, regardless of the date that the
collocation is complete.
(Ord. 25-2018, passed 7-2-2018)
§ 1305.07  REQUIRED APPLICATION MATERIALS.
   The applicant must submit the following documentation with each application.
   (A)   Completed application form including the identity, legal status and
federal tax identification number of the applicant, as well as all affiliates
and agents of the applicant that will use or be, in any way, responsible for
the facilities.
   (B)   The name, address, and telephone number of the local officer, agent,
or employee responsible for the accuracy of the application to be notified in
case of emergency.
   (C)   Fully dimensional scaled site plan (scale no smaller than one inch
equals 40 feet). The site plan must include:
      (1)   The exact proposed location of the facilities within the right-of-
way;
      (2)   All existing facilities with all existing transmission equipment;
      (3)   The location of all overhead and underground public utilities,
telecommunications, cable, water, sanitary sewer and storm water drainage
utilities in the public way within 100 feet surrounding the proposed
facilities;
      (4)   The legal property boundaries within 100 feet surrounding the
proposed facilities;
      (5)   Indication of distance between the facilities and existing curbs,
driveways, sidewalks, trees, utilities, other poles and existing buildings
within 100 feet surrounding the proposed facilities; and
      (6)   Access and utility easements within 100 feet surrounding the
proposed facilities.
   (D)   Elevation drawings (scale no smaller than one inch equals ten feet) of
the proposed facilities.
   (E)   Evidence that the applicant provided notice by mail to all property
owners within 300 feet of the proposed facilities prior to submitting the
application. The notice shall include:
      (1)   Name of the applicant;
      (2)   Estimated date applicant intends to submit the application;
      (3)   Detailed description of the proposed facilities and the proposed
location; and
      (4)   Accurate, to-scale photo simulation of the proposed facilities.
Scale shall be no smaller than one inch equals 40 feet.
   (F)   A preliminary installation/construction schedule and completion date.
   (G)   Structural calculations prepared, stamped and signed by an engineer
licensed and registered by the state showing that the wireless support
structure can accommodate the weight of the proposed small cell equipment.
   (H)   Analysis demonstrating that the proposed facilities do not interfere
with the city’s public safety radio system, traffic and emergency signal light
system, or other city safety communications components. It shall be the
responsibility of the applicant to evaluate, prior to making the application
for a small cell use permit, the compatibility between the existing city
infrastructure and applicant’s proposed facilities.
   (I)   A landscape plan that demonstrates screening of proposed small cell
equipment.
   (J)   Drawings of the proposed facilities. For all equipment depicted, the
applicant must also include, if applicable:
      (1)   The manufacturer’s name and model number;
      (2)   Physical dimensions, including, without limitation, height, width,
depth and weight with mounts and other necessary hardware; and
      (3)   The noise level generated by the equipment, if any.
   (K)   If the applicant is not an operator, then the applicant must provide
proof that the applicant has been engaged by a wireless service provider who
will be the end-user of the facilities.
(Ord. 25-2018, passed 7-2-2018)
§ 1305.08  APPLICATION REVIEW.
   (A)   Applications shall be evaluated in the time frames as follows:
      (1)   Type 1 applications:  60 days;
      (2)   Type 2 applications: 90 days; and
      (3)   Type 3 applications:  120 days.
   (B)   Applications shall be reviewed for completeness. If the application is
incomplete, then the applicant will be notified of the insufficiency, and the
time frames set forth in division (A) shall be tolled until the application is
made complete
   (C)   The time frames set out in division (A) may also be tolled as follows:
      (1)   If the city receives between 15 and 30 applications in a 30-day
period, then the city may toll for an additional 20 days.
      (2)   If the city receives more than 30 applications in a 30-day period,
then the city may toll for an additional 15 days for every 15 applications
received.
      (3)   By mutual agreement between the applicant and the city.
      (4)   When an applicant submits an underground area waiver pursuant to §
1305.13(D) of this chapter, in which case the city may toll for an additional
14 days.
   (D)   If two applicants request to collocate on the same wireless support
structure or two wireless support structures are proposed within a distance
that would violate the spacing requirements set forth in §
1305.16 of this section, then the Building Commissioner may resolve the
conflict in any reasonable and nondiscriminatory manner.
   (E)   If a request for consent is denied, the city shall provide, in
writing, its reasons for denying the request, supported by substantial,
competent evidence. The denial of consent shall not unreasonably discriminate
against the applicant. Grounds for denying an application may include, but are
not limited to:
      (1)   Failure to provide information required under §
1305.07 of this chapter;
      (2)   Failure to comply with design guidelines established by the city;
      (3)   Failure to provide financial surety pursuant to §
1305.15 of this chapter;
      (4)   Failure to remove abandoned facilities as required under §
1305.12 of this chapter;
      (5)   Conflict with the historic nature or character of the surrounding
area;
      (6)   Conflict with planned future improvements in the right-of-way; and
      (7)   Failure to comply with generally applicable health, safety and
welfare requirements.
(Ord. 25-2018, passed 7-2-2018)
§ 1305.09  PERMITTING PROCESS, DURATION AND TERMINATION.
   (A)   Upon approval of its application, an applicant shall receive a small
cell use permit indicating that the city has granted the applicant consent to
occupy the right-of-way.
   (B)   A small cell use permit issued to an operator shall have duration of
no longer than ten years. Permits may be renewed for five-year terms.
   (C)   A small cell use permit issued to a facilities operator who is not an
operator shall have a term of ten years or the duration of the facilities
operator’s agreement with a wireless service provider provided pursuant to §
1305.06(K) of this chapter, whichever is shorter.
   (D)   A small cell use permit shall not be renewed if the facilities
operator or the facilities are not in compliance with all applicable laws and
regulations.
   (E)   (1)   Pursuant to R.C. § 4939.0314(E), a small cell use permit shall
be deemed terminated if the facilities operator has not completed construction
of the facilities or has failed to attach small cell equipment to a wireless
support structure within 180 days of issuance of the permit, unless the delay
is caused by:
         (a)   Make-ready work for a municipally-owned wireless support
structure; or
         (b)   Due to the lack of commercial power or backhaul availability at
the site, provided that the operator has made a request for commercial power or
backhaul services within 60 days after the small cell use permit was granted.
      (2)   If the additional time to complete the installation exceeds 360
days after the issuance of the permit, then the permit shall be deemed
terminated regardless of the cause of the delay.
   (F)   A small cell use permit for a new wireless support structure shall be
deemed terminated if the facilities operator fails to attach small cell
equipment to the new wireless support structure within 180 days of issuance of
the small cell use permit.
   (G)   If the facilities operator fails to remit the annual attachment fee
required pursuant to §
1305.10 of this chapter, then the small cell use permit will expire on the 90th
day from the date the annual attachment fee was due.
   (H)   A small cell use permit may be terminated by the facilities operator
at any time upon service of 60-days written notice to the city.
   (I)   Upon termination of a small cell use permit, the facilities operator
shall restore and rehabilitate all city-owned wireless support structures and
the right-of-way to their former condition and utility.
   (J)   The city shall not issue any refunds for any amounts paid by the
facilities operator upon termination of the permit.
(Ord. 25-2018, passed 7-2-2018)
§ 1305.10  ANNUAL REGISTRATION.
   (A)   All facilities operators with consent to occupy or use the right-of-
way shall register with the city each calendar year between January 1 and
January 31 on a form provided by the city. The form will allow the facilities
operator to indicate when there is no change in the information required, and
when such indication is submitted, previously provided information will be
considered current and will be relied upon. Facilities operators who obtain
consent to occupy the right-of-way after September 30 of any year need not file
an annual registration for next calendar year.
   (B)   The purpose of registration under this section is to:
      (1)   Compile, update and supplement the city’s database so that the city
has accurate and current information concerning the facilities operators that
own or operate facilities in the city’s public right-of-way;
      (2)   Assist the city in monitoring the usage of the public right-of-way
in order to ensure that the public receives the maximum possible benefit from
that use, and the use is consistent with the best management and care of the
public right-of-way;
      (3)   Assist the city in the collection and enforcement of any municipal
taxes, fees or other charges that may be due the city; and
      (4)   Assist the city in monitoring compliance with local, state and
federal laws.
   (C)   Registration forms will be provided by the city and shall require the
following information. Any material changes to the information the facilities
operator provided to the city in the application for small cell use permit
including, but not limited to:
      (1)   The identity, legal status and federal tax identification number of
the facilities operator, including any affiliates or agents;
      (2)   The name, address and telephone number of the local officer, agent
or employee responsible for the accuracy of the facilities operator’s
registration statement and available at all reasonable times to be notified in
case of emergency;
      (3)   Evidence that the facilities operator is in compliance with the
insurance, indemnity and financial surety requirements pursuant to this
chapter; and
      (4)   Such other information as the Building Commissioner may reasonably
require.
   (D)   In addition to the annual registration requirement, each facilities
operator shall keep all required registration information current at all times
and shall provide the city with notice of changes to the required information
within 15 days following the date on which the facilities operator has notice
of the need for such change.
(Ord. 25-2018, passed 7-2-2018)
§ 1305.11  NONCONFORMING FACILITIES.
   (A)   Facilities in the right-of-way that are legally in existence on the
date of the adoption of this chapter but that do not comply with the
requirements of this chapter may remain in the right-of-way but shall be
considered a nonconforming facility.
   (B)   Any person or entity who owns or operates a nonconforming facility
shall register such facility pursuant to §
1305.10 within 90 days of the date this chapter takes effect.
   (C)   If a nonconforming facility is damaged or destroyed beyond repair, any
replacement facility must be designed in accordance with all provisions of this
chapter, the design guidelines established by the city, and state and federal
law and regulations.
(Ord. 25-2018, passed 7-2-2018)
§ 1305.12  ABANDONED AND DAMAGED FACILITIES.
   (A)   A facilities operator shall provide written notice to the city of its
intent to discontinue use of any facilities. The notice shall include the date
the use will be discontinued. If facilities are not removed within 365 days
from the date the use was discontinued, the facilities shall be considered a
nuisance and the city may remove the facilities at the expense of the
facilities operator.
   (B)   In the event that facilities are damaged, the facilities operator
shall promptly repair the damaged facilities. Damaged facilities shall be
repaired no later than 30 days after obtaining written notice that the
facilities were damaged. If the damaged facilities are not repaired within 30
days, then the damaged facilities shall be considered a nuisance and the city
may repair or remove the facilities at the expense of the facilities operator.
(Ord. 25-2018, passed 7-2-2018)
§ 1305.13  INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   As a condition of the city’s consent to occupy the right-of-way, a
facilities operator must secure and maintain the following liability insurance
policies insuring both the facilities operator and the city, and its elected
and appointed officers, officials, agents and employees as additional insureds:
      (1)   Comprehensive general liability insurance with limits not less
than:
         (a)   $5,000,000 for bodily injury or death to each person;
         (b)   $5,000,000 for property damage resulting from any one accident;
and
         (c)   $5,000,000 for all other types of liability.
      (2)   Automobile liability for owned, non-owned and hired vehicles with a
limit of $3,000,000 for each person and $3,000,000 for each accident.
      (3)   Worker’s compensation within statutory limits and employer’s
liability insurance with limits of not less than $1,000,000.
      (4)   Comprehensive form premises-operations, explosions and collapse
hazard, underground hazard and products completed hazard with limits of not
less than $3,000,000.
   (B)   Each such insurance policy shall contain the following endorsement:
“It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor
the intention not to renew be stated until 90 days after receipt by the city,
by registered mail, of a written notice addressed to the building commissioner
of such intent to cancel or not to renew.”
   (C)   Within 60 days after receipt by the city of said notice, and in no
event later than 30 days prior to said cancellation, the facilities operator
shall obtain and furnish to the city replacement insurance policies meeting the
requirements of this division (C).
(Ord. 25-2018, passed 7-2-2018)
§ 1305.14  INDEMNIFICATION.
   A facilities operator shall indemnify, protect, defend, and hold the city
and its elected officials, officers, employees, agents, and volunteers harmless
against any and all claims, lawsuits, judgments, costs, liens, losses,
expenses, fees to include reasonable attorney fees and costs of defense,
proceedings, actions, demands, causes of action, liability and suits of any
kind and nature, including personal or bodily injury or death, property damage
or other harm for which recovery of damages is sought, to the extent that it is
caused by the negligence of the operator who owns or operates small cell
facilities and wireless service in the right-of-way, any agent, officer,
director, representative, employee, affiliate, or subcontractor of the
operator, or their respective officers, agents, employees, directors, or
representatives while installing, repairing, or maintaining facilities in the
right-of-way.
(Ord. 25-2018, passed 7-2-2018)
§ 1305.15  FINANCIAL SURETY.
   (A)   Each facilities operator must procure and provide to the city a bond,
escrow, deposit, letter of credit or other financial surety to ensure
compliance with this chapter and R.C. Chapter 4939. The financial surety must
be in an amount sufficient to cover the cost of removal of all facilities owned
or operated by the facilities operator.
   (B)   The city may, in its sole discretion, draw on the financial surety to
remove abandoned facilities, remove or repair damaged facilities, or to repair
damage to any city property caused by the facilities operator or its agent. In
such event, the facilities operator shall cause the financial surety be
replenished to its prior amount within ten business days after city notifies
the facilities operator that it has drawn on the financial surety.
(Ord. 25-2018, passed 7-2-2018)
§ 1305.16  RESERVED SPACE.
   The city reserves the right to install, and permit others to install,
facilities in the right-of-way. The city may reserve space in the right-of-way
and on wireless support structures for future utility, safety or transportation
uses. Such space may be reserved in an ordinance or plan approved by the Mayor,
City Manager, City Council, Building Commissioner or Planning Commission.
(Ord. 25-2018, passed 7-2-2018)
§ 1305.17  REMOVAL OR RELOCATION OF FACILITIES.
   (A)   The city may require a facilities operator to remove or relocate
facilities to accomplish construction and maintenance activities. The
facilities operator shall remove or relocate the facilities at no cost to the
city. If the facilities operator fails to remove or relocate the facilities
within 90 days of receiving a request to do so from the city, then the city may
remove the facilities at facilities operator’s sole cost and expense, without
further notice to the facilities operator.
   (B)   If the facilities are placed in a location other than the location
approved by the city, the facilities operator shall relocate the facilities
within 30 days of receiving notice that the facilities are located improperly.
(Ord. 25-2018, passed 7-2-2018)
§ 1305.18  NOTICE OF WORK.
   A facilities operator shall notify the Building Commissioner of all
nonemergency work within ten calendar days prior to performing any upgrades or
maintenance on any facilities, regardless of whether the work requires any
permit or consent from the city.
(Ord. 25-2018, passed 7-2-2018)
§ 1305.19  CONSTRUCTION PERMIT.
   (A)   Facilities operators are required to obtain a construction permit
pursuant to Chapters
1446 and
1449 prior to commencing any of the following activities:
      (1)   Collocation of small cell equipment on a wireless support
structure;
      (2)   Replacement,  modification,  repair, or maintenance  of small cell
equipment;
      (3)   Construction, replacement, modification, repair or maintenance of a
wireless support structure associated with a small cell facility; and
      (4)   Any excavation of the right-of-way in connection with the
activities described in this division (A).
   (B)   The construction permit fee shall be the fee set forth in
Chapter 1449.
(Ord. 25-2018, passed 7-2-2018)
§ 1305.99  PENALTIES; EQUITABLE REMEDIES.
   (A)   Any person or entity found guilty of violating, disobeying, omitting,
neglecting or refusing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter
shall be fined not less than $100 nor more than $500 for each offense. A
separate and distinct offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation occurs or continues.
   (B)   Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as limiting any judicial
remedies that the city may have, at law or in equity, for enforcement of this
chapter.
(Ord. 25-2018, passed 7-2-2018)
CHAPTER 1306:  TELECOMMUNICATIONS UNDERGROUND SERVICE LINES
Section
   
1306.01   Installation requirements
   
1306.99   Penalty
Editor’s note:
   This Chapter 1306 was formerly Chapter 1451 of the Building and Housing
Code, which was recodified by Ordinance 62-07, passed June 4, 2007.
§ 1306.01  INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS.
   All underground telecommunications service lines installed from the source
shall be installed a minimum of eight inches below grade.
(Ord. 76-06, passed 5-15-2006)
§ 1306.99  PENALTY.
   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be subject to the
penalty provided in §
1440.99.
(Ord. 76-06, passed 5-15-2006)
CHAPTER 1308:  AUTOMATED TELLER MACHINES
Section
   
1308.01   Security cameras
   
1308.02   911 access
   
1308.03   Inspection of security cameras
   
1308.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Alarm systems, see
Chapter 1064
   Police Department, see
Chapter 244
Editor’s note:
   This Chapter 1308 was formerly Chapter 1454 of the Building and Housing
Code, which was recodified by Ordinance 62-07, passed June 4, 2007.
Statutory reference:
   Automated teller machines, see Ohio R.C. 1101.16
   Banks generally, see Ohio R.C. Chapter 1101
§ 1308.01  SECURITY CAMERAS.
   Within six months from the effective date of this chapter (Ordinance 93-96,
passed July 22, 1996), all banks and other financial institutions in the city,
providing access to an automated teller machine (ATM) which is located outside
of a building or other structure, shall have installed and have functioning
cameras capable of photographing the general area around the ATM, as well as
the areas of ingress to and egress from the ATM, for the safety of all users of
such ATM.
(Ord. 93-96, passed 7-22-1996)
§ 1308.02  911 ACCESS.
   Within nine months from the effective date of this chapter (Ordinances 93-
96, passed July 22, 1996), all ATMs located outside of a building or other
structure shall be equipped with card- activated 911 access.
(Ord. 93-96, passed 7-22-1996)
§ 1308.03  INSPECTION OF SECURITY CAMERAS.
   The location of the cameras required by this chapter must be inspected and
approved by the Chief of Police or his or her designated representative.
(Ord. 93-96, passed 7-22-1996)
§ 1308.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1440.99 for general Building and Housing Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.
CHAPTER 1310:  EXTERIOR MASONRY SURFACES
Section
   
1310.01   Construction specifications
   
1310.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Ohio State Building Codes, see
Chapter 1420
   Residential Code of Ohio for One-, Two- and Three-Family Dwellings, see
Chapter 1421
Editor’s note:
   This Chapter 1310 was formerly Chapter 1459 of the Building and Housing
Code, which was recodified by Ordinance 62-07, passed June 4, 2007.
§ 1310.01  CONSTRUCTION SPECIFICATIONS.
   All exterior masonry surfaces on all buildings constructed in any zoning
district of the city, other than Class A Districts, shall be of face brick,
stone or other finish-type of masonry.  Common concrete block shall not be
permitted, except on rear walls adjacent to the rear property line where
expansion can occur, provided the rear wall does not face residential areas,
public facilities, schools, churches, and the like, and all openings, doorways
and transitions are returned in brick.
(Ord. 93-90, passed 7-23-1990)
§ 1310.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1440.99 for general Building and Housing Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.
CHAPTER 1312:  FENCES
Section
   
1312.01   Purpose
   
1312.02   Scope
   
1312.03   Definitions
   
1312.04   Plot plan and permit required
   
1312.05   General requirements
   
1312.06   Fences in residential districts
   
1312.07   Fences in nonresidential districts
   
1312.08   Inspections
   
1312.09   Exemptions
   
1312.10   Variances
   
1312.11   Appeals
   
1312.12   Fees for variances and appeals
   
1312.13   Enforcement
   
1312.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Swimming pool fences, see §
1332.05
Statutory reference:
   Fences, see Ohio R.C. 971.01 et seq.
   Fences on limited-access highways, see Ohio R.C. 3767.201
§ 1312.01  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of this chapter is to establish regulations controlling the use
of fences (wood, vinyl, iron, steel, masonry, stone, and any type of growing
plant or shrub or other material not listed) whereby the property owner may
have the privilege of privacy, security and landscape design within the
property with due consideration to the environment of the neighboring
properties, the appearance of the community and the safety of the public and
the individual.
(Ord. 169-99, passed 9-20-1999; Ord. 160-11, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 1312.02  SCOPE.
   The fence regulations contained in this chapter shall not apply to any
legally erected permanent fence erected prior to the effective date of this
chapter.
(Ord. 169-99, passed 9-20-1999; Ord. 160-11, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 1312.03  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the
following meanings.
   “Backyard enclosure fence.” A fence that meets all of the following
specifications:
      (1)   The fence does not exceed six feet in height from existing finished
natural grade line;
      (2)   The fence enclosed part of or the entire rear yard of the subject
property;
      (3)   Although not mandatory, the fence may follow property boundaries
(i.e., lot lines) of the rear yard;
      (4)   The entire fence is erected to the rear of the wall line of the
residence:
         (a)   Exception number 1: if the subject property is a corner lot,
then, in addition to the fence being erected to the rear of the rear wall line
of the primary setback, the fence shall also be erected entirely behind the
line established for the secondary setback;
         (b)   Exception number 2: if the subject property’s rear yard fronts
on another street, the fence erected shall also be erected entirely behind the
established setback line for structures on that street; and
         (c)   Exception number 3: where a residence is equipped with a side
door, the fence may be extended into a side yard for a maximum of three feet
closer to the street than the side door.
      (5)   The fence shall contain a gate that is at least three feet wide and
is located so as to provide reasonable and easy access to safety forces.
   “Barbed wire fence.” A fence, or portion of a fence, made with two or more
wires twisted together with sharp hooks or points (or a single wire furnished
with barbs).
   “Boundary line fence.”  A fence erected along the boundary line of any lot,
which encloses or partially encloses a parcel of property.
   “Chain link fence.”  A fence, usually made of heavy steel wire fabric
(usually coated with zinc, or the like) which is interwoven in such a way as to
provide a continuous mesh without ties or knots, except at the salvage; the
wire fabric is held in place by metal posts. Vinyl slates woven into the wire
mesh is permitted providing colors are not obtrusive.
   “Chicken wire fence.”  A fence constructed of light-weight, galvanized wire
netting having a hexagonal mesh.
   “Deer fence.”  A temporary or permanent-type, non-electric fence to modify
deer behavior in cultivated garden areas or orchards of rear yards. A “deer
fence” shall be constructed in accordance with the types and designs as
recommended by the Ohio Division of Wildlife for such purposes and approved by
the Building Commissioner.
   “Dumpster enclosure fence.”  A privacy fence consisting of materials
constructed to inhibit light, ventilation and sight through said fence. Such
enclosure shall include a double gate for purposes of vehicle access, in
addition to a separate employee access area. Such design shall be acceptable to
the Building Commissioner.
   “Fence.” Any artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination
of materials, living or otherwise, erected to enclose, screen or divide areas
of land, yards or gardens.
   “Latticework fence.”  A fence constructed of reticulated or net-like work
formed by the crossing of laths or narrow, thin strips of wood or iron, in a
diagonal pattern.
   “Living fence.” A natural plant species which has been planted to form a
continuous barrier to prevent passage or for protection.
   “Open ornamental fence.”  A fence, with a maximum height of 36 inches (such
as a rail, split rail or white picket fence), that is constructed for its
beauty or decorative effect and, when viewed at right angles, has not less than
50% of the surface area of its vertical plane (the area within a rectangular
outline enclosing all parts of the fence in its vertical plane) open to light
and air. However, an ornamental fence shall not surround a front yard, either
partially or in its entirety.
   “Patio privacy fence.”  A fence that meets all of the following
specifications:
      (1)   The fence is used to enclose a patio, deck, hot tub or pool;
      (2)   The fence has a maximum height of six feet from the existing
finished grade line or finished deck;
      (3)   No part of the fence shall be more than three feet from any
boundary line of the patio;
      (4)   The fence shall be erected entirely behind the rear wall line of
the residence;
      (5)   No part of the fence shall be within ten feet of any side yard line
of the residence; and
      (6)   No solid sheets of fabric, vinyl, or canvas solid screening
materials are permitted.
   “Picket fence.”  A fence, with pickets that have points at the center of the
top of the picket. The maximum size of each picket shall be seven-eighths
inches thick by three and one- half inches wide by 36 inches high above
existing natural finished grade line. Minimum picket spacing shall be equal to
the picket width. The rails shall be a maximum of one and one-half inches thick
by three and one-half inches wide. Posts shall be a maximum of four inches
thick by four inches wide by 34 inches high.
   “Privacy fence.”  A fence structure, or any part thereof, consisting of
materials constructed to inhibit light, ventilation and sight through said
fence. This definition shall not include a “living fence”.
   “Private nuisance.” That which destroys or deteriorates the property of an
individual or of a few persons or interferes with their lawful use or enjoyment
thereof and producing such material annoyance, inconvenience and discomfort
that law will presume resulting damage and/or that which annoys and disturbs
one in possession of his or her property, rendering its ordinary use or
occupation physically uncomfortable to the person.
   “Rail fence.”  A fence in which the rails are set into the posts and
adjoining rails either butt against each other or overlap. Maximum rail height
shall be 36 inches above existing natural finished grade.
   “Shadowbox fence.”  A fence constructed of three-quarter inch thick by a
maximum five and one-half inches wide by a maximum of six feet high (from
existing finished grade) vertical boards that are attached to both sides by
horizontal rails. Minimum board spacing shall be equal to the board width on
both sides of the horizontal rails. The rails shall be a maximum one and one-
half inches thick by three and one-half inches wide. Posts shall be a maximum
of four inches thick by four inches wide. (This fence is also known as board-
on-board).
   “Silt fence.” A fence used to control sediment during construction.
Installed to be in compliance with EPA regulations.
   “Similar fences.”  The Building Commissioner, Planning Commissioner may
permit other fences, which are similar in character and design to one or more
of the fences permitted by this chapter.
   “Snow fence.”  A temporary fence (seasonal) which has slats less than four
inches in width, wired together and set perpendicular to the direction of the
prevailing winds to catch drifting snow, or thin preformed plastic or vinyl
mesh material secured to metal posts.
   “Split rail fence.”  A fence with a maximum of two horizontal rails, with a
maximum size of three inches by three inches, that are set into posts that are
a maximum of five inches by five inches. Maximum rail height shall be 36 inches
above existing natural finished grade line.
   “Stockade fence.”  A solid fence of half-rounded boards pointed at the top.
   “Stockade fence.”  A fence used primarily for security and privacy, made of
cedar or pine wood vertical members with no spaces between. The vertical
framing is usually one inch by four inches nominal size with a decorative top.
The rails and posts are similar to picket fence (for definition - see above).
   “Stone fence.”  A solid stone, brick, or masonry fence used for screening,
privacy or retaining a change in grade. A solid “stone fence” must be designed
and drawings submitted to the Building Commissioner for review and approval.
Maximum height of 36 inches above existing natural finished grade line. Minimum
width of wall to be 12 inches.
   “Swimming pool fence.” See
Chapter 1332.
   “Utility fence.”  Commercial fence enclosing athletic fields, tennis courts,
basketball courts, public pools or the like of an unspecified height above
existing grade. Drawings must be approved by the Building Commissioner.
   “Well fence.” A fence regulated by the state to enclose an oil or gas well.
Subject to landscaping approved by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 169-99, passed 9-20-1999; Ord. 199-99, passed 11-15-1999; Ord. 160-11,
passed 12-19-2011; Ord. 137-12, passed 9-17-2012)
 
§ 1312.04  PLOT PLAN AND PERMIT REQUIRED.
   Any fence, other than living and snow fences, which may be permitted, shall,
prior to its erection, require issuance of a permit by the Building
Commissioner after an application for the same has been reviewed and approved.
Application shall be made on a city application form and shall be accompanied
by a plot plan made to scale showing property lines, the location of all
existing driveways, sidewalks, fences and structures on the subject property,
plus distances from all fences and structures within five feet of the property
lines to the proposed fence(s). The plot plan shall show the location of the
proposed fence with length, height and fence style noted. A permit fee shall be
required in accordance with the fee schedule in
Chapter 1449.
(Ord. 169-99, passed 9-20-1999; Ord. 160-11, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 1312.05  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   Scope.  This section shall include general fence requirements for all
districts.
   (B)   Access Corridor.  No fence shall be erected or allowed to grow in a
natural state so as to create an inaccessible and/or unmaintainable area or
corridor with any other principal, accessory or fence structure. Such area or
corridor shall be a minimum distance of 30 inches. This shall not prohibit a
fence from being adjacent to or attached to another principal, accessory or
fence structure.
   (C)   Attachment to Neighboring Structure.  A fence may be erected across
the property line to be adjacent to or attached to a neighbor’s principal,
accessory or fence structure if such notarized authorization from said adjacent
property owner is submitted to the Building Commissioner with the required
application for a fence permit. This notarized form must state that this
authorization is a permanent agreement to become part of any change of
ownership of either property owner.
   (D)   Appearance.  All visible supports must face the property that is
making such installation, unless the Planning Commission grants approval
otherwise.
   (E)   Swimming Pool Fence.  Swimming pool fences shall comply with the
regulations as set forth in
Chapter 1332.
   (F)   Footing Depths.  All fence types shall have posts secured a minimum of
38 inches below the finished grade to the frost depth of the local area or
modifications of required depth as approved by the Building Commissioner. It is
recommended posts be set on a minimum six-inch concrete footing.
   (G)   Maintenance.
      (1)   Living fences shall be trimmed and maintained at all times so as
not to create a private nuisance, as determined by the Building Commissioner,
or interfere with pedestrian and vehicular traffic on both public and private
property. Violations are subject to citations of the Property Maintenance Code
Chapter 1348.
      (2)   Entering adjoining property; damage.
         (a)   No person, being the owner of any residential or commercial real
property, or his or her lessee or tenant, or any person acting for or on his or
her behalf, shall prohibit, prevent, hinder, obstruct or deny the right of the
owner of any adjoining real property or any person acting for or on his, her,
or their behalf, to reasonably enter upon such real property for the purpose of
making necessary repairs and/or maintenance to such adjoining owner’s real
property only when it is reasonably necessary to enter upon such real property
to make such repairs and/or maintenance with prior written notice.
         (b)   Any person, being owner of any residential or commercial real
property, or any person acting for or on his, her, or their behalf, who enters
upon the adjoining real property of another pursuant to this section shall
return such property to the condition it was in prior to such entry and shall
be liable for damage caused by such entry to any person or real or personal
property, including, but not limited to, trees, shrubbery, flowers, grass or
other vegetation.
      (3)   All other fences shall be maintained:
         (a)   So as not to interfere with pedestrian and vehicular traffic on
both public and private property; and
         (b)   In accordance with the city’s Property Maintenance Code as set
forth in
Chapter 1348.
      (4)   All fences shall be maintained in good repair, structurally sound,
and sanitary so as not to pose a threat to public health, safety and welfare.
All fences shall periodically be treated with paint stains or chemicals so as
to retard deterioration.
   (H)   Access to Utilities. Fences placed on utility easements shall provide
access to manholes, utility boxes, clean outs or other apparatus that may be
used from time to time for maintenance of the utility.
   (I)   Obstructing Utilities. When a fence obstructs access to utilities, the
owner shall be required to remove such fence at his or her expense without
remuneration from the city.
   (J)   Prior Approval. Fences in drainage easements, riparian setbacks shall
require prior approval of the Building Commissioner.
   (K)   Conflict with Zoning Ordinance. If the provisions of this chapter are
in conflict with any other provision of the Zoning Ordinance, the provisions of
this chapter shall supersede the other sections of the Zoning Ordinance.
(Ord. 169-99, passed 9-20-1999; Ord. 17-10, passed 2-1-2010; Ord. 160-11,
passed 12-19-2011; Ord. 137-12, passed 9-17-2012)
§ 1312.06  FENCES IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Scope. This section shall include A-l and B-3 single-family, A-2 two-
family and B-1 cluster housing and B-2 multi-family districts.
   (B)   Permitted Fences.  The following fences shall be permitted in
residential districts:
      (1)   Living fence;
      (2)   Boundary line fence;
      (3)   Privacy fence;
      (4)   Open ornamental fence;
      (5)   Chain link fence;
      (6)   Deer fence;
      (7)   Split rail fence;
      (8)   Picket fence;
      (9)   Backyard enclosure fence;
      (10)   Patio privacy fence;
      (11)   Latticework fence;
      (12)   Shadowbox fence;
      (13)   Stone fence;
      (14)   Swimming pool fence (Refer to
Chapter 1332);
      (15)   Silt fence;
      (16)   Stockade fence; and
      (17)   Well fence.
   (C)   Restricted Fences. The following fences shall be restricted in
residential districts:
      (1)   Patio privacy fence (as defined in §
1312.03);
      (2)   Backyard enclosure fence (as defined in §
1312.03);
      (3)   Swimming pool fence, as set forth in the regulations of
Chapter 1332;
      (4)   Tennis court fences. A variance shall be required from the Zoning
Board of Appeals;
      (5)   Barbed wire or razor ribbon fences, as follows:
         (a)   Prohibited when the fence would abut a residential district or
use; and
         (b)   Approval is required from the Planning Commission for all
owners.
      (6)   Snow fences may be erected and used only in the months of customary
snowfall, after which they shall be removed. No snow fence shall be used so as
to cause an artificial or unnatural accumulation of snow or driving snow to
accumulate on the property of another, in excess of that which would otherwise
accumulate in the absence of such a fence;
      (7)   Chicken wire fences shall be prohibited;
      (8)   Electrified fences shall be prohibited, except for underground low
voltage pet containment cable. Approved by the Building Commissioner;
      (9)   Dumpster enclosure fence shall be prohibited, except for multi-
family dwellings;
      (10)   Solid sheets of fabric, vinyl or canvas screening materials are
prohibited; and
      (11)   Pointed fences posting a hazard of impalement.
   (D)   Maximum Fence Height and Location of Fence Types.
      (1)   Rear Yard.  As defined in §
1260.04 . However, a fence shall not be erected in a side yard (as defined in §
1260.04 ) that abuts a street.
         (a)   Living fences shall not exceed three feet in height for 15 feet
from any public sidewalk. Otherwise they may grow to their natural height.
         (b)   Privacy and boundary line fences shall not exceed three feet in
height for 15 feet from any public sidewalk. Otherwise they shall not exceed
six feet from existing natural finished grade to the top of any portion of the
fence. Fence posts may exceed the fence height by six inches.
         (c)   Backyard enclosure fences shall meet all of the following
specifications.
            1.   The fence shall not exceed six feet in height from existing
natural finished grade.
            2.   The fence encloses part of or the entire rear yard of the
subject property.
            3.   Although not mandatory, the fence may follow property
boundaries (i.e., lot lines) of the rear yard.
            4.   The entire fence is erected to the rear of the wall line of
the residence.
               a.   Exception number 1: if the subject property is a corner
lot, then, in addition to the fence being erected to the rear of the rear wall
line of the primary setback, the fence shall also be erected entirely behind
the line established for the secondary setback.
               b.   Exception number 2: if the subject property’s rear yard
fronts on another street, the fence erected shall also be erected entirety
behind the established setback line for structures on that street.
               c.   Exception number 3: where a residence is equipped with a
side door, the fence may be extended into a side yard for a maximum of three
feet closer to the street than the side door.
            5.   The fence shall contain a gate that is at least three feet
wide and is located so as to provide reasonable and easy access to safety
forces.
         (d)   Chain link fences shall not exceed six feet from existing
natural finished grade to the top portion of the fence. Fence posts may exceed
the fence height by six inches.
      (2)   Side Yard.  As defined in §
1260.04 . Location and height shall be as follows.
         (a)   Except for living and/or ornamental, and as permitted in
division (D)(1)(c)4. Exception number 3, all other fences are prohibited in
side yards. Any living side yard fence shall not exceed three feet in height
for 15 feet from any public sidewalk or front property line.
         (b)   Open ornamental fences shall not exceed 36 inches in height from
existing natural finish grade line.
         (c)   All other fences are prohibited in the front yard unless
approval is given by a simple majority of the Planning Commission.
         (d)   The Building Commissioner may grant limited side yard height
extensions up to 72 inches in an area from the rear corner of the house to the
front corner for special hardships. Such exception also requires written
approval from adjacent property owner.
      (3)   Front Yard.  As defined in §
1260.04 .
         (a)   Living fences shall not exceed three feet in height for 15 feet
from the front property line and/or any public sidewalk. Beyond 15 feet, they
may grow to their natural height.
         (b)   Open ornamental fences shall not exceed 36 inches in height.
         (c)   All other fences are prohibited in the front yard unless
approval is granted by a simple majority of the Planning Commission.
      (4)   Height Exception.  A privacy fence may be erected in the rear yard,
and shall not exceed eight feet in height from existing natural finished grade
line, including posts, when such rear or side yard property line abuts a
property zoned or used for nonresidential purposes. Such fence shall not exceed
three feet in height for 15 feet from any public sidewalk.
(Ord. 169-99, passed 9-20-1999; Ord. 199-99, passed 11-15-1999; Ord. 160-11,
passed 12-19-2011; Ord. 137-12, passed 9-17-2012; Ord. 38-16, passed 6-20-2016;
Ord. 44-2018, passed 11-5-2018)
§ 1312.07  FENCES IN NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   (A)   Scope.  This section shall include all Class B-5, C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4,
C-5, D-1, E-1 and E-2 Districts.
   (B)   Permitted Fences.  The following fences shall be permitted in
nonresidential districts:
      (1)   Living fence;
      (2)   Boundary line fence;
      (3)   Privacy fence;
      (4)   Open ornamental fence;
      (5)   Chain link fence;
      (6)   Deer fence;
      (7)   Dumpster enclosure fence;
      (8)   Rail or split rail fence;
      (9)   Picket fence;
      (10)   Latticework fence;
      (11)   Shadowbox fence;
      (12)   Stone fences;
      (13)   Utility fences;
      (14)   Silt fence;
      (15)   Stockade fence; or
      (16)   Well fence.
   (C)   Restricted Fences.  The following fences shall be restricted in
nonresidential districts.
      (1)   Tennis court fences. Approval shall be required from the Planning
Commission.
      (2)   Barbed wire fences shall be prohibited when the fence would abut a
residential district or use, unless approval is granted by a simple majority of
the Architectural Review Board.
      (3)   Snow fences may be erected and used only in the months of customary
snowfall, after which they shall be removed. No snow fence shall be used so as
to cause an artificial or unnatural accumulation of snow or to allow drifting
snow to accumulate on the property of another in excess of that which would
otherwise accumulate on the property of another in excess of that which would
otherwise accumulate in the absence of such a fence.
      (4)   Chicken wire fences shall be prohibited.
      (5)   Electrified fences shall be prohibited, except for underground low
voltage pet fences approved by the Building Commissioner.
      (6)   Stockade fences shall be prohibited.
      (7)   Pointed fences posting a hazard of impalement.
   (D)   Maximum Fence Height and Location.
      (1)   Rear and Side Yards. As defined in §
1260.04 .
         (a)   Living fences shall not exceed three feet in height for 15 feet
from any public sidewalk. Otherwise they may grow to their natural height.
         (b)   Privacy and boundary line fences shall not exceed three feet in
height for 15 feet from any public sidewalk.
         (c)   Open chain link fences may be erected in the side and rear yards
that abut a public sidewalk or street with no setback requirement.
      (2)   Front Yard. As defined in §
1260.04 .
         (a)   Living fences shall not exceed three feet in height for 15 feet
from the front property line and/or any public sidewalk. Beyond 15 feet, they
may grow to their natural height.
         (b)   Open ornamental fences shall not exceed three feet in height
from existing natural finished grade.
         (c)   All other fences are prohibited in the front yard unless
approval is granted by a simple majority of the Planning Commission.
   (E)   Nonconforming Multi-Tenant Residential Uses Exempted.  This section
shall not apply to pre-existing, nonconforming residential dwellings in these
districts. Section
1312.06 (formerly § 1460.06 (Fences in Residential Districts)) shall apply and
govern.
(Ord. 169-99, passed 9-20-1999; Ord. 160-11, passed 12-19-2011; Ord. 38-16,
passed 6-20- 2016; Ord. 45-2018, passed 11-5-2018)
§ 1312.08  INSPECTIONS.
   It shall be the duty of each property owner erecting a fence to determine
property lines, at the owner’s expense, and to ascertain that the fence thus
constructed does not deviate from the plans approved by the Building
Commissioner and does not encroach upon another lot or parcel of land unless
specifically authorized by that abutting property owner, in writing. The person
responsible for the erection of such fence shall contact the Building
Department to have the fence inspected upon completion. The inspection will not
be to determine whether the fence is encroaching upon another lot, nor shall it
relieve the property owner of the duty imposed upon him or her herein.
(Ord. 169-99, passed 9-20-1999; Ord. 160-11, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 1312.09  EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   Legally pre-existing fences that had a valid permit shall be exempt
from the provisions of this chapter. However, there shall be no exemption from
the maintenance provisions of this chapter.
   (B)   Fences constructed or owned by the city are exempted from the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 169-99, passed 9-20-1999; Ord. 160-11, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 1312.10  VARIANCES.
   (A)   Where difficulty and unnecessary hardship will result from the strict
enforcement of this chapter, the Board of Zoning Appeals may grant a variance
for height and location, in harmony with the general intent of this chapter, to
secure the general welfare and substantial justice in the promotion of the
public health, comfort, convenience, morals, safety and general welfare of the
city. The Planning Commission may grant a variance for modifications to the
appearance or style of fence design.
   (B)   A variance from this chapter will be granted only by a majority of the
Board members after a hearing and notice to neighbors residing within a 500-
foot radius of the property for which a variance is requested. In the instance
(s) where such property is in the condominium form of ownership, notice shall
be sent to the condominium unit owners association only.
(Ord. 169-99, passed 9-20-1999; Ord. 160-11, passed 12-19-2011; Ord. 137-12,
passed 9-17-2012)
§ 1312.11  APPEALS.
   (A)   Any decision of the Building Commissioner made in the enforcement of
this chapter may be appealed to the Board of Zoning Appeals by any person
claiming to be adversely affected by such decision.
   (B)   A reversal of the Building Commissioner’s decision will be granted
only by a majority of the Board members after a hearing and notice to neighbors
residing within a 500-foot radius of the property for which a variance is
requested.
(Ord. 169-99, passed 9-20-1999; Ord. 172-06, passed 12-18-2006; Ord. 160-11,
passed 12-19-2011)
§ 1312.12  FEES FOR VARIANCES AND APPEALS.
   The fee for each request for a variance and/or appeal to the Board of Zoning
Appeals shall be the same as set forth in §
1262.05.
(Ord. 169-99, passed 9-20-1999; Ord. 160-11, passed 12-19-2011)
§ 1312.13  ENFORCEMENT.
   See §
1440.17.
(Ord. 169-99, passed 9-20-1999; Ord. 160-11, passed 12-19-2011)
 
§ 1312.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1440.99 for general Building and Housing Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.
(Ord. 160-11, passed 12-19-2011)
CHAPTER 1314:  FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION
Section
General Provisions
   
1314.01   Statutory authorization
   
1314.02   Findings of fact
   
1314.03   Statement of purpose
   
1314.04   Methods of reducing flood loss
   
1314.05   Lands to which these regulations apply
   
1314.06   Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard
   
1314.07   Abrogation and greater restrictions
   
1314.08   Interpretation
   
1314.09   Warning and disclaimer of liability
   
1314.10   Severability
   
1314.11   Definitions
Administration
   
1314.20   Designation of the Floodplain Administrator
   
1314.21   Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
   
1314.22   Floodplain development permits
   
1314.23   Application required
   
1314.24   Review and approval of a floodplain development permit application
   
1314.25   Inspections
   
1314.26   Post-construction certifications required
   
1314.27   Revoking a floodplain development permit
   
1314.28   Exemption from filing a development permit
   
1314.29   Map maintenance activities
   
1314.30   Data use and flood map interpretation
   
1314.31   Substantial damage determinations
Use and Development Standards for Flood Hazard Reduction
   
1314.40   Generally
   
1314.41   Use regulations
   
1314.42   Water and wastewater systems
   
1314.43   Subdivisions and large developments
   
1314.44   Residential structures
   
1314.45   Nonresidential structures
   
1314.46   Accessory structures
   
1314.47   Recreational vehicles
   
1314.48   Above ground gas or liquid storage tanks
   
1314.49   Assurance of flood carrying capacity
Appeals and Variances
   
1314.60   Appeals Board established
   
1314.61   Powers and duties
   
1314.62   Appeals
   
1314.63   Variances
   
1314.64   Procedure at hearings
   
1314.65   Appeal to the court
Enforcement
   
1314.70   Compliance required
   
1314.71   Notice of violation
   
1314.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Altering, polluting and diverting watercourses, see §
660.04
Editor’s note:
   This Chapter 1314 was formerly Chapter 1465 of the Building and Housing
Code, which was recodified by Ordinance 62-07, passed June 4, 2007, and
subsequently amended in its entirety by Ordinance 103-10, passed August 23,
2010.
Statutory reference:
   Flood control by soil conservation district supervisors, see Ohio R.C.
1515.08
   Flood insurance, see Ohio R.C. 3925.34(C), 3941.02(A)(1)
   Water supply, sanitation, ditches, see Ohio R.C. 6101.01 et seq.
GENERAL PROVISIONS
§ 1314.01  STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION.
   Article XVIII, Section 3, of the Ohio Constitution grants municipalities the
legal authority to adopt land use and control measures for promoting the
health, safety, and general welfare of its citizens.  Therefore, the City
Council does ordain the following regulations.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1314.02  FINDINGS OF FACT.
   The city has special flood hazard areas that are subject to periodic
inundation which may result in loss of life and property, health and safety
hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public
expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base.
Additionally, structures that are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or
otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. In
order to minimize the threat of such damages and to achieve the purposes
hereinafter set forth, these regulations are adopted.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1314.03  STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
   It is the purpose of these regulations to promote the public health, safety,
and general welfare, and to:
   (A)   Protect human life and health;
   (B)   Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control
projects;
   (C)   Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with
flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
   (D)   Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
   (E)   Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and
gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets, and bridges located in
areas of special flood hazard;
   (F)   Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the proper use and
development of areas of special flood hazard so as to protect property and
minimize future flood blight areas;
   (G)   Ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume
responsibility for their actions;
   (H)   Minimize the impact of development on adjacent properties within and
near flood prone areas;
   (I)   Ensure that the flood storage and conveyance functions of the
floodplain are maintained;
   (J)   Minimize the impact of development on the natural, beneficial values
of the floodplain;
   (K)   Prevent floodplain uses that are either hazardous or environmentally
incompatible; and
   (L)   Meet community participation requirements of the National Flood
Insurance Program.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1314.04  METHODS OF REDUCING FLOOD LOSS.
   In order to accomplish its purposes, these regulations include methods and
provisions for:
   (A)   Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety,
and property due to water hazards, or which result in damaging increases in
flood heights or velocities;
   (B)   Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which
serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
   (C)   Controlling the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels,
and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood
waters;
   (D)   Controlling filling, grading, dredging, excavating, and other
development which may increase flood damage; and
   (E)   Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers, which
will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards in
other areas.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1314.05  LANDS TO WHICH THESE REGULATIONS APPLY.
   These regulations shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within
the jurisdiction of the city as identified in §
1314.06, including any additional areas of special flood hazard annexed by the
city.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1314.06  BASIS FOR ESTABLISHING THE AREAS OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD.
   For the purposes of these regulations, the following studies and/or maps are
adopted:
   (A)   Flood Insurance Study Cuyahoga County, Ohio and Incorporated Areas and
Flood Insurance Rate Map Cuyahoga County, Ohio and Incorporated Areas both
effective December 3, 2010;
   (B)   Other studies and/or maps, which may be relied upon for establishment
of the flood protection elevation, delineation of the 100-year floodplain,
floodways or delineation of other areas of special flood hazard; and
   (C)   (1)   Any hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis authored by a
registered professional engineer in the state which has been approved by the
city as required by §
1314.43.
      (2)   Any revisions to the aforementioned maps and/or studies are hereby
adopted by reference and declared to be a part of these regulations. Such maps
and/or studies are on file at the City Hall at 9543 Broadview Road, Broadview
Heights, Ohio.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1314.07  ABROGATION AND GREATER RESTRICTIONS.
   These regulations are not intended to repeal any existing ordinances
including subdivision regulations, zoning or building codes. In the event of a
conflict between these regulations and any other ordinance, the more
restrictive shall be followed. These regulations shall not impair any deed
restriction covenant or easement but the land subject to such interests shall
also be governed by the regulations.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1314.08  INTERPRETATION.
   In the interpretation and application of these regulations, all provisions
shall be:
   (A)   Considered as minimum requirements;
   (B)   Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
   (C)   Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under
state statutes. Where a provision of these regulations may be in conflict with
a state or federal law, such state or federal law shall take precedence over
these regulations.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1314.09  WARNING AND DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   The degree of flood protection required by these regulations is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering
considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood
heights may be increased by human-made or natural causes. These regulations do
not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted
within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damage. These regulations
shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee
thereof, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damage that
results from reliance on these regulations or any administrative decision
lawfully made thereunder.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1314.10  SEVERABILITY.
   Should any section or provision of these regulations be declared by the
courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the
validity of the regulations as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part
so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1314.11  DEFINITIONS.
   Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in these
regulations shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give these regulations the most reasonable application.
   “Accessory structure.”  A structure on the same lot with, and of a nature
customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal structure.
   “Appeal.”  A request for review of the Floodplain Administrator’s
interpretation of any provision of these regulations or a request for a
variance.
   “Base flood.”  The flood having a 1% chance of being equaled or exceeded in
any given year. The “base flood” may also be referred to as the “1% chance
annual flood” or “100-year flood”.
   “Base (100-year) flood elevation (BFE).”  The water surface elevation of the
base flood in relation to a specified datum, usually the National Geodetic
Vertical Datum of 1929 or the North American Vertical Datum of 1988, and
usually expressed in feet mean sea level (MSL).  In Zone AO areas, the “base
flood elevation” is the natural grade elevation plus the depth number (from one
to three feet).
   “Basement.”  Any area of the building having its floor subgrade (below
ground level) on all sides.
   “Development.”  Any human-made change to improved or unimproved real estate,
including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of
equipment or materials.
   “Enclosure below the lowest floor.”  See “lowest floor”.
   “Executive Order 11988 (Floodplain Management).”  Issued by President Carter
in 1977, this order requires that no federally assisted activities be conducted
in or have the potential to affect identified special flood hazard areas,
unless there is no practicable alternative.
   “Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).”  The agency with the overall
responsibility for administering the National Flood Insurance Program.
   “Fill.”  A deposit of earth material placed by artificial means.
   “Flood” or “flooding.”  A general and temporary condition of partial or
complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
      (1)   The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or
      (2)   The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from
any source.
   “Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM).”  Usually the initial map, produced by
the Federal Emergency Management Agency, or U.S. Department of Housing and
Urban Development, for a community depicting approximate special flood hazard
areas.
   “Flood insurance rate map (FIRM).”  An official map on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development has delineated the areas of special flood hazard.
   “Flood insurance risk zones.”  Zone designations on FHBMs and FIRMs that
indicate the magnitude of the flood hazard in specific areas of a community.
Following are the zone definitions:
      (1)   “Zone A.”  Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year
flood; base flood elevations are not determined.
      (2)   “Zones A1-30 and Zone AE.” Special flood hazard areas inundated by
the 100-year flood; base flood elevations are determined.
      (3)   “Zone AO.” Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year
flood; with flood depths of one to three feet (usually sheet flow on sloping
terrain); average depths are determined.
      (4)   “Zone AH.” Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year
flood; flood depths of one to three feet (usually areas of ponding); base flood
elevations are determined.
      (5)   “Zone A99.” Special flood hazard areas inundated by the 100-year
flood to be protected from the 100-year flood by a federal flood protection
system under construction; no base flood elevations are determined.
      (6)   “Zone B and Zone X (shaded).” Areas of 500-year flood; areas
subject to the 100-year flood with average depths of less than one foot or with
contributing drainage area less than one square mile; and areas protected by
levees from the base flood.
      (7)   “Zone C and Zone X (unshaded).” Areas determined to be outside the
500-year floodplain.
   “Flood insurance study (FIS).”  The official report in which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency or the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban
Development has provided flood profiles, floodway boundaries (sometimes shown
on flood boundary and floodway maps), and the water surface elevations of the
base flood.
   “Flood protection elevation (FPE).”  The base flood elevation. In areas
where no base flood elevations exist from any authoritative source, the flood
protection elevation can be historical flood elevations, or base flood
elevations determined and/or approved by the Floodplain Administrator.
   “Floodway.”
      (1)   A “floodway” is the channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that have been reserved in order to pass the base flood
discharge. A “floodway” is typically determined through a hydraulic and
hydrologic engineering analysis such that the cumulative increase in the water
surface elevation of the base flood discharge is no more than a designated
height. In no case shall the designated height be more than one foot at any
point within the community.
      (2)   The “floodway” is an extremely hazardous area, and is usually
characterized by any of the following: moderate to high velocity flood waters,
high potential for debris and projectile impacts, and moderate to high erosion
forces.
   “Freeboard.”  A factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood
level for the purposes of floodplain management. “Freeboard” tends to
compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights
greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway
conditions, such as wave action, obstructed bridge openings, debris and ice
jams, and the hydrologic effect of urbanization in a watershed.
   “Historic structure.”  Any structure that is:
      (1)   Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a
listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily
determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for
individual listings on the National Register;
      (2)   Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the
Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered
historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to
qualify as a registered historic district; and
      (3)   Individually listed on the State of Ohio’s inventory of historic
places maintained by the Ohio Historic Preservation Office.
   “Hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis.”  An analysis performed by a
professional engineer, registered in the State of Ohio, in accordance with
standard engineering practices as accepted by FEMA, used to determine flood
elevations and/or floodway boundaries.
   “Letter of map change (LOMC).”  An official FEMA determination, by letter,
to amend or revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary and
floodway maps, and flood insurance studies.  “LOMCs” are broken down into the
following categories:
      (1)   “Letter of map amendment (LOMA).”  A revision based on technical
data showing that a property was incorrectly included in a designated special
flood hazard area. A LOMA amends the current effective flood insurance rate map
and establishes that a specific property is not located in a special flood
hazard area.
      (2)   “Letter of map revision (LOMR).”  A revision based on technical
data that, usually due to human-made changes, shows changes to flood zones,
flood elevations, floodplain and floodway delineations, and planimetric
features. One common type of LOMR, a LOMR-F, is a determination concerning
whether a structure or parcel has been elevated by fill above the base flood
elevation and is, therefore, excluded from the special flood hazard area.
      (3)   “Conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR).”  A formal review and
comment by FEMA as to whether a proposed project complies with the minimum
National Flood Insurance Program floodplain management criteria.  A “CLOMR”
does not amend or revise effective flood insurance rate maps, flood boundary
and floodway maps, or flood insurance studies.
   “Lowest floor.”  The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including
basement) of a structure. This definition excludes an “enclosure below the
lowest floor” which is an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure usable solely
for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a
basement area, provided that such enclosure is built in accordance with the
applicable design requirements specified in these regulations for enclosures
below the lowest floor.
   “Manufactured home.”  A structure, transportable in one or more sections,
which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term
“manufactured home” does not include a recreational vehicle. For the purposes
of these regulations, a “manufactured home” includes manufactured homes and
mobile homes as defined in Ohio R.C. Chapter 3733.
   “Manufactured home park.”  As specified in the O.A.C. 5501:2, any tract of
land upon which three or more manufactured homes, used for habitation are
parked, either free of charge or for revenue purposes, and includes any
roadway, building, structure, vehicle, or enclosure used or intended for use as
part of the facilities of the park. A tract of land that is subdivided and the
individual lots are not for rent or rented, but are for sale or sold for the
purpose of installation of manufactured homes on the lots, is not a
manufactured home park, even though three or more manufactured homes are parked
thereon, if the roadways are dedicated to the local government authority.
   “National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).” A federal program enabling
property owners in participating communities to purchase insurance protection
against losses from flooding. This insurance is designed to provide an
insurance alternative to disaster assistance to meet the escalating costs of
repairing damage to buildings and their contents caused by floods.
Participation in the NFIP is based on an agreement between local communities
and the federal government that states if a community will adopt and enforce
floodplain management regulations to reduce future flood risks to all
development in special flood hazard areas, the federal government will make
flood insurance available within the community as a financial protection
against flood loss.
   “New construction.”  Structures for which the “start of construction”
commenced on or after the initial effective date of the City of Broadview
Heights Flood Insurance Rate Map, March 2, 1979, and includes any subsequent
improvements to such structures.
   “Person.”  Includes any individual or group of individuals, corporation,
partnership, association, or any other entity, including state and local
governments and agencies. An “agency” is further defined in Ohio R.C. 111.15 as
any governmental entity of the state and includes, but is not limited to, any
board, department, division, commission, bureau, society, council, institution,
state college or university, community college district, technical college
district, or state community college. “Agency” does not include the general
assembly, the controlling board, the adjutant general’s department, or any
court.
   “Recreational vehicle.”  A vehicle which is built on a single chassis; 400
square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection;
designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living
quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
   “Registered professional architect.”  A person registered to engage in the
practice of architecture under the provisions of Ohio R.C. 4703.01 to 4703.19.
   “Registered professional engineer.”  A person registered as a professional
engineer under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4733.
   “Registered professional surveyor.”  A person registered as a professional
surveyor under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4733.
   “Special flood hazard area.”  Also known as “areas of special flood hazard”,
it is the land in the floodplain subject to a 1% or greater chance of flooding
in any given year. “Special flood hazard areas” are designated by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency on flood insurance rate maps, flood insurance
studies, flood boundary and floodway maps and flood hazard boundary maps as
Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-30, and A99.  “Special flood hazard areas” may also
refer to areas that are flood prone and designated from other federal, state or
local sources of data including but not limited to historical flood information
reflecting high water marks, previous flood inundation areas, and flood prone
soils associated with a watercourse.
   “Start of construction.”  The date the building permit was issued, provided
the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation,
addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit
date. The actual “start” means either the first placement of permanent
construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings,
the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the
stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing,
grading, and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers, or
foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds
not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual “start of construction” means the first
alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of a building.
   “Structure.”  A walled and roofed building, manufactured home, or gas or
liquid storage tank that is principally above ground.
   “Substantial damage.”  Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal
or exceed 50% of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   “Substantial improvement.”  Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or
other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50% of
the market value of the structure before the start of construction of the
improvement. This term includes structures, which have incurred substantial
damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed.  The term does not,
however, include:
      (1)   Any improvement to a structure that is considered new construction;
      (2)   Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing
violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications
which have been identified prior to the application for a development permit by
the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to
assure safe living conditions; or
      (3)   Any alteration of a “historic structure,” provided that the
alteration would not preclude the structure’s continued designation as a
“historic structure”.
   “Variance.”  A grant of relief from the standards of these regulations
consistent with the variance conditions herein.
   “Violation.”  The failure of a structure or other development to be fully
compliant with these regulations.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
ADMINISTRATION
§ 1314.20  DESIGNATION OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The City Engineer is hereby appointed to administer and implement these
regulations and is referred to herein as the Floodplain Administrator.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1314.21  DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE FLOODPLAIN ADMINISTRATOR.
   The duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall
include, but are not limited to:
   (A)   Evaluate applications for permits to develop in special flood hazard
areas;
   (B)   Interpret floodplain boundaries and provide flood hazard and flood
protection elevation information;
   (C)   Issue permits to develop in special flood hazard areas when the
provisions of these regulations have been met, or refuse to issue the same in
the event of noncompliance;
   (D)   Inspect buildings and lands to determine whether any violations of
these regulations have been committed;
   (E)   Make and permanently keep all records for public inspection necessary
for the administration of these regulations including flood insurance rate
maps, letters of map amendment and revision, records of issuance and denial of
permits to develop in special flood hazard areas, determinations of whether
development is in or out of special flood hazard areas for the purpose of
issuing floodplain development permits, elevation certificates, variances, and
records of enforcement actions taken for violations of these regulations;
   (F)   Enforce the provisions of these regulations;
   (G)   Provide information, testimony, or other evidence as needed during
variance hearings;
   (H)   Coordinate map maintenance activities and FEMA follow-up; and
   (I)   Conduct substantial damage determinations to determine whether
existing structures, damaged from any source and in special flood hazard areas
identified by FEMA, must meet the development standards of these regulations.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1314.22  FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMITS.
   It shall be unlawful for any person to begin construction or other
development activity, including, but not limited to: filling; grading;
construction; alteration, remodeling, or expanding any structure; or alteration
of any watercourse wholly within, partially within or in contact with any
identified special flood hazard area, as established in §
1314.06, until a floodplain development permit is obtained from the Floodplain
Administrator. Such floodplain development permit shall show that the proposed
development activity is in conformity with the provisions of these regulations.
No such permit shall be issued by the Floodplain Administrator until the
requirements of these regulations have been met.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1314.23  APPLICATION REQUIRED.
   An application for a floodplain development permit shall be required for all
development activities located wholly within, partially within, or in contact
with an identified special flood hazard area. Such application shall be made by
the owner of the property or his or her authorized agent, herein referred to as
the applicant, prior to the actual commencement of such construction on a form
furnished for that purpose. Where it is unclear whether a development site is
in a special flood hazard area, the Floodplain Administrator may require an
application for a floodplain development permit to determine the development’s
location. Such applications shall include, but not be limited to:
   (A)   Site plans drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions,
and topography of the area in question; the location of existing or proposed
structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities, and the location
of the foregoing;
   (B)   Elevation of the existing, natural ground where structures are
proposed;
   (C)   Elevation of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed
structures;
   (D)   Such other material and information as may be requested by the
Floodplain Administrator to determine conformance with, and provide enforcement
of these regulations;
   (E)   Technical analyses conducted by the appropriate design professional
registered in the State of Ohio and submitted with an application for a
floodplain development permit when applicable:
      (1)   Floodproofing certification for nonresidential floodproofed
structure as required in §
1314.45;
      (2)   Certification that fully enclosed areas below the lowest floor of a
structure not meeting the design requirements of §
1314.44(E) are designed to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces;
      (3)   Description of any watercourse alteration or relocation that the
flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be diminished, and
maintenance assurances as required in §
1314.49(C);
      (4)   A hydrologic and hydraulic analysis demonstrating that the
cumulative effect of proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface
elevation of the base flood by more than one foot in special flood hazard areas
where the Federal Emergency Management Agency has provided base flood
elevations but no floodway as required by §
1314.49(B);
      (5)   A hydrologic and hydraulic engineering analysis showing impact of
any development on flood heights in an identified floodway as required by §
1314.49(A); and
      (6)   Generation of base flood elevation(s) for subdivision and large-
scale developments as required by §
1314.43.
   (F)   A floodplain development permit application fee set by the schedule of
fees adopted by the city.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1314.24  REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF A FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT APPLICATION.
   (A)   Review.
      (1)   After receipt of a complete application, the Floodplain
Administrator shall review the application to ensure that the standards of
these regulations have been met. No floodplain development permit application
shall be reviewed until all information required in §
1314.23 has been received by the Floodplain Administrator.
      (2)   The Floodplain Administrator shall review all floodplain
development permit applications to assure that all necessary permits have been
received from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which
prior approval is required. The applicant shall be responsible for obtaining
such permits as required including permits issued by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1
et seq. and Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. §§ 1251 et
seq., and the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency under Section 401 of the
Clean Water Act, being 33 U.S.C. § 1341.
   (B)   Approval. Within 30 days after the receipt of a complete application,
the Floodplain Administrator shall either approve or disapprove the
application. If an application is approved, a floodplain development permit
shall be issued. All floodplain development permits shall be conditional upon
the commencement of work within one year.  A floodplain development permit
shall expire one year after issuance unless the permitted activity has been
substantially begun and is thereafter pursued to completion.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1314.25  INSPECTIONS.
   The Floodplain Administrator shall make periodic inspections at appropriate
times throughout the period of construction in order to monitor compliance with
permit conditions.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1314.26  POST-CONSTRUCTION CERTIFICATIONS REQUIRED.
   The following as-built certifications are required after a floodplain
development permit has been issued:
   (A)   For new or substantially improved residential structures, or
nonresidential structures that have been elevated, the applicant shall have a
Federal Emergency Management Agency Elevation Certificate completed by a
registered surveyor to record as-built elevation data. For elevated structures
in Zone A and Zone AO areas without a base flood elevation, the elevation
certificate may be completed by the property owner or owner’s representative;
and
   (B)   For all development activities subject to the standards of §
1314.29(A), a letter of map revision.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1314.27  REVOKING A FLOODPLAIN DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   A floodplain development permit shall be revocable, if among other things,
the actual development activity does not conform to the terms of the
application and permit granted thereon. In the event of the revocation of a
permit, an appeal may be taken to the Appeals Board in accordance with §§
1314.60 through
1314.65.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1314.28  EXEMPTION FROM FILING A DEVELOPMENT PERMIT.
   (A)   An application for a floodplain development permit shall not be
required for:
      (1)   Maintenance work such as roofing, painting, and basement sealing,
or for small nonstructural development activities (except for filling and
grading) valued at less than $5,000;
      (2)   Development activities in an existing or proposed manufactured home
park that are under the authority of the state’s Department of Health and
subject to the flood damage reduction provisions of the O.A.C. § 3701;
      (3)   Major utility facilities permitted by the Ohio Power Siting Board
under Ohio R.C. Chapter 4906;
      (4)   Hazardous waste disposal facilities permitted by the Hazardous
Waste Siting Board under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3734; or
      (5)   Development activities undertaken by a federal agency and which are
subject to Federal Executive Order 11988 - Floodplain Management.
   (B)   Any proposed action exempt from filing for a floodplain development
permit is also exempt from the standards of these regulations.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1314.29  MAP MAINTENANCE ACTIVITIES.
   To meet National Flood Insurance Program minimum requirements to have flood
data reviewed and approved by FEMA, and to ensure that city flood maps,
studies, and other data identified in §
1314.06 accurately represent flooding conditions so appropriate floodplain
management criteria are based on current data, the following map maintenance
activities are identified.
   (A)   Requirement to Submit New Technical Data.
      (1)   For all development proposals that impact floodway delineations or
base flood elevations, the community shall ensure that technical data
reflecting such changes be submitted to FEMA within six months of the date such
information becomes available. These development proposals include:
         (a)   Floodway encroachments that increase or decrease base flood
elevations or alter floodway boundaries;
         (b)   Fill sites to be used for the placement of proposed structures
where the applicant desires to remove the site from the special flood hazard
area;
         (c)   Alteration of watercourses that result in a relocation or
elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of
culverts; and
         (d)   Subdivision or large scale development proposals requiring the
establishment of base flood elevations in accordance with §
1314.43.
      (2)   It is the responsibility of the applicant to have technical data,
required in accordance with this division (A), prepared in a format required
for a conditional letter of map revision or letter of map revision, and
submitted to FEMA.  Submittal and processing fees for these map revisions shall
be the responsibility of the applicant.
      (3)   The Floodplain Administrator shall require a conditional letter of
map revision prior to the issuance of a floodplain development permit for:
         (a)   Proposed floodway encroachments that increase the base flood
elevation; and
         (b)   Proposed development which increases the base flood elevation by
more than one foot in areas where FEMA has provided base flood elevations but
no floodway.
      (4)   Floodplain development permits issued by the Floodplain
Administrator shall be conditioned upon the applicant obtaining a letter of map
revision from FEMA for any development proposal subject to division (A)(1)
hereof.
   (B)   Right to Submit New Technical Data.  The Floodplain Administrator may
request changes to any of the information shown on an effective map that does
not impact floodplain or floodway delineations or base flood elevations, such
as labeling or planimetric details. Such a submission shall include appropriate
supporting documentation made in writing by the Mayor, and may be submitted at
any time.
   (C)   Annexation/Detachment.  Upon occurrence, the Floodplain Administrator
shall notify FEMA in writing whenever the boundaries of the city have been
modified by annexation or the community has assumed authority over an area, or
no longer has authority to adopt and enforce floodplain management regulations
for a particular area. In order that the City of Broadview Heights Flood
Insurance Rate Map accurately represent the city boundaries, include within
such notification a copy of a map of the city suitable for reproduction,
clearly showing the new corporate limits or the new area for which the city has
assumed or relinquished floodplain management regulatory authority.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1314.30  DATA USE AND FLOOD MAP INTERPRETATION.
   The following guidelines shall apply to the use and interpretation of maps
and other data showing areas of special flood hazard.
   (A)   In areas where FEMA has not identified special flood hazard areas, or
in FEMA identified special flood hazard areas where base flood elevation and
floodway data have not been identified, the Floodplain Administrator shall
review and reasonably utilize any other flood hazard data available from a
federal, state, or other source.
   (B)   Base flood elevations and floodway boundaries produced on FEMA flood
maps and studies shall take precedence over base flood elevations and floodway
boundaries by any other source that reflect a reduced floodway width and/or
lower base flood elevations. Other sources of data, showing increased base
flood elevations and/or larger floodway areas than are shown on FEMA flood maps
and studies, shall be reasonably used by the Floodplain Administrator.
   (C)   When preliminary flood insurance rate maps and/or flood insurance
study have been provided by FEMA:
      (1)   Upon the issuance of a letter of final determination by the FEMA,
the preliminary flood hazard data shall be used and replace all previously
existing flood hazard data provided from FEMA for the purposes of administering
these regulations; and
      (2)   Prior to the issuance of a letter of final determination by FEMA,
the use of preliminary flood hazard data shall only be required where no base
flood elevations and/or floodway areas exist or where the preliminary base
flood elevations or floodway area exceed the base flood elevations and/or
floodway widths in existing flood hazard data provided from FEMA. Such
preliminary data may be subject to change and/or appeal to FEMA.
   (D)   The Floodplain Administrator shall make interpretations, where needed,
as to the exact location of the flood boundaries and areas of special flood
hazard. A person contesting the determination of the location of the boundary
shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as
provided in §§
1314.60 through
1314.65.
   (E)   Where a map boundary showing an area of special flood hazard and field
elevations disagree, the base flood elevations or flood protection elevations
(as found on an elevation profile, floodway data table, established high water
marks, and the like) shall prevail.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1314.31  SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE DETERMINATIONS.
   (A)   Damages to structures may result from a variety of causes including
flood, tornado, wind, heavy snow, fire, and the like. After such a damage
event, the Floodplain Administrator shall:
      (1)   Determine whether damaged structures are located in special flood
hazard areas;
      (2)   Conduct substantial damage determinations for damaged structures
located in special flood hazard areas; and
      (3)   Make reasonable attempt to notify owners of substantially damaged
structures of the need to obtain a floodplain development permit prior to
repair, rehabilitation, or reconstruction.
   (B)   Additionally, the Floodplain Administrator may implement other
measures to assist with the substantial damage determination and subsequent
repair process. These measures include issuing press releases, public service
announcements, and other public information materials related to the floodplain
development permits and repair of damaged structures; coordinating with other
federal, state, and local agencies to assist with substantial damage
determinations; providing owners of damaged structures materials and other
information related to the proper repair of damaged structures in special flood
hazard areas; and assist owners of substantially damaged structures with
increased cost of compliance insurance claims.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
USE AND DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION
§ 1314.40  GENERALLY.
   The following use and development standards apply to development wholly
within, partially within, or in contact with any special flood hazard area as
established in §§
1314.06 or
1314.30(A).
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1314.41  USE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Permitted Uses.  All uses not otherwise prohibited in this section or
any other applicable land use regulation adopted by the city are allowed
provided they meet the provisions of these regulations.
   (B)   Prohibited Uses.
      (1)   Private water supply systems in all special flood hazard areas
identified by FEMA, permitted under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3701; and
      (2)   Infectious waste treatment facilities in all special flood hazard
areas, permitted under Ohio R.C. Chapter 3734.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1314.42  WATER AND WASTEWATER SYSTEMS.
   The following standards apply to all water supply, sanitary sewerage and
waste disposal systems not otherwise regulated by the Ohio Revised Code:
   (A)   All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems;
   (B)   New and replacement sanitary sewerage systems shall be designed to
minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and
discharge from the systems into flood waters; and
   (C)   On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to
or contamination from them during flooding.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1314.43  SUBDIVISIONS AND LARGE DEVELOPMENTS.
   (A)   All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to
minimize flood damage and are subject to all applicable standards in these
regulations.
   (B)   All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to
minimize flood damage.
   (C)   All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to
reduce exposure to flood damage.
   (D)   In all areas of special flood hazard where base flood elevation data
are not available, the applicant shall provide a hydrologic and hydraulic
engineering analysis that generates base flood elevations for all subdivision
proposals and other proposed developments containing at least 50 lots or five
acres, whichever is less.
   (E)   The applicant shall meet the requirement to submit technical data to
FEMA in §
1314.29(A)(1)(d) when a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis is completed that
generates base flood elevations as required by division (D) hereof.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1314.44  RESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES.
   (A)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to
prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure resulting
from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy.
Where a structure, including its foundation members, is elevated on fill to or
above the base flood elevation, the requirements for anchoring and construction
materials resistant to flood damage are satisfied.
   (B)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with methods and materials resistant to flood damage.
   (C)   New construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed
with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing and air conditioning equipment
and other service facilities that are designed and/or elevated so as to prevent
water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of
flooding.
   (D)   New construction and substantial improvement of any residential
structure, including manufactured homes, shall have the lowest floor, including
basement, elevated to or above the flood protection elevation. In Zone AO areas
with no elevations specified, the structure shall have the lowest floor,
including basement, elevated at least two feet above the highest adjacent
natural grade.
   (E)   New construction and substantial improvements, including manufactured
homes, that do not have basements and that are elevated to the flood protection
elevation using pilings, columns, posts, or solid foundation perimeter walls
with openings sufficient to allow unimpeded movement of flood waters may have
an enclosure below the lowest floor provided the enclosure meets the following
standards:
      (1)   Be used only for the parking of vehicles, building access, or
storage;
      (2)   Be designed and certified by a registered professional engineer or
architect to automatically equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls
by allowing for the entry and exit of floodwaters; or
      (3)   Have a minimum of two openings on different walls having a total
net area not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area,
and the bottom of all such openings being no higher than one foot above grade.
The openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, or other coverings or
devices provided that they permit the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters.
   (F)   Manufactured homes shall be affixed to a permanent foundation and
anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure
resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of
buoyancy. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of
over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors.
   (G)   Repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination
that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure’s
continued designation as a historic structure and is the minimum necessary to
preserve the historic character and design of the structure, shall be exempt
from the development standards of this section.
   (H)   In AO Zones, new construction and substantial improvement shall have
adequate drainage paths around structures on slopes to guide floodwaters around
and away from the structure.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1314.45  NONRESIDENTIAL STRUCTURES.
   (A)   New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial or other nonresidential structure shall meet the requirements of §
1314.44(A) through (C) and (E) through (H).
   (B)   New construction and substantial improvement of any commercial,
industrial, or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest
floor, including basement, elevated to or above the level of the flood
protection elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary
facilities, shall meet all of the following standards:
      (1)   Be dry floodproofed so that the structure is watertight with walls
substantially impermeable to the passage of water to the level of the flood
protection elevation;
      (2)   Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and
hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
      (3)   Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect,
through the use of a Federal Emergency Management Agency Floodproofing
Certificate, that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with
divisions (B)(1) and (2) hereof.
   (C)   In Zone AO areas with no elevations specified, the structure shall
have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated at least two feet above the
highest adjacent natural grade.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1314.46  ACCESSORY STRUCTURES.
   Relief to the elevation or dry floodproofing standards may be granted for
accessory structures containing no more than 600 square feet. Such structures
must meet the following standards:
   (A)   They shall not be used for human habitation;
   (B)   They shall be constructed of flood resistant materials;
   (C)   They shall be constructed and placed on the lot to offer the minimum
resistance to the flow of floodwaters;
   (D)   They shall be firmly anchored to prevent flotation;
   (E)   Service facilities such as electrical and heating equipment shall be
elevated or floodproofed to or above the level of the flood protection
elevation; and
   (F)   They shall meet the opening requirements of §
1314.44(E)(3).
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1314.47  RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
   Recreational vehicles must meet at least one of the following standards:
   (A)   They shall not be located on sites in special flood hazard areas for
more than 180 days;
   (B)   They must be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or
   (C)   They must meet all standards of §
1314.44.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1314.48  ABOVE GROUND GAS OR LIQUID STORAGE TANKS.
   All above ground gas or liquid storage tanks shall be anchored to prevent
flotation or lateral movement resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic
loads.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1314.49  ASSURANCE OF FLOOD CARRYING CAPACITY.
   Pursuant to the purpose and methods of reducing flood damage stated in these
regulations, the following additional standards are adopted to assure that the
reduction of the flood carrying capacity of watercourses is minimized.
   (A)   Development in Floodways.
      (1)   In floodway areas, development shall cause no increase in flood
levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. Prior to issuance of
a floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit
a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis, conducted by a registered professional
engineer, demonstrating that the proposed development would not result in any
increase in the base flood elevation; or
      (2)   Development in floodway areas causing increases in the base flood
elevation may be permitted provided all of the following are completed by the
applicant:
         (a)   Meet the requirements to submit technical data in §
1314.29(A);
         (b)   An evaluation of alternatives, which would not result in
increased base flood elevations and an explanation why these alternatives are
not feasible;
         (c)   Certification that no structures are located in areas that would
be impacted by the increased base flood elevation;
         (d)   Documentation of individual legal notices to all impacted
property owners within and outside the community, explaining the impact of the
proposed action on their property; and
         (e)   Concurrence of the Mayor and the Chief Executive Officer of any
other communities impacted by the proposed actions.
   (B)   Development in Riverine Areas with Base Flood Elevations but No
Floodways.
      (1)   In riverine special flood hazard areas identified by FEMA where
base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have been designated,
the cumulative effect of any proposed development, when combined with all other
existing and anticipated development, shall not increase the base flood
elevation more than one foot at any point. Prior to issuance of a floodplain
development permit, the applicant must submit a hydrologic and hydraulic
analysis, conducted by a registered professional engineer, demonstrating that
this standard has been met; or
      (2)   Development in riverine special flood hazard areas identified by
FEMA where base flood elevation data are provided but no floodways have been
designated causing more than one foot increase in the base flood elevation may
be permitted provided all of the following are completed by the applicant:
         (a)   An evaluation of alternatives which would result in an increase
of one foot or less of the base flood elevation and an explanation why these
alternatives are not feasible; and
         (b)   Division (A)(2), items (a) and (c) through (e) hereof.
   (C)   Alterations of a Watercourse.  For the purpose of these regulations, a
watercourse is altered when any change occurs within its banks. The extent of
the banks shall be established by a field determination of the “bankfull
stage.” The field determination of “bankfull stage” shall be based on methods
presented in Chapter 7 of the USDA Forest Service General Technical Report RM-
245, Stream Channel Reference Sites: An Illustrated Guide to Field Technique or
other applicable publication available from a federal, state, or other
authoritative source. For all proposed developments that alter a watercourse,
the following standards apply:
      (1)   The bankfull flood carrying capacity of the altered or relocated
portion of the watercourse shall not be diminished. Prior to the issuance of a
floodplain development permit, the applicant must submit a description of the
extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of the
proposed development, and certification by a registered professional engineer
that the bankfull flood carrying capacity of the watercourse will not be
diminished.
      (2)   Adjacent communities, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, and the
Ohio Department of Natural Resources, Division of Water, must be notified prior
to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse. Evidence of such notification
must be submitted to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
      (3)   The applicant shall be responsible for providing the necessary
maintenance for the altered or relocated portion of said watercourse so that
the flood carrying capacity will not be diminished. The Floodplain
Administrator may require the permit holder to enter into an agreement with the
city specifying the maintenance responsibilities. If an agreement is required,
it shall be made a condition of the floodplain development permit.
      (4)   The applicant shall meet the requirements to submit technical data
in §
1314.29(A)(1)(c) when an alteration of a watercourse results in the relocation
or elimination of the special flood hazard area, including the placement of
culverts.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
APPEALS AND VARIANCES
§ 1314.60  APPEALS BOARD ESTABLISHED.
   (A)   The City Board of Zoning Appeals is hereby appointed to serve as the
Appeals Board for these regulations as established by the City Code.
   (B)   Records of the Appeals Board shall be kept and filed in City Hall at
9543 Broadview Road, Broadview Heights, Ohio.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1314.61  POWERS AND DUTIES.
   (A)   The Appeals Board shall hear and decide appeals where it is alleged
there is an error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by
the Floodplain Administrator in the administration or enforcement of these
regulations.
   (B)   Authorize variances in accordance with §
1314.63.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1314.62  APPEALS.
   (A)   Any person affected by any notice and order, or other official action
of the Floodplain Administrator may request and shall be granted a hearing on
the matter before the Appeals Board provided that such person shall file,
within 30 days of the date of such notice and order, or other official action,
a brief statement of the grounds for such hearing or for the mitigation of any
item appearing on any order of the Floodplain Administrator’s decision. Such
appeal shall be in writing, signed by the applicant, and be filed with the
Floodplain Administrator. Upon receipt of the appeal, the Floodplain
Administrator shall transmit said notice and all pertinent information on which
the Floodplain Administrator’s decision was made to the Appeals Board.
   (B)   Upon receipt of the notice of appeal, the Appeals Board shall fix a
reasonable time for the appeal, give notice in writing to parties in interest,
and decide the appeal within a reasonable time after it is submitted.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1314.63  VARIANCES.
   Any person believing that the use and development standards of these
regulations would result in unnecessary hardship may file an application for a
variance. The Appeals Board shall have the power to authorize, in specific
cases, such variances from the standards of these regulations, not inconsistent
with federal regulations, as will not be contrary to the public interest where,
owning to special conditions of the lot or parcel, a literal enforcement of the
provisions of these regulations would result in unnecessary hardship.
   (A)   Application for a Variance.
      (1)   Any owner, or agent thereof, of property for which a variance is
sought shall make an application for a variance by filing it with the
Floodplain Administrator, who upon receipt of the variance shall transmit it to
the Appeals Board.
      (2)   Such application at a minimum shall contain the following
information: name, address, and telephone number of the applicant; legal
description of the property; parcel map; description of the existing use;
description of the proposed use; location of the floodplain; description of the
variance sought; and reason for the variance request.
      (3)   All applications for variance shall be accompanied by a variance
application fee set in the schedule of fees adopted by the city.
   (B)   Public Hearing.  At such hearing the applicant shall present such
statements and evidence as the Appeals Board requires. In considering such
variance applications, the Appeals Board shall consider and make findings of
fact on all evaluations, all relevant factors, standards specified in other
sections of these regulations and the following factors:
      (1)   The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the
injury of others;
      (2)   The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage;
      (3)   The susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to
flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
      (4)   The importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to
the community;
      (5)   The availability of alternative locations for the proposed use that
are not subject to flooding or erosion damage;
      (6)   The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where
applicable;
      (7)   The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated
development;
      (8)   The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and
floodplain management program for that area;
      (9)   The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary
and emergency vehicles;
      (10)   The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise, and
sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if
applicable, expected at the site; and
      (11)   The costs of providing governmental services during and after
flood conditions, including maintenance and repair of public utilities and
facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and
bridges.
   (C)   Variances.
      (1)   Variances shall only be issued upon:
         (a)   A showing of good and sufficient cause;
         (b)   A determination that failure to grant the variance would result
in exceptional hardship due to the physical characteristics of the property.
Increased cost or inconvenience of meeting the requirements of these
regulations does not constitute an exceptional hardship to the applicant;
         (c)   A determination that the granting of a variance will not result
in increased flood heights beyond that which is allowed in these regulations;
additional threats to public safety; extraordinary public expense, nuisances,
fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws;
         (d)   A determination that the structure or other development is
protected by methods to minimize flood damages; and
         (e)   A determination that the variance is the minimum necessary,
considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
      (2)   Upon consideration of the above factors and the purposes of these
regulations, the Appeals Board may attach such conditions to the granting of
variances, as it deems necessary to further the purposes of these regulations.
   (D)   Other Conditions for Variances.
      (1)   Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any
increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
      (2)   Generally, variances may be issued for new construction and
substantial improvements to be erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in
size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed
below the base flood level, providing items in divisions (B)(1) to (B)(11)
hereof have been fully considered.  As the lot size increases beyond one-half
acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
      (3)   Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written
notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with a lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation and the cost of flood insurance will
be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor
elevation.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1314.64  PROCEDURE AT HEARINGS.
   (A)   All testimony shall be given under oath.
   (B)   A complete record of the proceedings shall be kept, except
confidential deliberations of the Board, but including all documents presented
and a verbatim record of the testimony of all witnesses.
   (C)   The applicant shall proceed first to present evidence and testimony in
support of the appeal or variance.
   (D)   The Administrator may present evidence or testimony in opposition to
the appeal or variance.
   (E)   All witnesses shall be subject to cross-examination by the adverse
party or their counsel.
   (F)   Evidence that is not admitted may be proffered and shall become part
of the record for appeal.
   (G)   The Board shall issue subpoenas upon written request for the
attendance of witnesses. A reasonable deposit to cover the cost of issuance and
service shall be collected in advance.
   (H)   The Board shall prepare conclusions of fact supporting its decision.
The decision may be announced at the conclusion of the hearing and thereafter
issued in writing or the decision may be issued in writing within a reasonable
time after the hearing.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1314.65  APPEAL TO THE COURT.
   Those aggrieved by the decision of the Appeals Board may appeal such
decision to the Cuyahoga County Court of Common Pleas, as provided in Ohio R.C.
Chapter 2506.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
ENFORCEMENT
§ 1314.70  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No structure or land shall hereafter be located, erected, constructed,
reconstructed, repaired, extended, converted, enlarged or altered without full
compliance with the terms of these regulations and all other applicable
regulations which apply to uses within the jurisdiction of these regulations,
unless specifically exempted from filing for a development permit as stated in
§
1314.28.
   (B)   Failure to obtain a floodplain development permit shall be a violation
of these regulations and shall be punishable in accordance with §
1314.99.
   (C)   Floodplain development permits issued on the basis of plans and
applications approved by the Floodplain Administrator authorize only the use,
and arrangement, set forth in such approved plans and applications or
amendments thereto. Use, arrangement, or construction contrary to that
authorized shall be deemed a violation of these regulations and punishable in
accordance with §
1314.99.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1314.71  NOTICE OF VIOLATION.
   Whenever the Floodplain Administrator determines that there has been a
violation of any provision of these regulations, he or she shall give notice of
such violation to the person responsible therefore and order compliance with
these regulations as hereinafter provided. Such notice and order shall:
   (A)   Be put in writing on an appropriate form;
   (B)   Include a list of violations, referring to the section or sections of
these regulations that have been violated, and order remedial action, which, if
taken, will effect compliance with the provisions of these regulations;
   (C)   Specify a reasonable time for performance;
   (D)   Advise the owner, operator, or occupant of the right to appeal; and
   (E)   Be served on the owner, occupant, or agent in person. However, this
notice and order shall be deemed to be properly served upon the owner,
occupant, or agent if a copy thereof is sent by registered or certified mail to
the person’s last known mailing address, residence, or place of business, and/
or a copy is posted in a conspicuous place in or on the dwelling affected.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1314.99  PENALTY.
   Violation of the provisions of these regulations or failure to comply with
any of its requirements shall be deemed to be a strict liability offense, and
shall constitute a fourth degree misdemeanor. Any person who violates these
regulations or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon
conviction thereof, be fined or imprisoned as provided by the laws of the
city.  Each day such violation continues shall be
considered a separate offense.  Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city
from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any
violation.  The city shall prosecute any violation of these regulations in
accordance with the penalties stated herein.
(Ord. 103-10, passed 8-23-2010)
CHAPTER 1316:  GRADE LEVELS
Section
   
1316.01   Definitions
   
1316.02   Change of level; authority of City Engineer
   
1316.03   Fee schedule
   
1316.04   Payment of Engineer; services
   
1316.05   Time limit for establishment
   
1316.06   Drawings
Cross-reference:
   Division of Engineering, see
Chapter 250
   Drainage facilities in subdivisions, see §
1248.04
   Grades of streets in subdivisions, see §
1246.03
   Grading in subdivisions, see §
1248.03
   Line and grade of sidewalks, see §
1024.03
   Notice to fill lots; remove putrid substances, see §
660.11
Editor’s note:
   This Chapter 1316 was formerly Chapter 1466 of the Building and Housing
Code, which was recodified by Ordinance 62-07, passed June 4, 2007.
§ 1316.01  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in this chapter:
   “Change of grade.” Means any raising or lowering of a grade level by any
means under circumstances where one of the following occurs:
      (1)   A change of grade level for purposes of erecting buildings,
streets, sewers, appurtenant structures and/or any other structure in the city;
or
      (2)   A change which has the actual effect of changing the direction of
the flow of any surface water across the land affected by the change of grade
such that the diverted surface water flows onto lands other than the parcel
upon which the change of grade occurred.
   “Grade level.” Means the degree of rise or descent of a land surface as
measured in number of feet above sea level.
(Ord. 1-93, passed 1-4-1993)
§ 1316.02  CHANGE OF LEVEL; AUTHORITY OF CITY ENGINEER.
   No person shall change a grade level in the city without the prior approval
of the City Engineer.  The City Engineer is hereby authorized and directed to
set all grade levels in the city.
(Ord. 1-93, passed 1-4-1993)
§ 1316.03  FEE SCHEDULE.
   (A)   Multi-Family Units.  A fee as established in
Chapter 1449 (Fee Schedule) shall be paid by each applicant for City Engineer’s
services for plan approval and inspection of any parcel which a multi-family
unit occupies.
   (B)   Other Grade Approvals.  A fee as established in
Chapter 1449 (Fee Schedule) shall be paid by each applicant in obtaining the
City Engineer’s review of topographical plans and confirmation of finished
grades.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 1316.04  PAYMENT OF ENGINEER; SERVICES.
   The City Engineer shall be paid as determined from time to time by Council
for the following services:
   (A)   Review of submitted topographical site plan for correctness;
   (B)   In-office review of utilities, and the like;
   (C)   Check of the building foot or elevation on the first floor of a
building;
   (D)   Tar line grade check;
   (E)   Checking compliance of finished grade with topographical site plans;
and
   (F)   Preparation of “as built” drawings.
(Ord. 1-93, passed 1-4-1993; Ord. 90-93, passed 9-7-1993)
§ 1316.05  TIME LIMIT FOR ESTABLISHMENT.
   (A)   The establishment of a grade level must be completed prior to any
excavation, initial construction or other change of grade.
   (B)   The owner, or his or her agent or employee, shall apply through the
Building Department for the City Engineer to establish such grade level at
least ten days prior to the time such change is proposed.
   (C)   All trees required to be removed from swales pursuant to §
1248.03(D) of the Planning and Zoning Code shall be so removed before the
issuance of a building permit with respect to the land affected.
(Ord. 108-92, passed 10-19-1992)
§ 1316.06  DRAWINGS.
   The applicant shall provide topographical drawings reflecting all current
grade levels and proposed changed grade levels and containing such other
details as the City Engineer may require from time to time.
(Ord. 1-93, passed 1-4-1993)
CHAPTER 1318:  MOVING OF BUILDINGS
Section
   
1318.01   Permit required
   
1318.02   Permit fees
   
1318.03   Conformity with Building and Zoning Codes required
   
1318.04   Authority of Service Director
   
1318.05   Insurance; bond requirements; police escort and fees
   
1318.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Department of Public Service, see
Chapter 248;
CHTR. Art. V, § 6
   Loads dropping or leaking, see §
440.06
   Obstruction and special uses of public ways, see
Chapter 412
   Permit fee for moving of buildings, see §
1449.08
   Sidewalk obstruction; damage or injury, see §
660.10
   Temporary driveways and protective plankings, see §
1336.01
Editor’s note:
   This Chapter 1318 was formerly Chapter 1470 of the Building and Housing
Code, which was recodified by Ordinance 62-07, passed June 4, 2007.
§ 1318.01  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   No person shall move a building within the city without first
obtaining a permit therefor from the Building Commissioner.
   (B)   The application shall conform in all respects with the requirements of
this Code of Ordinances for the issuance of building permits, including, but
not limited to, time limits as provided in §
1448.09.
   (C)   The application or residential structure moving shall be approved by
the Building Commissioner. Application for commercial building moving shall be
forwarded to the Planning Commission for approval. In considering approval of
said plans, the Planning Commission will take into consideration the general
consistency of the architecture of the building to be moved with the
architecture of structures surrounding the site upon which the building is to
be moved. The Council shall have jurisdiction to disapprove the application for
the permit if it finds, after appropriate review from the Planning Commission,
that the moving of the building will result in a building which is
architecturally and/or aesthetically incongruous with the general character of
the neighborhood in which the building is being moved.
(Ord.  82-91, passed 11-4-1991; Ord. 73-93, passed 7-19-1993; Ord. 137-12,
passed 9-17-2012)
§ 1318.02  PERMIT FEES.
   The fee for the permit required by §
1318.01 shall be as set forth in
Chapter 1449 (Fee Schedule).
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 1318.03  CONFORMITY WITH BUILDING AND ZONING CODES REQUIRED.
   (A)   Any building moved into the city from outside the city shall conform
in all respects to the Building Code and to the Zoning Code.
   (B)   The Building Commissioner shall inspect the building proposed to be
moved within the city prior to its being moved or a permit being granted
hereunder.
   (C)   The requirements of this chapter are in addition to all other building
permit requirements, including zoning certificates and certificates of
occupancy required by other sections of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 6-84, passed 1-16-1984; Ord. 73-93, passed 7-19-1993)
§ 1318.04  AUTHORITY OF SERVICE DIRECTOR.
   (A)   The Director of Public Service shall be the sole and final determiner
of when and if a building shall be moved. 
   (B)   The Director shall inspect the roads to be traveled within the city
both before and after the movement of any building across such roads, taking
pictures and noting any damage caused as a result of the move. 
(Ord. 6-84, passed 1-16-1984; Ord. 73-93, passed 7-19-1993)
§ 1318.05  INSURANCE; BOND REQUIREMENTS; POLICE ESCORT AND FEES.
   (A)   Prior to obtaining any permit for the moving of a building through or
into the city, the applicant must post a certificate of insurance showing
limits of liability in the minimum amounts of $300,000/$500,000.
   (B)    Prior to the issuance of a permit for the movement of a building
through or into the city, an applicant shall file with the city a surety bond
in the amount as set forth in §
1445.06, to be payable to the city if the Director of Public Service certifies
any road damage caused by such movement or any other damage caused to public or
private property.
   (C)    No person shall move a building through or into the city without a
police escort using city police personnel and a police vehicle, with a minimum
of one vehicle and two police officers, during the entire moving process, and
more personnel and vehicles if determined to be necessary by the Chief of
Police and/or the officer in charge of the shift at the time the moving takes
place. Prior to the movement of the building, the applicant shall pay a fee as
established in Chapter 1449 (Fee Schedule).
(Ord. 6-84, passed 1-16-1984; Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 1318.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1440.99 for general Building and Housing Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.
CHAPTER 1320:  REMOVAL OF LOAM OR TOPSOIL
Section
   
1320.01   Permit required
   
1320.02   Application information
   
1320.03   Hearing by Board of Zoning Appeals; conditions of permit
   
1320.04   Bond required
   
1320.05   Exemption from permit and bond requirements; duty to replace topsoil
or loam
   
1320.06   Enforcement
   
1320.07   Violations
   
1320.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Board of Zoning Appeals, see
Chapter 272; 
CHTR. Art. V, § 8
   Drainage facilities in subdivisions, see §
1248.04
   Flood and mudslide hazards, see
Chapter 1314
   Grade levels, see
Chapter 1316
   Grading in subdivisions, see §
1248.03
§ 1320.01  PERMIT REQUIRED.
   No person shall strip or remove, or cause or permit the stripping or
removal, of loam or topsoil from any land area located in any present or future
use district in this municipality, except as otherwise provided in this
chapter, unless he or she is the holder of, and is in conformity with, a permit
to do so issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 36-71, passed 5-10-1971)
§ 1320.02  APPLICATION INFORMATION.
   Any person desiring a permit to strip or remove loam or topsoil shall file
with the Building Commissioner a written application therefor. Such application
shall contain the following information:
   (A)   The full name and business and home addresses of the applicant and, if
the applicant is a partnership, the names and business and home addresses of
each of the partners, and, if the applicant is a corporation, the names and
business and home addresses of its principal officers;
   (B)   A description of the land from which the topsoil is to be stripped or
removed, specifying the quantity of land involved;
   (C)   If the applicant is not the owner of the land described, the name and
address of the owner and the owner’s written consent to the work proposed,
attached to the application;
   (D)   The method of stripping or removal to be employed;
   (E)   The time within which the work will be commenced and completed,
including the days of the week and the hours during which such work will be
done;
   (F)   The type of reseeding or replanting proposed for the land;
   (G)   The depth of topsoil now on the property, the amount proposed to be
removed or stripped and the amount to remain;
   (H)   The method of drainage to be used during the operation and after its
completion and the topography of the land after removal;
   (I)   The ultimate proposed use of the land after removal or stripping of
the topsoil;
   (J)   A statement that the applicant will bear the expense of a municipal
inspector during the operation under the permit;
   (K)   A statement that the applicant is capable of furnishing, and will
furnish, a performance bond in the amount of $500 for each acre or fraction
thereof included in such permit; and
   (L)   Such other information as the Building Commissioner deems necessary.
(Ord. 36-71, passed 5-10-1971)
§ 1320.03  HEARING BY BOARD OF ZONING APPEALS; CONDITIONS OF PERMIT.
   The Building Commissioner shall investigate the statements contained in the
application and shall report the filing of such application and his or her
findings to the Board of Zoning Appeals. The Board shall set a date for a
hearing upon the application and shall notify the applicant of such date. If,
after a hearing, the Board determines that the granting of the application will
not adversely affect the public welfare, health, safety and convenience, it
shall grant the application upon such conditions relating to the method of
stripping or removal, the term of the permit, the amount of topsoil or loam to
be left on the land, which shall not be less than three inches, the reseeding
or replanting, the drainage or topography of the land which shall be required
after removal of the topsoil, the days of the week and the hours during such
days that operations may be carried on, and such other conditions as the Board
may deem necessary for the protection of the public interest, health, safety
and welfare. Any condition imposed by the Board shall be made a part of the
permit and constitute a limitation thereon.
(Ord. 36-71, passed 5-10-1971)
§ 1320.04  BOND REQUIRED.
   Upon the granting of the application, the Building Commissioner shall be
instructed to issue the permit containing the conditions imposed upon it, if
any, by the granting body. The permit shall be issued to the applicant upon the
posting of a bond in favor of the municipality in a form approved by the
Director of Law, conditioned upon the performance of the permit in accordance
with its terms. The bond shall be signed by the applicant and a surety company
or two good and sufficient sureties satisfactory to the Mayor. The bond shall
be in the amount of $500 for each acre or fraction thereof of property under
such permit. The bond shall be filed with the City Clerk.
(Ord. 36-71, passed 5-10-1971)
§ 1320.05  EXEMPTION FROM PERMIT AND BOND REQUIREMENTS; DUTY TO REPLACE TOPSOIL
OR LOAM.
   A person excavating or grading land to the grade fixed by the City Engineer
for the purpose of constructing thereon any building, structure or other
improvement permitted in any present or future use district pursuant to a
building permit duly issued by the Building Commissioner, is not required to
comply with §§
1320.01 through
1320.04, but shall, upon completion of such excavation or grading operations,
replace the topsoil or loam over the area from which the same was moved
(excluding therefrom the area covered by the building, structure or other
improvement placed thereon) equal to the depth of such loam or topsoil before
the moving or removal thereof, or to a depth of three inches, whichever is
less.
(Ord. 36-71, passed 5-10-1971)
§ 1320.06  ENFORCEMENT.
   In addition to all other provisions for the enforcement of this chapter,
compliance with the provisions of this chapter may be enforced in any manner
provided by law, including proceedings in equity brought in the name of the
municipality.
(Ord. 36-71, passed 5-10-1971)
§ 1320.07  VIOLATIONS.
   No person shall violate or cause or knowingly permit to be violated any of
the provisions of this chapter, or fail to comply with any of such provisions,
or fail to comply with any lawful requirement of any public authority made
pursuant to this chapter, or knowingly use or cause or permit the use of any
lands in violation hereof, or in violation of any permit granted hereunder.
(Ord. 36-71, passed 5-10-1971)
§ 1320.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1440.99 for General Building and Housing Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.
CHAPTER 1322:  ROADWAY DITCH LINES
Section
   
1322.01   Installation of pipe
   
1322.02   Size and material variations
   
1322.03   Responsibility of builders and contractors
   
1322.04   Permit required; fee
   
1322.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Drainage in subdivisions, see §§
1246.06,
1248.04
   Protection of drainage ditches and culverts, see §
1336.01
Statutory reference:
   Contracts and apportionment of costs for culverts, see Ohio R.C. 5517.02
   Drainage and ditches, see Ohio R.C. 6131.01 et seq.
   Improvement and repair of culverts, see Ohio R.C. 735.02, 735.32
§ 1322.01  INSTALLATION OF PIPE.
   Before a building permit is issued by the Building Commissioner, and
wherever it is deemed necessary by the Foreman of the Street Division, a 16-
gauge, 12-inch corrugated metal (or equal) pipe, not less than 16 feet, shall
be installed along the existing roadway ditch line at a location and depth
determined by such Foreman.
(Ord. 28-55, passed 10-24-1955)
§ 1322.02  SIZE AND MATERIAL VARIATIONS.
   (A)   The installation of a smaller diameter pipe shall be permissible only
upon the recommendation of the Foreman of the Street Division.
   (B)   The installation of boiler tanks or vitrified pipe is prohibited.
(Ord. 28-55, passed 10-24-1955)
§ 1322.03  RESPONSIBILITY OF BUILDERS AND CONTRACTORS.
   Building permit applicants and/or building contractors shall maintain an
unobstructed drainage ditch across the entire width of the premises for which
such permit is applied for at all times at the street line and adjoining
parcels of realty where obstructions may occur due to the building operation of
such applicants and/or building contractors.
(Ord. 28-55, passed 10-24-1955)
§ 1322.04  PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.
   No person shall install culvert pipe, as required by this chapter, without
first obtaining a permit therefor from the Building Commissioner. The fee for
the permit required shall be as set forth in
Chapter 1449 (Fee Schedule). Such permit fee shall be paid into the General
Fund. 
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 1322.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1440.99 for general Building and Housing Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.
CHAPTER 1324:  RURAL MAILBOXES
Section
   
1324.01   House numbers; advertising
   
1324.02   Posts and supports
   
1324.99   Penalty
Editor’s note:
   This Chapter 1324 was formerly Chapter 1476 of the Building and Housing
Code, which was recodified by Ordinance 62-07, passed June 4, 2007.
§ 1324.01  HOUSE NUMBERS; ADVERTISING.
   The house number on each mailbox shall be inscribed in neat numbers not less
than two inches high on each side of the mailbox, or on the door of the house
if the boxes are grouped. Advertising on mailboxes or supports is prohibited.
(Ord. 5-66, passed 1-17-1966)
§ 1324.02  POSTS AND SUPPORTS.
   Posts or other supports for rural mailboxes must be neat and of adequate
strength and size. The height of posts and supports shall be as designated by
the United States Post Office.
(Ord. 5-66, passed 1-17-1966)
§ 1324.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1440.99 for general Building and Housing Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.
CHAPTER 1326:  SATELLITE SIGNAL-RECEIVING EARTH STATIONS
Section
   
1326.01   Dish-type satellite signal-receiving earth station defined
   
1326.02   Permit required; fee
   
1326.03   Application for permit; plans and specifications
   
1326.04   Location of stations
   
1326.05   Support structures
   
1326.06   Size of stations
   
1326.07   Height of stations
   
1326.08   Screening, lettering and color of stations
   
1326.09   Dismantling and removal of stations
   
1326.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Permit fee, see §
1449.08
   Wireless telecommunications facilities, see
Chapter 1344
Editor’s note:
   This Chapter 1326 was formerly Chapter 1477 of the Building and Housing
Code, which was recodified by Ordinance 62-07, passed June 4, 2007.
§ 1326.01  DISH-TYPE SATELLITE SIGNAL-RECEIVING EARTH STATION DEFINED.
   As used in this chapter, “dish-type satellite signal-receiving earth
station”, sometimes referred to hereinafter as “earth station”, means an
antenna of dish shape, which is larger than six feet in diameter, installed for
the purpose of receiving air-borne signals related to communications from
satellite transmissions.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 1326.02  PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.
   No person shall install or erect a dish-type satellite signal-receiving
earth station in the city, which is larger than six feet in diameter, without
first obtaining a permit therefor in accordance with §
1326.03. The fee for the permit required shall be as set forth in Chapter 1449
(Fee Schedule).
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 1326.03  APPLICATION FOR PERMIT; PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   (A)   Any owner of real estate who desires to construct or erect a dish-type
satellite signal-receiving earth station on such real estate shall apply to the
Building Commissioner for the permit referred to in §
1326.02. A part-owner, occupant or renter must have written permission from the
owner of the lot, premises or parcel of land within the city on which such
construction or erection is proposed.
   (B)   The applicant shall submit the permit application upon forms provided
by the Building Commissioners, together with a plot plan of the lot, premises
or parcel of land, showing the exact location of the proposed earth station and
the location of all buildings on the subject lot; a description of the kind of
earth station dish proposed; and three complete sets of construction plans,
specifications and elevations of the proposed location with sufficient details
to show the complete name and address of the subject property owner and the
complete name and address of the person who prepared the plans and
specifications. The application shall indicate the owner or owners of the
subject property, the occupant of the subject premises and the contractor or
other person who will be permitted to construct or erect the proposed earth
station, who shall be a licensed contractor pursuant to the regulations of the
city. All construction plans shall be certified with a professional engineer’s
stamp. However, a resident who proposes to construct the earth station by
himself or herself shall not be required to have his or her construction plans
certified by a professional engineer and shall not be required to employ a
licensed contractor for such construction. This exemption shall in no way apply
to any other provision of this chapter.
   (C)   The Building Commissioner must notify adjoining property owners, by
certified mail, of the proposed earth station site. The notice shall state that
the adjoining property owner may register objections to be proposed earth
station at the meeting of the Planning Commission at which the application is
reviewed. Such notice shall be served not less than ten days prior to such
meeting.
   (D)   The Building Commissioner shall review the submitted application and
shall note thereon whether all of the requirements of this chapter have been
satisfied. Other provisions of the Building Code and the provisions of the
Zoning Code, so far as they are consistent with this chapter and applicable
hereto, shall also apply to the construction of an earth station, except for
additional permit fees.
   (E)   Once the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied, the
application shall be referred to the Architectural Review Board, which shall
have the final authority to grant or deny approval.
(Ord. 74-93, passed 7-19-1993; Ord. 137-12, passed 9-17-2012)
§ 1326.04  LOCATION OF STATIONS.
   (A)   No dish-type satellite signal-receiving earth station shall be erected
in any front or side yard or within 20 feet of any lot line.
   (B)   No earth station shall be erected on the roof top of any residential
structure. An earth station may be located on the roof of a commercial,
apartment, hospital, school or church building or any other building if
approval is obtained first from the Planning Commission.
   (C)   No earth station shall be linked to receivers which are not located on
the same lot or premises as the earth station, unless the owner or occupant of
the premises is operating pursuant to a franchise granted by the city.
(Ord. 70-84, passed 11-19-1984)
§ 1326.05  SUPPORT STRUCTURES.
   (A)   Only metal support, galvanized construction, or equal, shall be
allowed for dish- type satellite signal-receiving earth stations.
   (B)   Only a concrete base or caissons, depending on soil conditions, shall
be employed in line with the grade.
   (C)   The structure shall be designed to withstand wind force of up to 85
mph in a manner conforming with good engineering practices.
   (D)   Should guy wires be used, they must be confined within a fenced area
or be protected by a suitable shield.
(Ord. 70-84, passed 11-19-1984)
§ 1326.06  SIZE OF STATIONS.
   The maximum diameter of any dish-type satellite signal-receiving earth
station shall be 12 feet.
(Ord. 70-84, passed 11-19-1984)
§ 1326.07  HEIGHT OF STATIONS.
   The maximum height of any dish-type satellite signal-receiving earth station
structure shall be 15 feet from the natural grade level, except as provided in
§
1326.04(B).
(Ord. 70-84, passed 11-19-1984)
§ 1326.08  SCREENING, LETTERING AND COLOR OF STATIONS.
   (A)   Either a solid fence, at least five feet in height, measured from the
top of the concrete base or caissons specified in §
1326.05(B), shall be erected, or landscaping shall be planted, sufficient to
form a permanent visual barrier five feet in height or grade, whichever is
higher, so as to permanently shield most of the structure from view from
adjoining properties and public rights-of-way.
   (B)   No lettering, numerals, symbols, pictorial signs or designs shall be
permitted on any surface of a dish-type satellite signal-receiving earth
station. No earth station dish shall be painted in a color other than gray,
white or earth tones.
(Ord. 70-84, passed 11-19-1984)
§ 1326.09  DISMANTLING AND REMOVAL OF STATIONS.
   If the residence, commercial structure, office building or other facility
upon which a dish- type satellite signal-receiving earth station is located,
sold or otherwise transferred, or the satellite dish is in any way abandoned or
neglected or becomes dilapidated, the seller or conveyor of such premises shall
cause the earth station to be dismantled completely, including all support
structures and appurtenances, and removed from the property.  However, if the
purchase contract or other means of conveyance provides specifically for the
earth station to remain in place for use by the successive possessor of the
property, then this section shall not apply.
(Ord. 70-84, passed 11-19-1984)
§ 1326.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1440.99 for general Building and Housing Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.
CHAPTER 1328:  SIGNS
Section
1328.01   Intent
1328.02   Definitions
1328.03   Application of sign regulations
1328.04   Exempt signs
1328.05   Determining sign area or dimension
1328.06   Determining sign height
1328.07   Determining building frontage and building unit
1328.08   Determining window area
1328.09   Signs in Business Districts (C1, C2, C3, C4)
1328.10   Signs in Industrial Districts (E1 - E2)
1328.11   Signs in Community Facilities Districts
1328.12   Special Planning Districts A, B
1328.13   Temporary signs in nonresidential districts
1328.14   Signs for residential uses and in residential districts
1328.15   Prohibited signs in all zoning districts
1328.16   Illumination, construction and maintenance standards
1328.17   Electronically controlled signs (C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, E-1, E2, D-1,
SPD A and B)
1328.18   Sign applications
1328.19   Sign inspections
1328.99   Penalty
Cross references:
   Advertising on traffic control devices, see §
414.07
   Fire lane signs, see §
1640.02
   No-solicitation signs, see §
828.03
   Parking signs and illumination, see §
1284.11
   Posting handbills, posters, placards, see §
642.27
   Sign permit fees, see §
1449.08
   Street name signs in subdivisions, see §
1248.10
Editor’s note:
   This Chapter 1328 was formerly Chapter 1479 of the Building and Housing
Code, which was recodified by Ordinance 62-07, passed June 4, 2007.
§ 1328.01  INTENT.
   (A)   This chapter is established to promote the public health, safety and
welfare through the provision of standards for existing and proposed signs of
all types. More specifically, this chapter is intended to:
      (1)   Enhance and protect the physical appearance of the community;
      (2)   Promote and maintain visually attractive, residential, retail
commercial and industrial districts;
      (3)   Ensure that signs are located and designed to reduce sign
distraction and confusion that may be contributing factors in traffic
congestion and accidents, and maintain a safe and orderly pedestrian and
vehicular environment; and
      (4)   Provide review procedures that enable the city to evaluate the
appropriateness of a sign to the site, building and surroundings.
   (B)   In establishing these objectives the city has determined that, without
adequate regulation and design standards, signs are a nuisance. The number of
signs in the city is excessive and is unduly distracting to motorists and
pedestrians, creates a traffic hazard and in some places reduces the
effectiveness of signs needed to direct the public. Therefore, permitted signs
should comply with the standards of this chapter in order to reduce the
aforementioned effects.
   (C)   In view of the foregoing, all signs not conforming to the provisions
of this chapter are hereby declared a nuisance. It is further declared that the
regulations contained in this chapter are the minimum regulation necessary to
abate the nuisance and to achieve the purposes of this chapter.
(Ord. 107-05, passed 8-22-2005; Ord. 15-15, passed 6-15-2015)
§ 1328.02  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   “Classification By Functional Type.”
      (1)   “Aerial sign.” Any balloon, or other airborne flotation device
which is tethered to the ground or to a building or other structure which
directs attention to a business, commodity, service or entertainment conducted,
sold or offered.
      (2)   “Changeable copy sign.” A portion of a wall mounted, free-standing
or center identification sign designed to accommodate frequent message changes.
“Changeable copy signs” include the following:
         (a)   Electronically or electrically controlled signs; see §
1328.17; and
         (b)   Manually changed message signs.
      (3)   “Directional or instructional sign.” Any sign which indicates
instructions for use, the direction or specific location of an object, person,
institution, organization, business or event which does not include information
regarding product lines or services. Directional signs can include: entry, exit
and similar traffic control signs.
      (4)   “Drive-thru sign.” A free-standing, one sided sign which is located
at or close to the stacking spaces for a drive-thru.
      (5)   “Free-standing sign.” Any sign independently supported by the
ground or mounted on a decorative wall or fence.
      (6)   “Identification sign.” A sign which, by symbol or name, identifies
the area, location (by street number) or premises where such sign is located or
to which it is affixed. “Identification signs” may include the following:
residential or industrial development identification signs, including signs
that identify a development, subdivision, neighborhood, apartment structure or
complex; and other developments used solely for residential or industrial
purposes.
      (7)   “Neon sign.” A sign formed from neon lamps containing neon gas.
      (8)   “Off-premises sign.” A sign which contains either a message or
symbols which does not relate to the premises where such sign is located or to
which it is affixed.
      (9)   “Portable sign.” Any sign which is movable and which is not
permanently attached to the ground, a structure or other signs, and is designed
or constructed in such a manner that it can be moved or relocated without
involving any structural or support changes. “Portable signs” would also
include any sign which is supported by an “A-frame” or “T-frame” base which is
designed to be easily movable.
      (10)   “Projecting sign.” Any sign which is attached to or supported by a
building or structure and extending perpendicular from said building or
structure a distance of more than 18 inches, Including: “Awning/canopy sign.”
Is any sign that is mounted, painted or otherwise applied on or attached to an
awning or a canopy.
      (11)   “Roof mounted sign.” Any sign which is mounted on the roof of a
building or which is wholly dependent upon a building for support and which
projects above the parapet of a building with a flat roof, the eave line of a
building with a gambrel, gable or hip roof or the deck line of a building with
a mansard roof.
      (12)   “Temporary sign.” A sign of any type, which is placed for a
specified period of time, intended to announce special events, promotions,
sales and the like, which are constructed of poster board, cardboard, masonite,
plywood or plastic material and mounted to wood, metal or wire frames or
supports. “Temporary signs” may include, by way of example, the following:
         (a)   A sign related to a special event on the site such as real
estate sales, construction sites, off-premises events, special merchandise
sales and the like;
         (b)   Window signs constructed of paper, cloth or similar expendable
material, including signs incorporated with a display of merchandise, a display
relating to services offered or a special sale or promotion which is located
inside a structure mounted on or near a window, intended to be viewed from
outside the structure; and
         (c)   Residential personal messages including school achievements or
announcements or other announcement or messages that are not derogative in
content.
      (13)   “Wall sign.” Any sign which is affixed to, painted on, or carved
into any exterior wall.
      (14)   “Window sign.” Any sign painted on, displayed from or installed
inside a window for purposes of viewing from outside the building.
   “Frontage.”
      (1)   “Building frontage.” The facade of a building which contains the
main public entry or is the facade of a building that is parallel to and facing
a public street. If a building has more than one building frontage, the shorter
frontage shall be used to calculate sign area.
      (2)   “Lot frontage.” The length of the front lot line measured at the
street right- of-way line between side lot lines.
   “Sign.” Any object, device, display, graphic, structure, or part thereof,
which is situated indoors or outdoors or is attached to, painted on or
displayed from a building or structure in order to direct, attract attention to
or announce an object, person, institution, organization, business, product,
service, event or location by any means, including words, letters, figures,
designs, symbols, fixtures, colors, illumination or projected images.
(Ord. 15-15, passed 6-15-2015)
§ 1328.03  APPLICATION OF SIGN REGULATIONS.
   (A)   The regulations contained in this chapter shall apply to signs outside
of the public right-of-way, except when specifically stated otherwise.
   (B)   A sign may only be erected, established, painted, created or
maintained in the city in conformance with the standards, procedures,
exemptions and other requirements of this chapter.
   (C)   No person shall locate or retain any sign, or cause a sign to be
located or retained unless all provisions of this Zoning Code have been met.
   (D)   A sign initially approved for which a permit has been issued shall not
be modified, relocated, altered or replaced, nor shall design elements of any
building or lot upon which such sign is maintained be modified, relocated,
altered or replaced if any such design element constituted a basis for approval
of such sign unless an amended or new permit is obtained consistent with these
regulations.
   (E)   The following shall also require a sign permit:
      (1)   The repair of off-premises signs; and
      (2)   A change of the face of a sign shall require a sign permit. The
repainting, changing of parts and preventive maintenance of signs, and a change
in the message on a changeable copy sign shall not be deemed alterations
requiring a sign permit.
   (F)   Any sign permit shall expire if the sign, for which the permit has
been issued, is not fully constructed within six months from the date of
issuance of the permit.
(Ord. 107-05, passed 8-22-2005; Ord. 15-15, passed 6-15-2015)
§ 1328.04  EXEMPT SIGNS.
   (A)   The following signs are allowed without a sign permit, and are not
required to be included in the determinations of the allowable number, type or
area of signs in each zoning classification.
      (1)   Residential Contractor Signs:  are limited to the duration of the
construction project plus one week not exceed 60 days;
      (2)   Garage and Yard Sale Signs: signs advertising garage and yard
sales;
      (3)   Hazard and Prohibition Signs: signs warning of construction,
excavation or similar hazards, so long as the hazard exists, and “No
Trespassing”, “No Parking”, and other similar warning signs;
      (4)   Holiday Decorations: temporary holiday decorations;
      (5)   Internal Signs: signs not intended to be viewed from public streets
and located so as not to be visible from public street or adjoining properties,
such as signs in interior areas of shopping centers, commercial buildings and
structures, ball parks, stadiums and similar uses of a recreational or
entertainment nature;
      (6)   Miscellaneous Information Signs: miscellaneous permanent
information signs for nonresidential land uses, with an aggregate area not to
exceed four square feet at each entrance, indicating address, hours and days of
operation, whether a business is open or closed, credit card information and
emergency address and telephone numbers;
      (7)   Official Flags: official federal, state or local government flags,
emblems and historical markers;
      (8)   Official Signs: official municipal or state government traffic,
directional and information signs; and any notices issued by any court;
      (9)   Window Signs: Temporary window signs constructed of paper, cloth or
similar expendable material, including signs incorporated with a display of
merchandise, a display relating to services offered, or a special sale or
promotion which are located inside a structure. Signs painted on or otherwise
permanently affixed to a window or made of metal, wood, plastic, neon or other
permanent material and positioned in a window are subject to the provisions for
window signs in each zoning district; and are not to exceed 20% per window
pane. Door signs are prohibited except for hours of operation, ingress and
egress indicators and other safety information that may be required by other
regulatory provisions.
      (10)   Monuments: Cornerstones and headstones; and
      (11)   Temporary Signs: Temporary signs in residential districts shall be
exempt. Such exempt signs shall not exceed six square feet per sign and shall
be allowed for a maximum continuous duration of six months, unless the sign is
related to an event and the date of the event is known. If a sign is related to
an event and the date of the event is known, then the sign shall be allowed for
a maximum of 30 days before and two days after the event.
   (B)   Nothing in this section shall exempt a sign from the necessity of
building permit approval if an electrical or building permit is required by the
Building Code.
(Ord. 15-15, passed 6-15-2015; Ord. 48-2019, passed 12-16-2019)
§ 1328.05  DETERMINING SIGN AREA OR DIMENSION.
   The following regulations shall control the computation and measurement of
sign area, sign height, window area and building frontage.
   (A)    Sign area shall include the face of all the display area of the sign.
Sign area shall include the frame and structural support of the sign when
mounted on masonry base, but not include the masonry base. If the sign is not
supported on masonry base, the area will be considered the sign face, frame and
structural support.
   (B)   For a display face that is framed, outlined, painted or otherwise
prepared and intended to provide a background for a sign display, the area of
the sign shall be the area of one rectangular shape that encompasses the entire
background or frame.
   (C)   (1)   For a sign comprised of individual letters, figures or elements
on a wall or similar surface of a building or structure, or an irregular shaped
ground sign, the area of the sign shall be the area of up to three rectangular
shapes that encompass the perimeter of all the elements in the display.
      (2)   When separate elements are organized to form a single sign, but the
elements are separated by open space, the area shall be the area of one
rectangular shape that comprises all the display areas, including the space
between the elements.
   (D)   For ground signs and projecting signs.
      (1)   The sign area shall be computed by the measurement of one of the
faces when two identical display faces are joined, are parallel or within 30
degrees of being parallel to each other and are at no point separated by a
distance that exceeds two feet apart.
      (2)   No more than two display faces shall be permitted.
      (3)   Air under a ground sign between supporting posts, air between a
projecting sign and the wall to which it is attached, and lighting fixtures and
associated brackets shall not be included in the calculation of sign area.
   (E)   Masonry bases for ground signs.
      (1)   The masonry base shall be wider than the main body of the sign and
be 12" - 24" above finished grade. The masonry base will not be included in the
overall height of the sign. The height of the sign will be based on the zoning
district regulations for that lot and be measured from the top of the masonry
base.
(Ord. 107-05, passed 8-22-2005; Ord. 15-15, passed 6-15-2015; Ord. 48-2019,
passed 12-16-2019)
§ 1328.06  DETERMINING SIGN HEIGHT.
   The masonry base will not be included in the overall height of the sign. The
height of the sign will be based on the zoning district regulations for that
lot and be measured from the top of the masonry base.
(Ord. 107-05, passed 8-22-2005; Ord. 15-15, passed 6-15-2015; Ord. 48-2019,
passed 12-16-2019)
§ 1328.07  DETERMINING BUILDING FRONTAGE AND BUILDING UNIT.
   For the purposes of these sign regulations, the length of the building wall
that faces a public street or that contains a public entrance to the uses
therein shall be considered the building frontage.
   (A)   The building frontage shall be measured along such building wall
between the exterior faces of the exterior sidewalls.
   (B)   In the case of an irregular wall surface, a single straight line
extended along such wall surface shall be used to measure the length.
   (C)   A building shall have only one building frontage except as otherwise
set forth below.
   (D)   A building shall have two frontages whenever the lot fronts on two or
more streets, or the building has a public entrance on a wall other than the
wall that faces the street. The property owner shall determine which wall shall
be the primary building frontage and which wall shall be the secondary building
frontage. Only one outside wall of any business shall be considered its primary
frontage and only one additional wall considered its secondary frontage.
   (E)   For multi-occupant buildings, the portion of a building that is owned
or leased by a single occupant shall be considered a building unit. The
building frontage for a building unit shall be measured from the centerline of
the party walls defining the building unit.
(Ord. 107-05, passed 8-22-2005; Ord. 15-15, passed 6-15-2015)
§ 1328.08  DETERMINING WINDOW AREA.
   The window area of a building shall be the total glass area of windows on
the building frontage. For the purposes of determining window area for ground
floor occupants, the ground floor shall be considered to be no more than 15
feet in height above grade.
(Ord. 107-05, passed 8-22-2005; Ord. 15-15, passed 6-15-2015)
§ 1328.09  SIGNS IN BUSINESS DISTRICTS (C1, C2, C3, C4).
   (A)   Maximum Number and Area of Permanent Signs Attached to Building.
Permanent signs attached to buildings shall conform to the maximum number and
area limitations set forth in Table 1328.09(1). In addition to the sign area
permitted in Table 1328.09(1), each building shall be permitted to display
numerals indicating the building’s street address, provided the numerals and
letters are not less than two inches proportional.
 
(C1, C2, C3, C4) Table 1328.09(1) Permanent Signs Attached to Buildings
Type Maximum Number Permitted Maximum Area Maximum Height
Awning sign     1/ground floor   6 sq. ft.            Lettering not to exceed
                occupant                              12 in.
Projecting sign 1/ground floor   6 sq. ft.
                occupant
Service sign    1 per entrance   2 sq. ft.
Sign plate      1/address        2 sq. ft.
                1/ground floor   1 sq. ft. per linear
Wall sign       occupant         ft. of building/unit 3 ft.
                                 frontage
Window sign     1/ground floor   Not to exceed 20% of
                occupant         total glass area
Window sign     1/occupant above 6 sq. ft. or 20% of
                ground floor     total glass area (a)
(a)  In addition to maximum allowable area for ground floor building signs
 
   (B)   Building Signs.  The building sign permitted in Table 1328.09(1),
shall be either a wall sign, awning sign or window sign erected in compliance
with the following additional regulations.
      (1)   Window Sign.
         (a)   Ground Floor Occupants. Notwithstanding the permitted area set
forth in Table 1328.09(1), a window sign shall not exceed 20% of the total
glass area of the ground floor window.
         (b)   Upper Story Occupants. For a multi-story building, each occupant
above the ground floor shall be permitted one permanent sign to be placed in a
window of the occupant’s space, not to exceed six square feet or 20% of the
area of the window in which the sign is placed, whichever is smaller. These
signs shall be in addition to the maximum allowable area for ground floor
building signs pursuant to Table 1328.09(1).
      (2)   Awning Signs.  Awning signs shall be permitted to have lettering
not to exceed 12 inches in height located on the front and side portions of the
awning.
      (3)   Corner Lots and Public Entrances Not Fronting a Street.  The
maximum allowable area for building signs set forth in Table 1328.09(1) shall
be the area allowed for the occupant’s primary frontage. In the event an
occupant has a secondary frontage, additional sign area shall be permitted in
compliance with the following.
         (a)   The sign area for the secondary building frontage may not exceed
60% of the sign area permitted for the primary frontage.
         (b)   The property owner may choose to locate the permitted building
sign area on any exterior building wall provided the sign area on any one wall
does not exceed the formula set forth in Table 1328.09(1) and signs are
attached to no more than two exterior walls.
         (c)   Illumination: signs shall be illuminated only in compliance with
§
1328.16.
      (4)   Projecting Signs.
         (a)   Projecting signs shall be limited to occupants that have a
minimum of 20 feet of occupant frontage.
         (b)   All projecting signs shall have a maximum height of 14 feet and
a minimum clearance of eight feet from the ground to the bottom of the sign.
         (c)   Projecting signs shall not extend more than 18 inches from face
of a building.
         (d)   Illumination: Projecting signs shall be illuminated only in
compliance with §
1328.16.
   (C)   Permanent Ground Signs.
      (1)   General Provisions. Permanent ground signs permitted in business
districts (C1, C2, C3, C4) shall comply with the following regulations. 
Maximum number, area and height, minimum setback of permanent ground signs set
forth in Table 1328.09(2).
 
(C1, C2, C3, C4) Table 1328.09(2) Permanent Ground Signs
            Maximum Number Maximum Area Maximum Height Minimum    Minimum Side
                                                       Setback    Setback
1.                                      3 ft. ground   5 ft. from 5 ft.
Directional 2 per driveway 2 sq. ft.    5 ft. wall     street ROW 10 ft. (a)
signs
2. Ground   1 per                                      5 ft. from 25 ft.
sign        dedicated      40 sq. ft.   5 ft.          street ROW 100 ft. (a)
            street
(a)   from residential lot line
 
      (2)   Minimum Sign Setback from Intersection.  On corner lots, no sign
shall be allowed on a lot within a triangle formed between points on the front
and side street right-of-way lined within 15 feet from their intersection.
      (3)   Minimum Sign Setback from Side Lot Lines.  Ground signs shall be
located a minimum of 25 feet from any side lot line, except that when a side
lot line coincides with a residential district line, the minimum setback shall
be 100 feet.
      (4)   Support Requirements.  Ground signs that exceed two square feet in
area shall be erected with a minimum of two supporting posts or on a solid
base.
      (5)   Landscaping. 
         (a)   Ground signs shall be erected in a landscaped setting and not on
sidewalks, drives or in parking lots. Neither the landscaping nor the ground
sign shall obstruct the view of vehicles entering or exiting the property.
         (b)   Landscaping plan shall be submitted with ground sign plan and
shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission.
         (c)   Said landscaping shall be installed at the time of the erection
of the sign, or within six months if sign is erected during the winter season.
      (6)   Changeable Copy Nonelectric Signs.
         (a)   Ground signs may have up to 50% of the sign area set forth in
Table 1328.09(2) devoted to changeable copy.
         (b)   Changeable copy may be either computer driven or manually
changed.
         (c)   All changeable copy shall comply with the lettering style,
lettering color, background color and all other elements approved by the
Planning Commission. No alphabetic letter or number shall be used as a
substitute for a different alphabetic letter or number or a different color of
letter.
      (7)   Multi-Occupant Facilities.  When a ground sign is permitted on a
site that has more than one occupant, it is the property owner’s responsibility
to determine if the sign area shall be devoted to identification of the
buildings(s), the anchor occupant, all occupants, or some combination thereof.
      (8)   Illumination. Ground signs shall be illuminated only in compliance
with §
1328.16 .
      (9)   All ground signs throughout the entire city shall have a masonry
base. The masonry base shall be wider than the main body of the sign and be 12"
- 24" above finished grade. The masonry base will not be included in the
overall height of the sign. The height of the sign will be based on the zoning
district regulations for that lot and be measured from the top of the masonry
base.
      (10)   The landscaping requirement shall be 50% of the vegetation to be
perennial.
      (11)   Window Signs shall not exceed 20% per window pane.
      (12)   Door Signs are prohibited except for hours of operation, ingress
and egress indicators and other safety information that may be required by
other regulatory provisions.
(Ord. 107-05, passed 8-22-2005; Ord. 114-09, passed 10-5-2009; Ord. 137-12,
passed 9-17-2012; Ord. 15-15, passed 6-15-2015; Ord. 48-2019, passed 12-16-
2019; Ord. 25-2020, passed 7-6-2020)
§ 1328.10  SIGNS IN INDUSTRIAL DISTRICTS (E1 - E2).
   (A)   Signs in E1 Office Laboratory and E2 Light Industrial Districts shall
be designed, erected, altered, moved and maintained in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter. Schedule of industrial signs permitted shall
conform to number, sizing, heights and minimum setback in Table 1328.10(1).
 
(E1 - E2) Table 1328.10(1) Permanent Signs Attached to Building
Type Maximum Number Permitted Maximum Area Maximum Height
Awning sign                                           Lettering not to exceed
                                                      12”
Projecting sign 1/ground floor   6 sq. ft.
                occupant
Service sign    1/entrance       2 sq. ft.
Sign plate      1/address        2 sq. ft.
Wall sign       1/building       Frontage x 1.0 = sq. 3 ft.
                                 ft.
Window sign     1/ground floor   Not to exceed 20% of
                occupant         glass area
Window sign     1/occupant above 6 sq. ft. or 20% of
                ground floor     total glass area (a)
(a)  In addition to maximum allowable area for ground floor signs
 
   (B)   Building Signs.  The building sign permitted in Table 1328.10(1) shall
be a wall sign, awning sign or window sign erected in compliance with the
following additional regulations.
      (1)   Window Sign.
         (a)   Ground Floor Occupants. Notwithstanding the permitted area set
forth in Table 1328.10(1), a permanent window sign shall not exceed 20% of the
total glass area of the ground floor window and shall comply with the design
standards for signs.
         (b)   Upper Story Occupants. For a multi-story building, each occupant
above the ground floor shall be permitted one permanent sign to be placed in a
window of the occupant’s space, not to exceed 20% of the area of the window in
which the sign is placed, whichever is smaller. These signs shall be in
addition to the maximum allowable area for building signs pursuant to Table
1328.10(1).
      (2)   Awning Signs.  Awning signs shall be permitted to have lettering
not to exceed 12 inches in height located on the front and side portions of the
awning.
      (3)   Corner Lots and Public Entrances Not Fronting a Street.  The
maximum allowable area for building signs set forth in Table 1328.10(1) shall
be the area allowed for the occupant’s primary frontage. In the event an
occupant has a secondary frontage, additional sign area shall be permitted in
compliance with the following.
         (a)   The sign area for the secondary building frontage shall be 60%
of the sign area permitted for the primary frontage.
         (b)   The property owner may choose to locate the permitted building
sign area on any exterior building wall provided the sign area on any one wall
does not exceed the formula set forth in Table 1328.10(1) and signs are
attached to no more than two exterior walls.
         (c)   Illumination: ground signs shall be illuminated only in
compliance with §
1328.16.
      (4)   Projecting Signs.
         (a)   Projecting signs shall be limited to occupants that have a
minimum of 20 feet of occupant frontage.
         (b)   All projecting signs shall have a maximum height of 14 feet and
a minimum clearance of eight feet from the ground to the bottom of the sign.
         (c)   Projecting signs shall not extend more than 18 inches from face
of a building.
         (d)   Illumination: projecting signs shall be illuminated only in
compliance with §
1328.16.
      (5)   Permanent Ground Signs Permitted in Industrial Districts (E-1, E-2)
Shall Comply with the Following Regulations. Maximum number, area and height,
minimum setback of permanent ground signs. Permanent ground signs shall comply
with the maximum number, area and height limitations and minimum setback from
the street right-of-way set forth in Table 1328.10(2).
 
(E1 - E2) Table 1328.10(2) Permanent Ground Signs
Type        Maximum Number Maximum Area Maximum Height Minimum     Minimum Side
                                                       Setback     Setback
Directional 2 per driveway 2 sq. ft.    3 ft. ground   5 ft.       5 ft.
signs                                   5 ft. wall                 15 ft. (b)
            1 per                                      20 ft. from 25 ft.
Ground sign dedicated      50 sq. ft.   6 ft.          street ROW  100 ft. (b)
            street
Pylon sign  1 per building 65 sq. ft.   16 ft.         40 ft. from 25 ft.
(a)                                                    street ROW  100 ft. (b)
(a)   one pylon or ground sign
(b)   from residential side lot line
 
      (6)   Minimum Sign Setback from Intersection.  On corner lots, no sign
shall be allowed on a lot within a triangle formed between points on the front
and side street right-of-way lined within 15 feet from their intersection.
      (7)   Minimum Sign Setback from Side Lot Lines.  Ground signs or pylon
sign shall be located a minimum of 25 feet from any side lot line, except that
when a side lot line coincides with a residential district line, the minimum
setback shall be 100 feet.
      (8)   Support Requirements.  Ground signs that exceed two square feet in
area shall be erected with a masonry base that shall be wider than the main
body of the sign and be 12" - 24" above finished grade. The masonry base will
not be included in the overall height of the sign. The height of the sign will
be based on the zoning district regulations for that lot and be measured from
the top of the masonry base.
      (9)   Landscaping.
         (a)   Ground signs or pylon signs shall be erected in a landscaped
setting and not on sidewalks, drives or in parking lots. Neither the
landscaping nor the ground sign shall obstruct the view of vehicles entering or
exiting the property.
         (b)   Landscaping plan shall be submitted with ground sign plan and
shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission.
         (c)   Said landscaping shall be installed at the time of the erection
of the sign, or within six months if sign is erected during the winter season.
         (d)   A landscaping cash bond shall be posted for $200. The bond will
be returned after final inspection approval.
      (10)   Changeable Copy on Non-Electronic Signs.
         (a)   Ground signs may have up to 50% of the sign area set forth in
Table 1328.10(2) devoted to changeable copy.
         (b)   Changeable copy may be either computer driven or manually
changed.
         (c)   All changeable copy shall comply with the lettering style,
lettering color, background color and all other elements approved by the
Planning Commission. No alphabetic letter or number shall be used as a
substitute for a different alphabetic letter or number or a different color.
      (11)   Multi-Occupant Facilities.  When a ground sign is permitted on a
site that has more than one occupant, it is the property owner’s responsibility
to determine if the sign area shall be devoted to identification of the
buildings(s), the anchor occupant, all occupants or some combination thereof.
      (12)   Multi-Unit Building Service Entrances.  The service entrance signs
and area shall be permitted in compliance with Table 1328.10(2).
      (13)   Illumination. Ground signs shall be illuminated only in compliance
with §
1328.16 .
      (14)   All ground signs throughout the entire city shall have a masonry
base. The masonry base shall be wider than the main body of the sign and be 12"
- 24" above finished grade. The masonry base will not be included in the
overall height of the sign. The height of the sign will be based on the zoning
district regulations for that lot and be measured from the top of the masonry
base.
      (15)   The landscaping requirement shall be 50% of the vegetation to be
perennial.
      (16)   Window Signs shall not exceed 20% per window pane.
      (17)   Door Signs are prohibited except for hours of operation, ingress
and egress indicators and other safety information that may be required by
other regulatory provisions.
(Ord. 107-05, passed 8-22-2005; Ord. 114-09, passed 10-5-2009; Ord. 137-12,
passed 9-17-2012; Ord. 15-15, passed 6-15-2015; Ord. 48-2019, passed 12-16-
2019)
§ 1328.11  SIGNS IN COMMUNITY FACILITIES DISTRICTS.
   (A)   General Provisions. Signs in Community Facilities Districts (D-1)
shall be designed, erected, altered, relocated and maintained in accordance
with the provisions of this chapter. Schedule of community facility signs
permitted shall conform to number, sizing, heights and minimum setback in Table
1328.11(1).
 
(D1) Table 1328.11(1) Permanent Signs Attached to Building
Type Maximum Number Permitted Maximum Area Maximum Height
Awning sign                                               Lettering not to
                                                          exceed 12 in.
Projecting sign 1/ground floor       6 sq. ft.
                occupant
Sign plate      1/address            2 sq. ft.
Wall sign       1/building           25 sq. ft.           4 ft.
Window sign     1/ground floor       Not to exceed 20% of
                occupant             total glass area
Window sign     1/above ground floor 6 sq. ft. or 20% of
                occupant             total glass area (a)
(a)  In addition to maximum allowable area for ground floor building signs
 
   (B)   Building Signs.  The building sign permitted in Table 1328.11(1),
shall be either a wall sign, awning sign or window sign erected in compliance
with the following additional regulations.
      (1)   Window Sign.
         (a)   Ground Floor Occupants. Notwithstanding the permitted area set
forth in Table 1328.11(1), a window sign shall not exceed 20% of the total
glass area of the ground floor windows and shall comply with the design
standards for signs.
         (b)   Upper Story Occupants. For a multi-story building, each occupant
above the ground floor shall be permitted one permanent sign to be placed in a
window of the occupant’s space, not to exceed 20% of the area of the window in
which the sign is placed, whichever is smaller. These signs shall be in
addition to the maximum allowable area for building signs pursuant to Table
1328.11(1).
      (2)   Awning Signs.  Awning signs shall be permitted to have lettering
not to exceed 12 inches in height located on the front and side portions of the
awning.
      (3)   Corner Lots and Public Entrances Not Fronting a Street.  The
maximum allowable area for building signs set forth in Table 1328.11(1) shall
be the area allowed for the occupant’s primary frontage. In the event an
occupant has a secondary frontage, additional sign area shall be permitted in
compliance with the following.
         (a)   The sign area for the secondary building frontage shall be 60%
of the sign area permitted for the primary frontage.
         (b)   The property owner may choose to locate the permitted building
sign area on any exterior building wall provided the sign area on any one wall
does not exceed the formula set forth in Table 1328.11(1) and signs are
attached to no more than two exterior walls.
         (c)   Illumination: signs shall be illuminated only in compliance with
§
1328.16.
      (4)   Projecting Signs.
         (a)   Projecting signs shall be limited to occupants that have a
minimum of 20 feet of occupant frontage.
         (b)   All projecting signs shall have a maximum height of 14 feet and
a minimum clearance of eight feet from the ground to the bottom of the sign.
         (c)   Projecting signs shall not extend more than 18 inches from face
of a building.
         (d)   Illumination: projecting signs shall be illuminated only in
compliance with §
1328.16.
      (5)   Permanent Ground Signs.
         (a)   General Provisions. Permanent ground signs permitted in
Community Facilities Districts (D-1) shall comply with the following
regulations: permanent ground signs shall comply with the maximum number, area
and height limitations and minimum setback from the street right-of-way set
forth in Table 1328.11(2).
 
(D1) Table 1328.11(2) Permanent Ground Signs
            Maximum Number Maximum Area Maximum Height Minimum     Minimum Side
                                                       Setback     Setback
Directional 2 per driveway 2 sq. ft.    3 ft. ground   5 ft. from  5 ft.
signs                                   5 ft. wall     street ROW  15 ft. (a)
            1 per                                      15 ft. from 25 ft.
Ground sign dedicated      50 sq. ft.   6 ft.          street ROW  100 ft. (a)
            street
(a)  from residential lot line
 
         (b)   Minimum Sign Setback from Intersection.  On corner lots, no sign
shall be allowed on a lot within a triangle formed between points on the front
and side street right-of-way lined within 15 feet from their intersection.
         (c)   Minimum Sign Setback from Side Lot Lines.  Ground signs shall be
located a minimum of 25 feet from any side lot line, except that when a side
lot line coincides with a residential district line, the minimum setback shall
be 100 feet.
         (d)   Support Requirements.  Ground signs that exceed two square feet
in area shall be erected with a solid masonry base. The masonry base shall be
wider than the main body of the sign and be 12" - 24" above finished grade. The
masonry base will not be included in the overall height of the sign. The height
of the sign will be based on the zoning district regulations for that lot and
be measured from the top of the masonry base.
         (e)   Landscaping.
            1.   Ground signs shall be erected in a landscaped setting and not
on sidewalks, drives or in parking lots. Neither the landscaping nor the ground
sign shall obstruct the view of vehicles entering or exiting the property.
            2.   Landscaping plan shall be submitted with ground sign plan and
shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning Commission. The landscaping
requirement shall be 50% of the vegetation to be perennial.
            3.   Said landscaping shall be installed at the time of the
erection of the sign, or within six months if sign is erected during the winter
season.
            4.   A landscaping cash bond shall be posted for $200.  The bond
will be returned after final inspection approval.
         (f)   Changeable Copy Nonelectric Signs.
            1.   Ground signs may have up to 50% of the sign area set forth in
Table 1328.11(2) devoted to changeable copy.
            2.   Changeable copy may be either computer driven or manually
changed.
            3.   All changeable copy shall comply with the lettering style,
lettering color, background color and all other elements approved by the
Planning Commission. No alphabetic letter or number shall be used as a
substitute for a different alphabetic letter or number or a different color of
letter.
         (g)   Multi-Occupant Facilities.  When a ground sign is permitted on a
site that has more than one occupant, it is the property owner’s responsibility
to determine if the sign area shall be devoted to identification of the
building(s), the anchor occupant, all occupants or some combination thereof.
         (h)   Illumination. Ground signs shall be illuminated only in
compliance with §
1328.16 .
         (i)   All ground signs throughout the entire city shall have a masonry
base. The masonry base shall be wider than the main body of the sign and be 12"
- 24" above finished grade. The masonry base will not be included in the
overall height of the sign. The height of the sign will be based on the zoning
district regulations for that lot and be measured from the top of the masonry
base.
         (j)   The landscaping requirement shall be 50% of the vegetation to be
perennial.
         (k)   Window Signs shall not exceed 20% per window pane.
         (l)   Door Signs are prohibited except for hours of operation, ingress
and egress indicators and other safety information that may be required by
other regulatory provisions.
(Ord. 107-05, passed 8-22-2005; Ord. 114-09, passed 10-5-2009; Ord. 137-12,
passed 9-17-2012; Ord. 15-15, passed 6-15-2015; Ord. 48-2019, passed 12-16-
2019)
§ 1328.12  SPECIAL PLANNING DISTRICTS A, B.
   Signage for the special planning districts shall be based on the type of
business and the regulations for the district as found in §§
1328.07 through
1328.09. Those requirements may be modified by the Planning Commission or
adjusted to conform to other signage in the area, type of construction or other
characteristics deemed appropriate.
(Ord. 15-15, passed 6-15-2015)
§ 1328.13  TEMPORARY SIGNS IN NONRESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   The following regulations for temporary signs in nonresidential districts
are in addition to the maximum sign area set forth in this chapter.
   (A)   Temporary signs may be ground signs or window signs.
   (B)   The area of a temporary window sign shall not exceed 20% of the total
transparent glass area of the window total area in which the sign is placed.
   (C)   The total maximum number and area permitted for temporary ground signs
shall be regulated based on the district in which the lot is located.
      (1)   In Zoning Districts C1 and C2, a maximum of one ground sign per
parcel shall be permitted provided the total area of all temporary signs shall
not exceed eight square feet per parcel.
      (2)   In Zoning District C3, a maximum of one ground sign per parcel
shall be permitted provided the total area of all temporary signs shall not
exceed 16 square feet per parcel.
      (3)   In Zoning District C4, no ground signs shall be permitted. Window
temporary signs shall not exceed 16 square feet per parcel.
      (4)   In Zoning Districts D and E, a maximum of two ground signs per
parcel shall be permitted provided the total area of all temporary ground signs
shall not exceed 20 square feet per parcel.
      (5)   In SPD A and B, a maximum of one ground sign shall be permitted
provided the total area does not exceed 16 square feet in area.
   (D)   Temporary signs secured to surfaces other than windows of the main
building are prohibited.
   (E)   Temporary ground signs shall have a maximum height of five feet and
shall be located a minimum distance from the public right-of-way that is equal
to the height of the sign.
   (F)   Vacant parcels in nonresidential districts shall be permitted one
temporary sign that may be erected for an unspecified time. The permitted sign
area shall be 20 square feet.
   (G)   Temporary signs that are erected in order to announce or advertise a
specific event shall be removed within two days after the close of such event
and limited to three 30-day periods within a calendar year and shall not exceed
20% per window pane.
   (H)   Temporary signs and sign location, for new tenants or new businesses,
approved by the Building Commissioner, shall be permitted for a period of 30
days.
(Ord. 107-05, passed 8-22-2005; Ord. 121-06, passed 9-5-2006; Ord. 15-15,
passed 6-15-2015; Ord. 48-2019, passed 12-16-2019)
§ 1328.14  SIGNS FOR RESIDENTIAL USES AND IN RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS.
   Signs for all residential uses in residential districts shall comply with
the regulations set forth in this chapter.
   (A)   Sign Standards.  Signs for all residential uses in residential
districts shall be limited in number, area, height and setback based on the
type of use, as set forth in Table 1328.14(1). All types of electronic signs
are prohibited.
 
(A1, A2, B1, B2, B3, B5) Table 1328.14(1) Signs in Residential Districts
     Maximum Number Maximum Total Maximum Area Regulations for Ground Signs
Type Permitted      Sign Area     Per Sign     Maximum Heights Minimum Setback
                                                               from ROW
(A)   Signs for Zoning District A1, A2
1. Permanent signs                                               
  a. Sign plate or window Per dwelling 2 sq. ft.  2 sq. ft.  -     -
sign                       unit (a)
  b. Ground sign          1/building   2 sq. ft.  2 sq. ft.  4 ft. 10 ft.
                           (c)
2. Ground sign for         1/
residential subdivision    subdivision  20 sq. ft. 20 sq. ft. 5 ft. 10 ft. (b)
                           entrance (c)
3. Temporary sign          2 per        6 sq. ft.  3 sq. ft.  4 ft. 10 ft.
                           dwelling
  a. Window sign          (a) per      Not to exceed 20% of  -     -
                           building     the window pane area
  b. Ground sign          (a) per      8 sq. ft.  6 sq. ft.  4 ft. 15 ft. (c)
                           building
(a)   No limit on the number provided the total area of this type of sign does
not exceed the maximum area permitted.
(b)   35 feet from any one- or two-family residence.  See §
1328.11(B)(5)
(c)   20 feet from side lot line
 
   (B)   Regulations for Ground Signs.
      (1)   Ground signs that exceed two square feet in area shall be erected
with a solid masonry base.
      (2)   Ground signs shall be erected in a landscaped setting and not on
sidewalks, drives or in parking lots.
      (3)   No part of a ground sign, the wall or entry feature on which a sign
is mounted, or the landscaping shall obstruct the view of vehicles entering or
exiting the property.
      (4)   For residential subdivisions, the ground sign shall have a maximum
of two sign faces per entrance and be either a double-faced ground sign or two
single-sided sign faces attached to walls or entry features located one on each
side of the street entrance.
      (5)   On corner lots, no sign shall be allowed on a lot within a triangle
formed between points on the front and side street right-of-way lined within 15
feet from their intersection.
      (6)   All ground signs throughout the entire city shall have a masonry
base. The masonry base shall be wider than the main body of the sign and be 12"
- 24" above finished grade. The masonry base will not be included in the
overall height of the sign. The height of the sign will be based on the zoning
district regulations for that lot and be measured from the top of the masonry
base.
      (7)   The landscaping requirement shall be 50% of the vegetation to be
perennial.
   (C)   Regulations for Temporary Signs.
      (1)   Temporary signs for residential uses permitted in Table 1328.14(1)
may be erected for an unspecified time.
      (2)   Notwithstanding division (A) hereof, vacant parcels in residential
districts shall be permitted one temporary sign that may be erected for an
unspecified time. The permitted sign area shall be 20 square feet.
      (3)   Temporary signs that are erected in order to announce or advertise
a specific event shall be removed within two days after the close of such
event.
   (D)   Illuminated Signs in Residential Districts.  Signs shall be permitted
to be illuminated provided such illumination complies with §
1328.16.
(Ord. 107-05, passed 8-22-2005; Ord. 15-15, passed 6-15-2015; Ord. 48-2019,
passed 12-16-2019)
§ 1328.15  PROHIBITED SIGNS IN ALL ZONING DISTRICTS.
   (A)   All signs not expressly permitted in this chapter shall be prohibited
in the city. Such signs include, but are not limited to the following:
      (1)   Roof signs;
      (2)   Billboards;
      (3)   Banner signs;
      (4)   Continuous motion electronic reader boards;
      (5)   No mobile signs shall be erected, constructed, displayed or
maintained except those on licensed commercial, delivery and service vehicles.
Such vehicles shall not be parked in any district closer to the street than the
front line of the principal building, unless the principal building has a rear
parking area; in which case, all such vehicles shall not be parked closer to
the street than the rear line of said building;
      (6)   Temporary directional sign, other than municipal or emergency
signs;
      (7)   Signs on ROW and public lands, including any curb, sidewalk, post,
pole, hydrant, bridge, wall, tree or other surface located on public property;
      (8)   Flashing, moving, inflatable, blinker, racer type, intermittent,
rotating, moving or revolving signs, whirligig devices, inflatable signs and
tethered balloons, pennants, ribbons, streamers, spinners, exposed light bulbs,
wave flags and string of lights not permanently mounted to a rigid background,
and other similar types of attention-getting devices;
      (9)   Signs erected or attached to accessory structures;
      (10)   Portable signs;
      (11)   No sign shall contain words, statements or graphic descriptions of
an obscene or indecent nature;
      (12)   Off-premises signs;
      (13)   No sign shall be of a shape or color that may be confused with
traffic control signs or devices, railroad sign or signal;
      (14)   Pole signs;
      (15)   Bracket signs; and
      (16)   Pylon signs.
      (17)   Electronically controlled changeable copy signs in windows or on
walls/exterior of building.
      (18)   Door Signs - except for hours of operation, ingress and egress
indicators and other safety information that may be required by other
regulatory provisions.
      (19)   Bluetooth advertising signs/blue casting signs are prohibited.
      (20)   Continuous Motion Video Displays, Digital Dynamic Signs or Signs
that display continuous motion videos, messages, or images.
   (B)   Unless specified elsewhere in this Zoning Code, the following
prohibitions exist on the location of permitted signs.
      (1)   No signs shall be located nearer than eight feet vertically, or
four feet horizontally from any overhead electric wires or conductors or public
utility guy wires.
      (2)   No sign shall be located in such a manner as to hinder or prevent
free ingress and egress from any door, window or fire escape.
      (3)   No sign shall be attached in any form, shape or manner which will
interfere with any opening required for ventilation.
      (4)   No sign shall be located at or near an intersection of two or more
streets in such a manner as to hinder or obstruct free and clear vision as
determined by the Building Official.
      (5)   Other than traffic control signs, no sign shall be attached to or
supported by a tree, bus shelter, utility pole, bench, trash receptacle or
newspaper vending machine or any surface or place on the public right-of-way.
   (6)   Temporary window signs to advertise a product, sale or promotion shall
not exceed 20% per window pane.
(Ord. 107-05, passed 8-22-2005; Ord. 15-15, passed 6-15-2015; Ord. 48-2019,
passed 12-16-2019)
§ 1328.16  ILLUMINATION, CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE STANDARDS.
   In addition to ensuring compliance with the numerical standards of these
regulations, the Building Department shall consider the proposed sign according
to the following standards.
   (A)   Illumination. Signs shall be permitted to be illuminated in compliance
with the following.
      (1)   All signs that are permitted to be illuminated as enumerated in §§
1328.09,
1328.10,
1328.11,
1328.13 and
1328.15 may be externally illuminated, except as otherwise mentioned in this
section and the external illumination shall comply with the following:
         (a)   Only direct lighting from an external source shall be used to
illuminate the sign;
         (b)   The source of light shall not be visible from the street or
adjacent property; and
         (c)   Light shall not be from a colored light source.
      (2)   Illuminated as enumerated in §§
1328.09,
1328.10,
1328.11,
1328.13 and
1328.15 above may be internally illuminated, except as otherwise mentioned in
this section.  Internal illumination may be permitted where no potential safety
hazard to motorist or pedestrians is created.
      (3)   Signs shall not include animated, flashing, moving or intermittent
illumination.
      (4)   No temporary sign shall be illuminated or have the potential to be
illuminated except upon approval from the Building Commissioner.
      (5)   Signs visible from the sight lines along a street shall not contain
an arrow or words such as “stop”, “go”, “slow” and the like, and the movement,
content, coloring or manner of illumination shall not resemble traffic control
signs or signals.
   (B)   Construction Standards.
      (1)   The construction, erection, safety and maintenance of signs shall
comply with the Ohio Building Code.
      (2)   Signs shall be structurally sound and located so as to pose no
threat to pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
      (3)   Signs shall be fabricated on and of materials of good quality,
rigid material, good weathering and durability.
      (4)   No sign shall be erected so as to project over and obstruct any
window, door, fire escape, balcony, platform, stairway, ladder, vent or other
means of ingress of any building.
      (5)   No sign shall be attached to a utility pole, tree, trash
receptacle, bench or other structure not intended or approved as a sign
support.
      (6)   Temporary signs shall be durable, rigid, weather-resistant and
fastened or anchored sufficiently, whether attached to a window or positioned
in the ground and shall not exceed 20% per window pane.
      (7)   No temporary sign shall have moveable lettering or lettering
capable of being moved or replaced.
      (8)   No sign regulated by any of the provisions of this chapter shall be
erected in the right-of-way or at the intersection of any streets in such a
manner as to obstruct free and clear vision; or at any location where, by
reason of the position, shape, or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the
view of or be confused with, any authorized traffic sign, signal or device as
defined in the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices; or which makes use of
the words “STOP”, “LOOK”, “DANGER” or any other word, phrase, symbol or
character in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse traffic.
   (C)   Maintenance and Removal of Signs. All signs shall be maintained in
accordance with the following.
      (1)   The property owner, occupant or other person responsible for the
sign shall maintain the sign in a condition fit for the intended use and he or
she shall have a continuing obligation to comply with all building code
requirements.
      (2)   If the Building Commissioner finds that any sign is unsafe,
insecure or a menace to the public, or constructed, erected or maintained in
violation of the provisions of this Code, notice shall be given in writing by
the Building Commissioner to the owner. The owner of the business shall, within
72 hours of such notification, correct such unsafe condition or remove the
sign. If the correction has not been made within the 72 hours, the sign may be
removed or altered by the city to comply with these regulations. The Building
Commissioner may cause any sign, which in the city’s opinion crates a danger to
persons or property to be removed immediately and without notice.
      (3)   Whenever any sign, either conforming or nonconforming to these
regulations, is required to be removed for the purpose of repair, refurbishing,
or repainting, the same may be done without a permit or any payment of fees
provided that all of the following conditions are met:
         (a)   There shall be no alteration or remodeling to the sign face,
lettering (except as otherwise permitted for changeable copy), sign base, sign
support(s) or the mounting of the sign itself;
         (b)   There shall be no enlargement or increase in any of the
dimensions of the sign or its structure; and
         (c)   The sign shall be accessory to a legally permitted, conditional
or nonconforming use.
      (4)   The Building Commissioner may order any sign to be painted or
refurbished whenever there is a need to keep the sign in a neat and safe
condition. All supports, guys, braces and anchors for such signs shall be
maintained in a safe condition, and it shall be unlawful for the owners or
person having charge of such sign not to remove the same after receiving notice
from the Building Commissioner.
      (5)   Any permanent sign which advertises a business no longer conducted
on the premises or fails to serve the purposes for which it was intended, or
evidences a lack of maintenance, shall be removed by the owner, agent or person
having the beneficial use of the building, structure or land upon which such
sign is located, within 14 days after written notice by the Building
Commissioner. Upon failure to comply with such notice within the time specified
in such order, the Building Commissioner is hereby authorized to cause removal
of such sign, and any expense incident thereto shall be paid by the owner of
the property on which such sign is located.
      (6)   Any temporary sign found in violation of any part of this chapter
shall be removed immediately by the Building Department.
      (7)   The city may remove and dispose of, or destroy, without notice, any
sign that has been unlawfully erected or placed on city property or in a right-
of-way.
   (D)   Regulations for Nonconforming Signs.
      (1)   Maintenance of Nonconforming Signs. Nonconforming signs shall be
maintained in good condition pursuant to this chapter and may continue until
such sign is required to be removed as set forth in this section.
      (2)   Alteration, Relocation or Replacement of Nonconforming Signs. A
nonconforming sign shall not be structurally altered, relocated or replaced
unless it is brought into compliance with the provisions of this section,
except as otherwise permitted in this section.
      (3)   Reconstruction of Damaged Sign. If a sign face and/or its support
are damaged to the extent where the repair cost exceeds 50% of the replacement
cost of the sign, the sign shall be removed or brought into compliance with
this section. If the repair costs do not exceed 50% of the replacement cost of
the sign, the sign may be repaired, subject to approval of consistency in
design by the Planning Commission and provided repair work is completed within
30 days after the date of approval from the Planning Commission.
      (4)   Termination. A legal nonconforming sign shall immediately lose its
legal nonconforming status, and therefore shall be brought into conformance
with this section or removed, when any of the following occur:
         (a)   The size or shape of the sign is changed;
         (b)   The sign face (except otherwise permitted for changeable copy)
or sign structure is altered;
         (c)   The building is renovated or remodeled to the extent that more
than 50% of the gross floor area is removed or replaced, or otherwise affected
by renovation or remodeling; or
         (d)   There is a change in occupancy.
(Ord. 107-05, passed 8-22-2005; Ord. 137-12, passed 9-17-2012; Ord. 15-15,
passed 6-15-2015; Ord. 48-2019, passed 12-16-2019)
§ 1328.17  ELECTRONICALLY CONTROLLED SIGNS (C-1, C-2, C-3, C-4, E-1, E2, D-1,
SPD A AND B).
   (A)   All electronically controlled changeable copy signs shall adhere to
the illumination restrictions set forth in §
1328.16 as well as all other standards set forth in this chapter.
   (B)   All electronically controlled changeable copy signs must show the
entire message at one time without displaying characters that are scrolling,
moving or exhibit the illusion of movement.
   (C)   Every electronically controlled changeable copy sign shall have each
message appear for no less than ten seconds.
   (D)   The height of each character on an electronically controlled
changeable copy sign shall not exceed 18 inches.
   (E)   Signs shall not include animated, flashing or scrolling information.
   (F)   Minimum lot frontage for placement of any electronic sign is 250 feet
and shall not be placed closer than within a 250' radius of another existing or
previously approved sign.
   (G)   Electronic signs adjacent to residential districts shall be off during
the hours of 10:00 p.m. to 6:00 a.m.
   (H)   All ground signs throughout the entire city shall have a masonry base.
The masonry base shall be wider than the main body of the sign and be 12" - 24"
above finished grade. The masonry base will not be included in the overall
height of the sign. The heigh of the sign will be based on the zoning district
regulations for that lot and be measured from the top of the masonry base.
   (I)   Electronic signs shall be equipped with automatic dimming technology
which automatically adjusts the signs brightness in direct correlation with
naturally ambient light conditions at all times.
   (J)   No electronic sign shall be manufactured or installed to create
situations of excessive brightness; determined as any emittance of light
greater than ten foot candles measured with a foot candle light meter or
photometric calculation at three feet perpendicular to any sign face or which
emits light at a boundary line with a residential property of .5 lumens.
(Ord. 15-15, passed 6-15-2015; Ord. 48-2019, passed 12-16-2019)
§ 1328.18  SIGN APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall erect, locate, move, alter or replace any sign or
cause a sign to be located or maintained, unless all the provisions of this
chapter are met.
   (B)   To ensure compliance with these regulations, a certificate shall be
obtained for all signs unless specifically exempted in this chapter.
   (C)   Applications to erect, place, paint, relocate or alter a sign shall be
made to the Building Commissioner or his or her designee by the owner, lessee
or developer of the property of his or her authorized representative. The
application shall be submitted on forms furnished by the city and may be made
either separately or with the application for a permit for a building. The fee
shall be $100.
      (1)   Application Required. An application shall be required for all
permanent signs.
      (2)   Application Not Required. An application is not required for any
temporary signs or any permanent sign under three square feet.
      (3)   Application Requirements. Each application shall present the
information required below through the use of photographs and drawings at a
scale that clearly shows the details and design of the sign.
         (a)   The designs and colored layout of each sign proposed, including
the total area of all sign and the area, height, character, materials, colors
and type of lettering or other symbols of individual signs. Material samples
may be requested.
         (b)   Photographs or drawings of the building for which the signs are
proposed.
         (c)   A dimensional site plan and building elevation showing the exact
locations of each sign in relation to the building and property lines. Also
included shall be the dimensions of the width of the building or building unit
face or faces.
         (d)   Details and specifications for construction, erection and
attachment as may be required by the Ohio Building Code, including the name of
the sign contractor or company.
         (e)   The Building Commissioner shall examine such plans and if it
appears that the proposed sign is in compliance with this chapter and all other
ordinances of the city, the application shall be referred to the Planning
Commission when its approval must be obtained before the certificate is issued.
         (f)   A written confirmation from the owner/property management
company that the proposed sign submitted is approved.
      (4)   Sign Application Review.
         (a)   The Planning Commission shall review and act on applications for
permanent signs that exceed three square feet, according to the standards set
forth in this chapter and the procedures set forth in all other ordinances of
the city. The Planning Commission shall have the authority to grant any
application which deviates from this chapter but is determined to be
reasonable, considering the intent and regulations of this chapter. When
approved by the Planning Commission, the application shall be returned to the
Building Commissioner, who shall issue the appropriate certificate. The
decision of the Planning Commission shall be final. Any appeals shall be filed
in the Cuyahoga County Common Pleas Court within 30 days after the decision of
the Council.
         (b)   The Building Commissioner shall review all temporary signs,
except as otherwise specifically exempted in this chapter.
(Ord. 107-05, passed 8-22-2005; Ord. 114-09, passed 10-5-2009; Ord. 137-12,
passed 9-17-2012; Ord. 15-15, passed 6-15-2015)
§ 1328.19  SIGN INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Rough electrical;
   (B)   Final electrical; and
   (C)   Final general inspection within 60 days of permit issuance.
(Ord. 114-09, passed 10-5-2009; Ord. 15-15, passed 6-15-2015)
§ 1328.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1440.99 for general Building and Housing Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.
CHAPTER 1330:  STREET LIGHTING
Section
1330.01   Preparation of plans and specifications
1330.02   Preparation of legislation
Cross references:
   Electricity, see
Chapter 1046
   Street improvements, see
Chapter 1020; §
1248.07
   Street lighting in subdivisions, see
Chapter 1252
Editor’s note:
   This Chapter 1330 was formerly Chapter 1481 of the Building and Housing
Code, which was recodified by Ordinance 62-07, passed June 4, 2007.
Statutory reference:
   Authority to assess benefitted property owners for cost of providing
electricity, see Ohio R.C. Chapter 727
§ 1330.01  PREPARATION OF PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   The City Engineer is hereby authorized to prepare and place on file in the
office of the Clerk of Council plans, profiles, specifications and estimates of
the cost of lighting certain public streets, roads and places in the city upon
which light poles, wiring and other lighting hardware and the maintenance
thereof are to be provided by the owners of benefitted property or by an
electric lighting company.
(Ord. 88-45, passed 4-11-1988)
§ 1330.02  PREPARATION OF LEGISLATION.
   The Director of Law, with the assistance of the city’s special counsel, is
hereby authorized and directed to prepare appropriate forms of legislation for
consideration by this Council to initiate the necessary proceedings for
determination of the necessity of the proposed improvement and for the giving
of notice to owners of property to be benefitted by the improvement of such
determination and of the amount of each property owner’s estimated assessment.
(Ord. 88-45, passed 4-11-1988)
CHAPTER 1332:  SWIMMING AND WADING POOLS
Section
1332.01   Swimming and wading pool defined
1332.02   Private pool and public pool defined
1332.03   Permit required; fee
1332.04   Location
1332.05   Fences and gates
1332.06   Construction, operation and maintenance of public pools
1332.07   License required for public pools; fee
1332.08   Design and construction requirements
1332.09   Safety of bathers
1332.10   Chlorination
1332.11   Quality of water
1332.12   Operation personnel
1332.13   Lifeguards
1332.14   Shielding lights
1332.15   Unnecessary noise
1332.16   Inspection
1332.17   Revocation of license
1332.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Swimming pool fences, see §
1312.05
   Swimming pool permit fees, see §
1449.08
   Water, see
Chapter 1040
   Wiring of swimming pools, see §
1332.08
Editor’s note:
   This Chapter 1332 was formerly Chapter 1482 of the Building and Housing
Code, which was recodified by Ordinance 62-07, passed June 4, 2007.
Statutory reference:
   Construction and maintenance of public pools, see Ohio R.C. 717.01(Z)
   Power to maintain public pools, see Ohio R.C. 755.12
§ 1332.01  SWIMMING AND WADING POOL DEFINED.
   Any outdoor structure, chamber or tank containing a body of water for
swimming, diving or recreation bathing over 18 inches in depth, including pools
constructed upon the premises which are intended to be permanent and pools
which by their nature are portable and can be moved from place to place.
(Ord. 17-60, passed 2-22-1960; Ord. 108-07, passed 8-20-2007)
§ 1332.02  PRIVATE POOL AND PUBLIC POOL DEFINED.
   For the purposes of this chapter, a private pool is one constructed or
located upon premises and used only by the owner thereof, his or her family,
neighbors and guests and for which no fee or remuneration is charged for the
use thereof.  A public pool is one used by persons other than the owner thereof
and for which a fee or remuneration is charged by the owner for the use thereof
or which is used by members of a club or association.
(Ord. 17-60, passed 2-22-1960)
§ 1332.03  PERMIT REQUIRED; FEE.
   (A)   No permanent pool, public or private, shall be constructed or any
alteration, addition, remodeling or other improvement made thereto, and no
portable pool, public or private, shall be placed upon any premises or moved
upon any premises, or moved from place to place, without first obtaining a
permit therefor from the Building Commissioner.  To obtain such a permit, the
applicant shall file with the Commissioner an application therefor showing the
location, size, depth, plans and specifications thereof of the pool, the site
development and such other information as may be required by the Commissioner.
   (B)   The fee for such permit shall be as set forth in §
1449.08(U).
(Ord. 17-60, passed 2-22-1960)
§ 1332.04  LOCATION.
   (A)   See §
1268.03 of the Planning and Zoning Code for permitted locations.
   (B)   All overflow or drainage from a pool shall be contained on the
property on which the pool is located.
(Ord. 163-99, passed 9-7-1999; Ord. 101-02, passed 6-17-2002)
§ 1332.05  FENCES AND GATES.
   (A)   Each pool and/or spa shall be completely surrounded by a fence or
barrier not less than 48 inches above grade on the side of the barrier that
faces away from the swimming pool. The maximum vertical clearance between grade
and the bottom of the barrier shall be two inches. Where the top of the pool
structure is above grade, the barrier is permitted to be at ground level or
mounted on top of the pool structure.
   (B)   All gates or doors opening into such enclosure shall be designed to
permit locking and shall be kept locked when the pool is not in actual use or
is left unattended. This provision shall not apply if the entire parcel on
which the pool is located is provided with such a fence and such a gate in
conformity with Chapter 1312 of this Code of Ordinances, regulating fences, nor
shall it apply to a pool entirely above the ground if the sides of the pool are
at least 48 inches above finished ground level.
   (C)   No swimming pool or spa cover in any form or type of construction
shall be considered a qualifying barrier or substitute for a fence barrier.
(Ord. 46-93, passed 4-19-1993; Ord. 108-07, passed 8-20-2007; Ord. 38-2019,
passed 10-21-2019)
§ 1332.06  CONSTRUCTION, OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC POOLS.
   No person shall construct, operate or maintain a public pool unless he or
she complies with the provisions of §§
1332.02 through
1332.04 and the following sections.
(Ord. 17-60, passed 2-22-1960)
§ 1332.07  LICENSE REQUIRED FOR PUBLIC POOLS; FEE.
   No person shall construct, operate or maintain a public pool unless he or
she has been duly licensed by the Building Commissioner. Such license shall be
effective for one year beginning April 1, and the fee therefor shall be $100.
Application for such license shall be made in writing by the operator of such
pool setting forth the location of the pool, its size, depth, the nature and
type of its safety precautions to bathers, the nature and type of means of
purifying the water, the nature and type of illumination, the number of
personnel to be employed, the number of bathers expected to use the pool, the
nature and type of shower, lavatory and toilets for bathers and their location,
and such other information requested by the Commissioner. If, upon inspection,
the Commissioner is satisfied that the pool, equipment and personnel comply
with this chapter, he or she shall issue such license.
(Ord. 17-60, passed 2-22-1960)
§ 1332.08  DESIGN AND CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
   The Building Commissioner shall not issue a permit to construct or approve
the construction of any public swimming pool or any alteration, addition,
remodeling or other improvement thereto unless the following design and
construction requirements are observed. Public swimming pools shall be
constructed and maintained in conformity with the following requirements, and
for a pool already in existence the Commissioner shall furnish the owners with
a program of improvements and additions which shall be carried out over a
period not to exceed five years in order to comply with the requirements of
this chapter for new pools:
   (A)   Material. The water-containing surface of artificial swimming pools
shall be light in color, impervious and provide a tight tank with smooth and
easily cleaned surfaces. If the water-containing surface is not artificial but
consists of earth, then such earth shall be covered with washed sand to a depth
of two inches in all places where the water is less than six feet in depth.
   (B)   Drinking Water. Lavatory and drinking water supplies shall be adequate
in quality and quantity.
   (C)   Walks. Each public swimming pool shall be provided with a paved walk
at least six feet in width so as to completely surround the pool, such walk to
drain away from the pool. Such walk shall not be required where earth is used
as the water-containing surface, if the ground surrounding the pool and
extending 12 feet from the water’s edge is covered with washed sand to a depth
of two inches.
   (D)   Lighting. Lighting for public swimming pools shall be adequate for the
protection of the public as may be determined by the Building Commissioner. All
wiring and lighting shall be in accordance with the latest National Electrical
Code and all fixtures and equipment shall be “UL” approved.
   (E)   Hose. Hose connections and hose must be of ample size and pressure to
clean all of the pool area.
   (F)   Towers and Steps. Steps and ladders must be made of an impervious,
corrosion-resistant material, with a uniform rise not to exceed 12 inches. The
decks of diving towers which are over one meter high shall be protected with
suitable railings to prevent falling.
   (G)   Bathhouse and Toilet Facilities. Every public swimming pool shall be
provided with conveniently located dressing, shower, locker and toilet rooms,
and if such pool is intended for simultaneous use by both sexes, separate
facilities shall be provided for each sex. For the purpose of this section, it
may be assumed that the users shall consist of an equal number of males and
females. Sanitary fixtures, based upon the maximum expected users, shall be
provided as follows:
      (1)   One shower for each 40 bathers;
      (2)   One lavatory for each 60 bathers;
      (3)   One toilet for each 40 women;
      (4)   One toilet for each 60 men; and
      (5)   One urinal for each 60 men.
(Ord. 17-60, passed 2-22-1960)
§ 1332.09  SAFETY OF BATHERS.
   All reasonable precautions shall be taken to protect the users of public and
family swimming pools from injury or accident. Convenient means of ingress and
egress shall be provided and the depth of water and any irregularities of the
bottom shall be clearly indicated. Safety appliances, such as lifebuoys, life
hooks, bamboo poles, ropes and equipment, including first-aid kits, shall be
provided and be readily accessible.
(Ord. 17-60, passed 2-22-1960)
§ 1332.10  CHLORINATION.
   Chlorination plants shall be operated in such a manner that the amount or
excess of residual chlorine in all parts of the pool at all times, when the
pool is in use, shall not be less than four-tenths of a part per million (0.4
p.p.m.), or more than one part per million (1.00 p.p.m.). The chlorinator and
tanks shall be installed in a special closet with a vent to the exterior of the
building and with a fan, unless the latter is considered unnecessary by the
Building Commissioner.
(Ord. 17-60, passed 2-22-1960)
§ 1332.11  QUALITY OF WATER.
   The bacterial quality of water in the pool shall be maintained so that no
two successive samples, nor more than 15% of any number of successive samples,
shall contain more than 200 bacteria per cubic centimeter or show positive
confirmed results for coli aerogenes.
(Ord. 17-60, passed 2-22-1960)
§ 1332.12  OPERATION PERSONNEL.
   Each public swimming pool shall be operated under the close supervision of a
well-trained and responsible operator or operators, capable of making field
tests such as residual chlorine or other bactericide tests, and thoroughly
familiar with the operation of all mechanical appurtenances of the pool. Any
such operator shall, upon request, demonstrate to the satisfaction of the
Building Commissioner his or her ability to perform his or her required duties.
(Ord. 17-60, passed 2-22-1960)
§ 1332.13  LIFEGUARDS.
   A sufficient number of attendants shall be on duty when the swimming pool is
in use, which attendants shall be capable swimmers, competent in life-saving
methods and resuscitation.
(Ord. 17-60, passed 2-22-1960)
§ 1332.14  SHIELDING LIGHTS.
   Lights used to illuminate any pool shall be so arranged and shaded as to
reflect light away from adjoining premises and public streets.
(Ord. 17-60, passed 2-22-1960)
§ 1332.15  UNNECESSARY NOISE.
   In the operation of a pool, no person shall use or permit the use or
operation of any radio, receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other
machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such a manner as
to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants, or at
any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing of the
person or persons who are in the pool premises.
(Ord. 17-60, passed 2-22-1960)
§ 1332.16  INSPECTION.
   The Building Commissioner shall inspect or cause to be inspected all pools
within the city at such times as he or she may deem necessary to carry out the
intent of this chapter. The Commissioner, or his or her duly authorized
representative, is hereby authorized to enter upon any premises, private or
public, to take such samples of water from such pools at such times as he or
she may deem necessary and to require the owner, proprietor or operator to
comply with the provisions of this chapter. In the event of the failure of
compliance, after due notice, with any provision of this chapter, the
Commissioner shall have the power to abate or cause a suspension of the use of
such pool until such time as the same is, in his or her opinion, no longer a
menace or a hazard to health, safety or morals.
(Ord. 17-60, passed 2-22-1960)
§ 1332.17  REVOCATION OF LICENSE.
   Any license granted by the Building Commissioner hereunder may be revoked by
him or her for failure to comply with rules and regulations promulgated
hereunder or with any provision of this chapter or whenever, in his or her
determination, further operation under such license creates a menace to health,
safety  or morals of the users of the swimming pool, provided that the holder
of such license which has been revoked may appeal from such revocation, in
writing, within 30 days of such revocation, to the Board of Zoning Appeals. The
Board shall determine the legality or reasonableness of the revocation of the
license. No appeal under this section, however, shall entitle the license
holder to continue operation of the swimming pool pending action of the Board.
(Ord. 17-60, passed 2-22-1960)
§ 1332.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1440.99 for general Building and Housing Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.
CHAPTER 1334:  STORM WATER POLLUTION PREVENTION PLAN
Section
Plan Generally
1334.01   Comprehensive Storm Water Management Plan
Control of Riparian Setbacks and Wetlands Setbacks
1334.05   Purpose
1334.06   Disclaimer of liability
1334.07   Conflicts, severability, nuisances and responsibilities
1334.08   Effective date
1334.09   Scope
1334.10   Consultations
1334.11   Riparian and wetland setback requirements
1334.12   Establishment of designated watercourses and riparian setbacks
1334.13   Establishment of wetland setbacks
1334.14   Procedure for wetland setbacks
1334.15   Uses permitted
1334.16   Uses prohibited
1334.17   Nonconforming structures or uses
1334.18   Variances
1334.19   Boundary interpretation and appeals procedure
1334.20   Inspection
1334.21   Violations
1334.22   Penalties
1334.23   Definitions
Control of Construction Site Soil Erosion, Sediment, and Other Wastes and Storm
Water Runoff
1334.30   Purpose
1334.31   Disclaimer of liability
1334.32   Conflicts, severability, nuisances and responsibility
1334.33   Effective date
1334.34   Scope
1334.35   Consultations
1334.36   Reserved
1334.37   Construction site conservation plan
1334.38   Easements
1334.39   Maintenance
1334.40   Minimum standards
1334.41   Stream channel and floodplain erosion design criteria
1334.42   Compliance with other rules and regulations
1334.43   Violations
1334.44   Penalties
1334.45   Construction and maintenance guarantee
1334.46   Application procedures for Construction Conservation Plans (CCP)
1334.47   Definitions
Cross references:
   Storm Water Management, see
Chapter 1041
   Storm Water Management Board, see
Chapter 275
Editor’s note:
   This Chapter 1334 was formerly Chapter 1483 of the Building and Housing
Code, which was recodified by Ordinance 62-07, passed June 4, 2007.
PLAN GENERALLY
§ 1334.01  COMPREHENSIVE STORM WATER MANAGEMENT PLAN.
   The Riparian Setbacks and Wetlands Setbacks Control Plan will be combined
with any Post-Construction Water Quality Plans and any Soil Erosion, Sediment
and Other Wastes Control Plans that are developed for the same site. These
plans will be titled and numbered in one consecutive sequence. All of the plans
together are the Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWP3).  The
Comprehensive Storm Water Management Plan so developed will serve as the Storm
Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWP3) required by Ohio EPA as part of the
NPDES storm water permit for general construction.
(Ord. 61-04, passed 4-9-2004; Ord. 109-04, passed 9-20-2004)
CONTROL OF RIPARIAN SETBACKS AND WETLANDS SETBACKS
§ 1334.05  PURPOSE.
   The intent of this subchapter is to:
   (A)   Protect the receiving stream’s physical, chemical and biological
characteristics and to maintain stream functions, post-construction storm water
practices shall provide perpetual management of runoff quality and quantity;
   (B)   Establish consistent, technically feasible and operationally practical
standards to achieve a level of storm water quantity and quality control that
will minimize damage to public and private property and degradation of water
resources, and will promote and maintain the health, safety and welfare of the
residents of the city;
   (C)   Preserve to the maximum extent practicable the natural drainage
characteristics of the city and building sites and minimize the need to
construct, repair and replace enclosed storm drain systems;
   (D)   Preserve to the maximum extent practicable natural infiltration and
ground water recharge, and maintain subsurface flow that replenishes water
resources, wetlands and wells;
   (E)   Prevent unnecessary stripping of vegetation and loss of soil,
especially adjacent to water resources and wetlands;
   (F)   Reduce the need for costly maintenance and repairs to roads,
embankments, sewage systems, ditches, water resources, wetlands and storm water
management practices that are the result of inadequate storm water control due
to the loss of riparian areas and wetlands; and
   (G)   Reduce the long-term expense of remedial projects needed to address
problems caused by inadequate storm water control.
(Ord. 61-04, passed 4-9-2004; Ord. 16-16, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1334.06  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   Neither submission of a plan under the provisions herein, nor compliance
with the provisions of these regulations, shall relieve any person or entity
from responsibility for damage to any person or property that is otherwise
imposed by law.
(Ord. 61-04, passed 4-9-2004)
§ 1334.07  CONFLICTS, SEVERABILITY, NUISANCES AND RESPONSIBILITIES.
   (A)   Where this subchapter imposes a greater restriction upon land than is
imposed or required by other city provisions of law, ordinance, contract or
deed, the provisions of this subchapter shall prevail.
   (B)   If a court of competent jurisdiction declares any clause, section or
provision of these regulations invalid or unconstitutional, the validity of the
remainder shall not be affected thereby.
   (C)   These regulations shall not be construed as authorizing any person to
maintain a private or public nuisance on their property. Compliance with the
provisions of these regulation shall not be a defense in any action to abate
such nuisance.
   (D)   Failure of the city to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly
conditions or to recommend corrective measures shall not relieve the owner from
the responsibility for the condition or damage resulting therefrom, and shall
not result in the city, its officers, employees or agents being responsible for
any condition or damage resulting therefrom.
(Ord. 61-04, passed 4-9-2004; Ord. 16-16, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1334.08  EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter and its regulations shall become effective upon their
passage.
(Ord. 61-04, passed 4-9-2004)
§ 1334.09  SCOPE.
   This subchapter applies to development areas having new or relocated
projects involving highways, underground cables, pipelines, property/parcel
splits, industrial projects, commercial projects, building activities on farms,
redevelopment of urban areas and all other land uses not specifically exempted.
This subchapter does not apply to:
   (A)   Land-disturbing activities related to producing agricultural crops or
silviculture operations regulated by the Ohio Agricultural Sediment Pollution
Abatement Rules, O.A.C. 1501:15-3-01 to 1501:15-3-09, and existing at the time
of passage of this regulations;
   (B)   Strip mining operations regulated by Ohio R.C. Chapter 1513 and
existing at the time of passage of this regulation; and
   (C)   Surface mining operations regulated by Ohio R.C. Chapter 1514 and
existing at the time of passage of this regulation.
(Ord. 61-04, passed 4-9-2004)
§ 1334.10  CONSULTATIONS.
   In implementing these regulations, the City Engineer or other city officials
may consult with the local County Soil and Water Conservation District (SWCD),
state and federal agencies and other technical experts as necessary. Any costs
associated with such consultations may be assessed to the applicant or his or
her designated representative.
(Ord. 61-04, passed 4-9-2004; Ord. 16-16, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1334.11  RIPARIAN AND WETLAND SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
   (A)   It is hereby determined that the system of wetlands, riparian areas,
rivers, streams and other natural watercourses within the city contributes to
the health, safety and general welfare of the residents. The specific purpose
and intent of this part of these regulations is to regulate uses and
developments within riparian and wetland setbacks that would impair the ability
of riparian and wetland areas to:
      (1)   Reduce flood impacts by absorbing peak flows, slowing the velocity
of floodwaters, and regulating base flow;
      (2)   Assist in stabilizing the banks of watercourses to reduce bank
erosion and the downstream transport of sediments eroded from watercourse
banks;
      (3)   Reduce pollutants in watercourses during periods of high flows by
filtering, settling and transforming pollutants already present in
watercourses;
      (4)   Reduce pollutants in watercourses by filtering, settling,
transforming and absorbing pollutants in runoff before they enter watercourses;
      (5)   Provide watercourse habitats with shade and food;
      (6)   Provide habitat to a wide array of aquatic organisms, wildlife,
many of which are on Ohio’s Endangered and/or Threatened Species listings, by
maintaining diverse and connected riparian and wetland vegetation; or
      (7)   Benefit the city economically by minimizing encroachment on
wetlands and watercourse channels and the need for costly engineering solutions
such as dams, retention basins and rip rap to protect structures and reduce
property damage and threats to the safety of residents; and by contributing to
the scenic beauty and environment of the city, and thereby preserving the
character of the city, the quality of life of the residents of the city and
corresponding property values.
   (B)   The regulations in division (C) of this section have been enacted to
protect these services of riparian and wetland areas by providing reasonable
controls governing structures and uses within a wetland and/or riparian setback
along designated watercourses in the city.
   (C)   (1)   These regulations shall apply to:
         (a)   All lands that are within the jurisdiction of the city and that
border designated watercourses and wetlands as defined in these regulations;
         (b)   These regulations shall apply to property/parcel split plan
approvals, site plan approvals and land development plan approvals requested of
the city; and
         (c)   These regulations shall apply to all building permits, which
involve soil-disturbing activities.
      (2)   The city shall issue no approvals or permits without full
compliance with the terms of these regulations.
(Ord. 61-04, passed 4-9-2004; Ord. 16-16, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1334.12  ESTABLISHMENT OF DESIGNATED WATERCOURSES AND RIPARIAN SETBACKS.
   (A)   Designated watercourses shall include those watercourses meeting any
one of the following criteria:
      (1)   All watercourses draining an area greater than one-half square
mile; or
      (2)   All watercourses draining an area less than one-half square mile
and having a defined bed and bank.
      (3)   In determining if watercourses have a defined bed and bank, the
city may consult with a representative of the local county SWCD or other
technical experts as necessary.
   (B)   Riparian setbacks on designated watercourses are established as
follows:
      (1)   A minimum of 300 feet on both sides of all watercourses draining an
area greater than 300 square miles;
      (2)   A minimum of 120 feet on both sides of all watercourses draining an
area greater than 20 square miles and up to and including 300 square miles;
      (3)   A minimum of 75 feet on both sides of all watercourses draining an
area greater than one-half square mile and up to and including 20 square miles;
and
      (4)   A minimum of 50 feet on both sides of all watercourses draining an
area less than one-half square mile and having a defined bed and bank as
determined above.
   (C)   Riparian Setback Map.
      (1)   The city shall use the latest edition of the official soil survey
that shows drainage features, on the paper maps in the back of the book, as the
map identifying designated watercourses and their riparian setbacks. The
drainage features identified on the paper maps in the official soil survey and
the information contained therein shall be believed to be accurate.
      (2)   At the time of application of this regulation, if any discrepancy
is found between the Riparian Setback Map and the criteria for designated
watercourses or riparian setbacks as set forth in these regulations, the
criteria shall prevail.
      (3)   In reviewing and interpreting the maps the city may consult with a
representative of the local County SWCD and other technical experts as
necessary.
   (D)   The following conditions shall apply in riparian and wetland setbacks.
      (1)   Riparian and wetland setbacks shall be measured in a perpendicular
and horizontal direction outward from the ordinary high water mark of each
designated watercourse and defined wetland boundary.
      (2)   Except as otherwise provided in this regulation, riparian and
wetland setbacks shall be preserved in their natural state and shall be
established and marked in the field prior to any soil-disturbing or land-
clearing activities.
      (3)   Where the 100-year floodplain is wider than a riparian setback on
either or both sides of a designated watercourse, the riparian setback shall be
extended to the outer edge of the 100-year floodplain. The 100-year floodplain
shall be determined by the project engineer conducting a hydrologic analysis of
the project area in conformance with standard engineering practices and
approved by the City Engineer.
      (4)   Where wetlands are identified within a riparian setback, the
minimum riparian setback width shall be extended to the outer boundary of the
wetland. In addition, wetlands shall be protected to the extent detailed in
these regulations.
      (5)   Wetlands shall be delineated by a site survey approved by the city
using delineation protocols accepted by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and
the Ohio EPA at the time of application of this regulation. If a conflict
exists between the delineation protocols of these two agencies, the delineation
protocol that results in the most inclusive area of wetland shall apply.
   (E)   The applicant or his or her designated representative shall be
responsible for delineating riparian and wetland setbacks, including any
expansions or modifications as required by these regulations, and identifying
these setbacks on all property/parcel splits, commercial development or other
land development plans, and/or building permit applications submitted to the
city. This delineation may be done by a metes and bounds, or higher level,
survey and shall be subject to review and approval by the city. As a result of
this review, the city may consult with a representative of the local County
SWCD or other technical experts as necessary.
   (F)   Prior to any soil-disturbing activity, riparian and wetland setbacks
shall be clearly delineated on site by the applicant or his or her designated
representative, and such delineation shall be maintained throughout soil-
disturbing activities.
   (G)   No approvals or permits shall be issued by the city prior to on-site
delineation of riparian and wetland setbacks in conformance with these
regulations.
   (H)   Upon completion of an approved property/parcel split, land development
or other improvement, riparian and wetland setbacks shall be permanently
recorded on the plat records of the city.
(Ord. 61-04, passed 4-9-2004; Ord. 16-16, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1334.13  ESTABLISHMENT OF WETLAND SETBACKS.
   Wetland setbacks are established as follows:
   (A)   A minimum of 120 feet surrounding and including all Ohio EPA Category
3 Wetlands, or current equivalent Ohio EPA classification; and
   (B)   A minimum of 75 feet surrounding and including all Ohio EPA Category 2
Wetlands, or current equivalent Ohio EPA classification.
(Ord. 61-04, passed 4-9-2004)
§ 1334.14  PROCEDURE FOR WETLAND SETBACKS.
   (A)   No Change to Parcel Boundaries or Land Use.
      (1)   Upon filing a request for a building permit that does not involve
changing of any parcel boundaries or changes in land use, the applicant will
check for indicators of wetlands on the National Wetlands Inventory maps and
Ohio Wetlands Inventory map and the Cuyahoga County Wetlands Inventory in the
Cuyahoga River Watershed map (if applicable). A photocopy of the applicable
section of each map will be attached to the permit application.
      (2)   If a potential wetland is shown on any of the maps or if there is
reason for the city to believe that an unmapped wetland exists on or within 120
feet of the project site, the applicant will retain a qualified wetland
professional to evaluate the proposed project site for wetlands or wetland
buffer areas. If no wetland or wetland buffer areas are found, the applicant
shall submit a letter from the qualified wetland professional with the
preliminary plat or permit application verifying their negative findings.
   (B)   New Residential or Commercial or Other Type Development and Projects
Involving a Change to Parcel Boundaries or a Land Use Change. Upon filing a
request for approval of a preliminary plat or building permit for new
residential, commercial or other type of development that involves changes in
any parcel boundaries or changes in land use, the applicant or his or her
designated representative shall retain a qualified wetland professional to
survey the proposed development site for wetlands. If no wetlands are found,
the applicant or his or her designated representative shall submit a letter
with the preliminary plat or permit application verifying that a qualified
wetland professional has surveyed the site and found no wetlands. If wetlands
are found, the following procedures shall be followed.
      (1)   A qualified wetland professional, acceptable to the City Engineer,
shall determine the presence of Ohio EPA Category 2 or 3 Wetlands (or current
equivalent Ohio EPA classification) on the proposed development site using the
latest version of the Ohio Rapid Assessment Method for wetland evaluation
approved at the time of application of this regulation. Acceptance of this
determination shall be subject to approval by the City Engineer.
      (2)   If Ohio EPA Category 2 or 3 Wetlands (or current equivalent Ohio
EPA classification) are located on the proposed development site, the applicant
or his or her designated representative shall delineate these wetlands and the
wetland setback in conformance with these regulations. The applicant or their
designated representative shall identify all delineated wetlands and his or her
associated setbacks on all property/parcel split plans, land development plans
and/or permit applications submitted to the city.
         (a)   Wetlands shall be delineated by a site survey, approved by the
city, using delineation protocols accepted by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
and the Ohio EPA at the time of application of this regulation. If conflict
exists between the delineation protocols of these two agencies, the delineation
protocol that results in the most inclusive area of wetland shall apply.
         (b)   Wetland setbacks shall be delineated through a metes and bounds,
or higher level, survey subject to approval by the city.
      (3)   Prior to any soil or vegetation-disturbing activity, the applicant
or his or her designated representative shall delineate wetland setbacks on the
development site in such a way that they can be clearly viewed, and such
delineation shall be maintained throughout construction.
      (4)   No approvals or permits shall be issued by the city prior to
delineation of wetland setbacks in conformance with this regulation.
   (C)   Upon completion of an approved property/parcel split, commercial
development or other land development or improvement, riparian and wetland
setbacks shall be permanently recorded on the plat records for the city and
shall be maintained as open space thereafter through a permanent conservation
easement. A third party, not the landowner or permittee or the city, that is
allowed by state law, shall be given the conservation easement. If no third
party will accept the conservation easement, the city shall accept it and
protect it in perpetuity.
(Ord. 61-04, passed 4-9-2004; Ord. 16-16, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1334.15  USES PERMITTED.
   (A)   By-Right Uses Without a Permit.  Open space uses that are passive in
character shall be permitted in riparian and wetland setbacks, including, but
not limited to, those listed in these regulations. No use permitted under these
regulations shall be construed as allowing public trespass on privately held
lands:
      (1)   Recreational Activity.  Passive recreational uses, as permitted by
federal, state and local laws, such as hiking, fishing, hunting, picnicking and
similar uses;
      (2)   Removal of Damaged or Diseased Trees.  Damaged or diseased trees
may be removed;
      (3)   Revegetation and/or Reforestation. Riparian and wetland setbacks
may be revegetated with non- invasive plant species; and
      (4)   Maintenance of Lawns, Gardens and Landscaping. Lawns, gardens and
landscaping, that existed at the time this subchapter was passed, may be
maintained as long as they are not increased in size.
   (B)   By-Right Uses with a Permit.
      (1)   Selective Harvesting of Timber. Selective harvesting of timber may
be allowed upon presentation of a Forest Management and Harvest Plan prepared
by a qualified forester and accepted by the City Engineer.
         (a)   Any landowner harvesting timber for sale shall obtain a permit
in accordance with Chapter 848 of this Code of Ordinances and post a $5,000
performance guarantee as required with the city. This performance guarantee
shall be held until completion of the timber-harvesting operation.
         (b)   Due to the potential for felled logs and branches to damage
downstream properties and/or to block ditches or otherwise exacerbate flooding,
logs or branches resulting from permitted selective harvesting that are greater
than six inches in diameter at the cut end shall be cut into sections no longer
than six feet or removed from the 100-year floodplain. Harvested trees or
felled logs and branches that are part of a designed and approved streambank
stabilization and erosion control measure shall be allowed to remain in a
designated watercourse.
         (c)   The Forest Management and Harvest Plan must:
            1.   Show that the site will be adequately stocked after the
approved selective harvest. “Adequately stocked” shall be defined as the
residual stocking level greater than the B-Level on the Allegheny Hardwood
Stocking Guide produced by the United States Forest Service, or other United
States Forest Service stocking guides as dictated by the forest community to be
harvested;
            2.   Show that trees located less than 25 feet from the ordinary
high water mark will not be impacted by the proposed harvesting;
            3.   Include a map of the site. This map shall specify the location
of any skid and haul roads required for transporting harvested trees and fire
wood from riparian and wetland setbacks;
            4.   Include the method to be used to transport harvested trees
from riparian and wetland setbacks;
            5.   Specify the erosion control best management practices that
will be employed during and after the proposed harvest. These erosion control
practices shall be in conformance with the Ohio Department of Natural
Resources, Division of Forestry’s BMPs for Erosion Control on Logging Jobs in
Ohio; and
            6.   Provide the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the Ohio EPA
Wetland and Stream protection permit numbers and the associated permit
requirements.
      (2)   Streambank Stabilization and Erosion Control Measures. Streambank
stabilization and erosion control measures may be allowed, provided that such
measures are ecologically compatible and substantially utilize natural
materials and native plant species where practical. The streambank
stabilization and erosion control measures shall only be undertaken upon
approval of a Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan by the city.
      (3)   Crossings. Crossings of designated watercourses and through
riparian setbacks by publicly and privately-owned sewer and/or water lines and
public and private utility transmission lines shall only be allowed upon
approval of a Crossing Plan by the City Engineer. Such crossings shall minimize
disturbance in riparian setbacks and shall mitigate any necessary disturbances.
Erosive materials will not be used in making stream crossings.
(Ord. 61-04, passed 4-9-2004; Ord. 16-16, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1334.16  USES PROHIBITED.
   Any use not authorized under these regulations shall be prohibited in
riparian and wetland setbacks. By way of example, the following uses are
specifically prohibited; however, prohibited uses are not limited to those
examples listed here.
   (A)   Construction. There shall be no structures of any kind.
   (B)   Dredging or Dumping.  There shall be no drilling, filling, dredging or
dumping of soil, spoils, liquid or solid materials, except for noncommercial
composting of uncontaminated natural materials, and except as permitted in §
1334.15 .
   (C)   Roads or Driveways.  There shall be no roads or driveways permitted in
riparian and/or wetland setback area, except as permitted in §
1334.15 . There shall be no roads or driveways or roads permitted in wetlands
or watercourses without a permit issued by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
and/or the Ohio EPA.
   (D)   Motorized Vehicles. There shall be no use of motorized vehicles,
except as permitted in §
1334.15 .
   (E)   Disturbance of Natural Vegetation.  There shall be no disturbance,
including mowing, of the natural vegetation, except for such conservation
maintenance that the landowner deems necessary to control noxious weeds; for
such plantings as are consistent with this regulation; for such disturbances as
are approved in §
1334.15; and for the passive enjoyment, access and maintenance of landscaping
or lawns existing at the
time of passage of this regulation. Nothing in this regulation shall be
construed as requiring a landowner to plant or undertake any other activities
in riparian and wetland setbacks.
   (F)   Parking Lots.  There shall be no parking lots or other human-made
impervious cover, except as permitted in §
1334.15 .
   (G)   New Surface and/or Subsurface Sewage Disposal or Treatment Areas. 
Riparian and wetland setbacks shall not be used for the disposal or treatment
of sewage, except in accordance with local County Board of Health regulations
in effect at the time of application of this regulation.
   (H)   Crossings. Crossings of designated riparian and wetland setbacks by
publicly and privately-owned sewer and/or water lines and small public and
small private utility transmission lines without a permit issued by the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers and/or the Ohio EPA.
(Ord. 61-04, passed 4-9-2004)
§ 1334.17  NONCONFORMING STRUCTURES OR USES.
   (A)   A nonconforming use within a riparian and wetland setback which is in
existence at the time of passage of this regulation, and which is not otherwise
permitted under these regulations, may be continued. However, the use shall not
be changed or enlarged unless it is changed to a use permitted under these
regulations.
   (B)   A nonconforming structure within a riparian and wetland setback which
is in existence at the time of passage of this regulation, and which is not
otherwise permitted under these regulations, may be continued. However, the
existing building footprint or roofline may not be expanded or enlarged in such
a way that would move the structure closer to the stream or wetland.
   (C)   A nonconforming structure or use or deteriorated structure within a
riparian and wetland setback which is in existence at the time of passage of
this regulation, and which is discontinued, terminated or abandoned for a
period of six months or more, may not be revived, restored or re-established.
   (D)   A nonconforming structure or use that is discontinued may be resumed
any time within six months from such discontinuance but not thereafter. No
change or resumption shall be permitted that is more detrimental to riparian
and wetland setbacks, as measured against the intent and objectives of these
regulations as determined by the city, than the existing or former
nonconforming structure or use.
(Ord. 61-04, passed 4-9-2004; Ord. 16-16, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1334.18  VARIANCES.
   (A)   The city may grant a variance from this regulation as provided herein.
In determining whether there is unnecessary hardship or practical difficulty
such as to justify the granting of a variance, the city shall consider the
potential harm or reduction in riparian and/or wetland area functions that may
be caused by a proposed structure or use.
   (B)   In making a variance determination, the city shall consider the
following:
      (1)   Varying the front, rear and side yard setback before the riparian
and wetland setbacks are varied; and
      (2)   Variances should not be granted for asphalt or concrete paving in
the riparian and wetland setbacks in any situation where gravel or porous
pavement (i.e., porous pavers and similar products) will do the job.
   (C)   In making a variance determination, the city may consider the
following:
      (1)   A parcel existing at the time of passage of this subchapter is made
unbuildable;
      (2)   The soil type natural vegetation of the parcel, as well as the
percentage of the parcel that is in the 100-year floodplain. The criteria of
the city’s flood damage prevention regulations may be used as guidance when
granting variances in the 100-year floodplain;
      (3)   The extent to which the requested variance impairs the flood
control, soil erosion control, sediment control, water quality protection, or
other functions of the riparian and/or wetland area. This determination shall
be based on sufficient technical and scientific data;
      (4)   The degree of hardship this regulation places on the landowner, and
the availability of alternatives to the proposed activity;
      (5)   Soil-disturbing activities permitted in a riparian and/or wetland
setback through variances should be implemented in order to minimize clearing
to the extent possible, and to include best management practices necessary to
minimize soil erosion and maximize sediment control;
      (6)   The presence of significant impervious cover, or smooth vegetation
such as maintained lawns, in riparian setback areas compromises their benefits
to the city;
      (7)   A reduction in storm water infiltration into the soil in wetland
areas will occur; and
      (8)   A requested above-ground fence does not increase the existing area
of mowed grass or lawn.
(Ord. 61-04, passed 4-9-2004; Ord. 16-16, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1334.19  BOUNDARY INTERPRETATION AND APPEALS PROCEDURE.
   (A)   When an applicant or his or her designated representative disputes the
boundary of a riparian or wetland setback or the ordinary high water mark of a
watercourse, the applicant or his or her designated representative shall submit
documentation to the city which describes the boundary, the applicant’s
proposed boundary, and justification for the proposed boundary change.
   (B)   The city shall evaluate this documentation and shall make a written
determination within a reasonable period of time, not to exceed 60 days, a copy
of which shall be submitted to the applicant. If during this evaluation the
city requires further information, it may be required of the applicant. In the
event that the city requests such additional information, the 60-day limit on
the city’s review shall be postponed until the applicant provides such
information.
   (C)   Any party aggrieved by any wetland or riparian setback determination
under this regulation may appeal to the Storm Water Management Program Task
Force of the city in accordance with its established procedures.
(Ord. 61-04, passed 4-9-2004; Ord. 84-04, passed 6-21-2004; Ord. 91-04, passed
9-7-2004; Ord. 16-16, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1334.20  INSPECTION.
   The delineation of riparian and/or wetland setbacks shall be inspected by
the city, as follows:
   (A)   The inspection shall be done prior to any soil-disturbing activities
authorized by the city for a property/parcel split, land development plan and/
or building permit. The applicant or his or her designated representative shall
provide the city with at least five working days’ notice prior to starting
soil-disturbing or land-clearing activities;
   (B)   Prior to starting any of the activities authorized by the city in §
1334.15, the applicant or his or her designated representative shall provide
the city with at least five working days’ notice prior to starting such
activities; and
   (C)   Any time evidence is brought to the attention of the city that uses or
structures are occurring that may reasonably be expected to violate the
provisions of these regulations.
(Ord. 61-04, passed 4-9-2004; Ord. 16-16, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1334.21  VIOLATIONS.
   No person shall violate, or cause, or knowingly permit to be violated, any
of the provisions of these regulations, or fail to comply with any such
provisions or with any lawful requirements of any public authority made
pursuant to these regulations, or knowingly use or cause or permit the use of
any lands in violation of these regulations or in violation of any permit
granted under these regulations.
(Ord. 61-04, passed 4-9-2004)
§ 1334.22  PENALTIES.
   (A)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any provision of this
regulation is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined no
more than $1,000 or imprisoned for no more than 180 days, or both, for each
offense.
   (B)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.
   (C)   Upon notice from the City Engineer, or designated representative, that
work is being performed contrary to this regulation, such work shall
immediately stop. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the
owner or person responsible for the development area, or person performing the
work, and shall state the conditions under which such work may be resumed;
provided, however, in instances where immediate action is deemed necessary for
public safety or the public interest, the City Engineer may require that work
be stopped upon verbal order pending issuance of the written order.
   (D)   The imposition of any other penalties provided herein shall not
preclude the city, by or through its Law Director and/or any of their
assistants, from instituting an appropriate action or proceeding in a court of
proper jurisdiction to prevent an unlawful development or to restrain, correct
or abate a violation, or to require compliance with the provisions of this
regulation or other applicable laws or ordinances, rules or regulations, or the
orders of the City Engineer.
(Ord. 61-04, passed 4-9-2004; Ord. 16-16, passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1334.23  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   “Approving Authority.”  The official responsible for administering the
applicable program(s).
   “Best management practice (BMP).”  Any practice or combination of practices
that is determined to be the most effective, practicable (including
technological, economic, and institutional considerations) means of preventing
or reducing the amount of pollution generated by non-point sources of pollution
to a level compatible with water quality goals. “BMPs” may include structural
practices, conservation practices and operation and maintenance procedures.
   “Certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC).”  A person
that has subscribed to the code of ethics and has met the requirements
established by the CPESC Council of Certified Professional in Erosion and
Sediment Control, Inc. to be a certified professional in erosion and sediment
control.
   “Channel.”  A natural stream that conveys water, or a ditch or channel
excavated for the natural flow of water.
   “City.”  Throughout these regulations the “city” shall mean the City of
Broadview Heights, State of Ohio, and its designated agents and representative.
   “Concentrated storm water runoff.”  Surface water runoff which converges and
flows primarily through water conveyance features such as swales, gullies,
waterways, channels or storm sewers, and which exceeds the maximum specified
flow rates of filters or perimeter controls intended to control sheet flow.
   “Conservation.”  The wise use and management of natural resources.
   “Damaged or diseased trees.”  Trees that have split trunks; broken tops;
heart rot; insect or fungus problems that will lead to imminent death; undercut
root systems that put the tree in imminent danger of falling; leaning as a
result of root failure that puts the tree in imminent danger of falling, or any
other condition that puts the tree in imminent danger of being uprooted or
falling.
   “Designated watercourse.”  A watercourse that is contained within, flows
through or borders the city and meets the criteria set forth in these
regulations.
   “Deteriorated structure.”  A structure which has sustained substantial
damage from any origin whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its
before-damaged condition would be equal to or greater than 50% of the market
value of the structure before the damage occurred.
   “Development area.”  Any tract, lot or parcel of land, or combination of
tracts, lots or parcels of land, which are in one ownership, or are contiguous
and in diverse ownership, where earth-disturbing activity is to be performed.
   “Ditch.”  An excavation, either dug or natural, for the purpose of drainage
or irrigation, and having intermittent flow.
   “Dumping.”  The grading, pushing, piling, throwing, unloading or placing of
soil or other material.
   “Earth-disturbing activity.”  Any grading, excavating, filling, or other
alteration of the earth’s surface where natural or human-made ground cover is
destroyed.
   “Erosion.”  The process by which the land surface is worn away by the action
of water, wind, ice or gravity.
   “Existing.”  In existence at the time of the passage of this subchapter and
these regulations.
   “Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA).”  The agency with overall
responsibility for administering the National Flood Insurance Program.
   “Grading.”  Earth disturbing activity such as excavation, stripping,
cutting, filling, stockpiling, or any combination thereof.
   “Impervious cover.”  Any surface that cannot effectively absorb or
infiltrate water. This includes roads, streets, parking lots, rooftops and
sidewalks.
   “Intermittent stream.”  A natural channel that may have some water in pools
but where surface flows are non-existent or interstitial (flowing through sand
and gravel in stream beds) for periods of one week or more during typical
summer months.
   “Landslide.”  The rapid mass movement of soil and rock material downhill
under the influence of gravity in which the movement of the soil mass occurs
along an interior surface of sliding.
   “Larger common plan of development or sale.”  A contiguous area where
multiple separate and distinct construction activities may be taking place at
different times on different schedules under one plan.
   “Local County SWCD.”  The local County Soil and Water Conservation District.
   “NPDES permit.”  A National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit
issued by Ohio EPA under the authority of the USEPA, and derived from the
Federal Clean Water Act.
   “National Wetlands Inventory Map.”  Wetland maps that were created by the
Fish and Wildlife Service, United States Department of Interior.
   “Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS).”  An agency of the United
States Department of Agriculture, formerly known as the Soil Conservation
Service (SCS).
   “Noxious weed.”  Any plant species defined by the Ohio Department of
Agriculture as a “noxious weed” and listed as such by the Department. For the
purposes of this regulation, the most recent version of this list at the time
of application of these regulations shall prevail.
   “Ohio EPA.”  The Ohio Environmental Protection Agency.
   “Ohio Wetlands Inventory Map.”  Wetland maps that were created by the
Natural Resources Conservation Service, USDA and the Ohio Department of Natural
Resources.
   “Ordinary high water mark.”  The point of the bank or shore to which the
presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a district
marked by erosion, destruction or prevention of woody terrestrial vegetation,
predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized characteristic.
   “Outfall.”  An area where water flows from a structure such as a conduit,
storm sewer, improved channel or drain, and the area immediately beyond the
structure which is impacted by the velocity of flow in the structure.
   “Perennial stream.”  A natural channel that contains water throughout the
year, except possibly during periods of extreme drought.
   “Person.”  Any individual, corporation, partnership, joint venture, agency,
unincorporated association, municipal corporation, township, county, state
agency, the federal government or any combination thereof.
   “Professional engineer.”  A person registered in the State of Ohio as a
professional engineer, with specific education and experience in water
resources engineering, acting in strict conformance with the Code of Ethics of
the Ohio Board of Registration for Engineers and Surveyors.
   “Qualified forester.”  Any forester employed by the Ohio Department of
Natural Resources, Division of Forestry, or any person attaining the credential
of Certified Forester as conferred by the Society of American Foresters.
   “Qualified wetland professional.”  An individual competent in the areas of
botany, hydric soils and wetland hydrology, and who is acceptable to the City
Engineer.
   “Redevelopment.”  The demolition or removal of existing structures or land
uses and construction of new ones.
   “Retention basin.”  A storm water management pond that maintains a permanent
pool of water. These storm water management ponds include a properly
engineered/designed volume dedicated to the temporary storage and slow release
of runoff waters.
   “Riparian area.”  Naturally vegetated land adjacent to watercourses which,
if appropriately sized, helps to limit erosion, reduce flood flows and/or
filter and settle out runoff pollutants, or which performs other functions
consistent with the purposes of these regulations.
   “Riparian setback.”  Those lands within the city which are alongside
streams, and which fall within the area defined by the criteria set forth in
these regulations.
   “Sediment.”  Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported or has been moved from its site of origin by
wind, water, gravity or ice, and has come to rest on the earth’s surface either
on dry land or in a body of water.
   “Sediment control.”  The limiting of sediment being transported, by
controlling erosion or detaining sediment-laden water, and allowing the
sediment to settle out.
   “Sediment pollution.”  A failure to use management or conservation practices
to control wind or water erosion of the soil and to minimize the degradation of
water resources by soil sediment in conjunction with land grading, excavating,
filling or other soil-disturbing activities on land used or being developed for
commercial, industrial, residential or other purposes.
   “Sensitive area.” An area or water resource that requires special management
because of its susceptibility to sediment pollution, or because of its
importance to the well-being of the surrounding communities, region or the
state, and includes, but is not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Ponds, wetlands or small lakes with less than five acres of surface
area;
      (2)   Small streams with gradients less than ten feet per mile with
average annual flows of less than three and one-half feet per second containing
sand or gravel bottoms;
      (3)   Drainage areas of a locally designated or a state designated scenic
river; and
      (4)   Riparian and wetland areas.
   “Sheet flow.”  Water runoff in a thin uniform layer or rills and which is of
small enough quantity to be treated by sediment barriers.
   “Silviculture”  The theory and practice of controlling forest establishment,
composition and growth.
   “Slip.”  A landslide as defined under “Landslides.”
   “Sloughing.”  A slip or downward movement of an extended layer of soil
resulting from the undermining action of water or the earth-disturbing activity
of man.
   “Soil.”  Unconsolidated erodible earth material consisting of minerals and/
or organics.
   “Soil Conservation Service, USDA.”  The federal agency now titled the
Natural Resources Conservation Service, which is an agency of the United States
Department of Agriculture.
   “Soil-disturbing activity.”  Clearing, grading, excavating, filling, or
other alteration of the earth’s surface where natural or human-made ground
cover is destroyed and which may result in, or contribute to, soil erosion and
sediment pollution.
   “Soil erosion and sediment control plan.”  A written and/or drawn soil
erosion and sediment pollution control plan to minimize erosion and prevent
off-site sedimentation throughout all earth-disturbing activities on a
development area.
   “Soil erosion and sediment control practices.”  Conservation measures used
to control sediment pollution and including structural practices, vegetative
practices and management techniques.
   “Soil survey.”  The official soil survey produced by the Natural Resources
Conservation Service, USDA, in cooperation with the Division of Soil and Water
Conservation, ODNR and the local Board of County Commissioners.
   “Storm water conveyance system.”  All storm sewers, channels, streams,
ponds, lakes and the like, used for conveying concentrated storm water runoff
or for storing storm water runoff.
   “Stream.”  A body of water running or flowing on the earth’s surface, or a
channel in which such flow occurs. Flow may be seasonally intermittent.
   “Substantial damage.”  Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby
the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would be
equal to or greater than 50% of the market value of the structure before the
damage occurred.
   “USEPA.”  The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
   “Water resources.”  All streams, lakes, ponds, wetlands, watercourses,
waterways, drainage systems and all other bodies or accumulations of surface
water, either natural or artificial, which are situated wholly or partly
within, or border upon this state, or are within its jurisdiction, except those
private waters which do not combine or affect a junction with natural surface
waters.
   “Watercourse.”  Any natural, perennial or intermittent channel, stream,
river or brook.
   “Wetland, Ohio EPA Category 2 Wetlands.”  Those wetlands classified by the
Ohio EPA as Category 2 Wetlands under O.A.C. 3745-1-54(C)(2), or current
equivalent Ohio EPA classification, in accordance with generally accepted
wetland functional assessment methods acceptable to the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers and Ohio EPA at the time of application of this regulation.
   “Wetland, Ohio EPA Category 3 Wetlands.”  Those wetlands classified by the
Ohio EPA as Category 3 Wetlands under O.A.C. 3745-1-54(C)(3), or current
equivalent Ohio EPA classification, in accordance with generally accepted
wetland functional assessment methods acceptable to the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers and Ohio EPA at the time of application of this regulation.
   “Wetland setback.”  Those lands within the city that fall within the area
defined by the criteria set forth in these regulations.
   “Wetlands.”  Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or
ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under
normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted
for life in saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs and
similar areas.
   “Winter.”  October 1 to April 1 of each year.
   “100-Year floodplain.”  Any land susceptible to being inundated by water
from a base flood. The base flood is the flood that has a 1% or greater chance
of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. For the
purposes of this regulation, the “100-year floodplain” shall be defined by FEMA
or a site-specific floodplain delineation in conformance with standard
engineering practices and approved by the city.
(Ord. 61-04, passed 4-9-2004; Ord. 16-16, passed 3-7-2016)
CONTROL OF CONSTRUCTION SITE SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENT, AND OTHER WASTES AND STORM
WATER RUNOFF
§ 1334.30  PURPOSE.
   (A)   The intent of this regulation is to establish consistent technically
feasible and operationally practical standards to achieve a level of storm
water management and erosion and sediment control that will minimize damage to
public and private property and the degradation of water resources, and will
promote and maintain the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the
city.
   (B)   This regulation further intends, but is not limited, to:
      (1)   Allow development while minimizing increases in downstream
flooding, erosion and sedimentation;
      (2)   Reduce damage to receiving water resources and drainage systems
that are caused by new development or redevelopment activities;
      (3)   Control storm water runoff resulting from soil-disturbing
activities;
      (4)   Assure that development site owners control the volume and rate of
storm water runoff originating from their property so that surface water and
ground water are protected, soil erosion is controlled, and flooding potential
is not increased;
      (5)   Preserve to the maximum extent practicable the natural drainage
characteristics of the building site and minimize the need to construct, repair
and replace enclosed storm drain systems;
      (6)   Preserve to the maximum extent practicable natural infiltration and
ground water recharge, and maintain subsurface flow that replenishes water
resources, wetlands and wells;
      (7)   Assure that storm water controls are incorporated into site
planning and design at the earliest possible stage;
      (8)   Prevent unnecessary stripping of vegetation and loss of soil,
especially adjacent to water resources and wetlands;
      (9)   Reduce the need for costly maintenance and repairs to roads,
embankments, sewage systems, ditches, water resources, wetlands and storm water
management practices that are the result of inadequate soil erosion, sediment
and storm water control;
      (10)   Reduce the long-term expense of remedial projects needed to
address problems caused by inadequate storm water, erosion and sediment
control;
      (11)   Require the construction of storm water management practices that
serve multiple purposes, including flood control, soil erosion and sediment
control, and require water quality protection; and encourage such practices
that promote recreation and habitat preservation; and
      (12)   Ensure that all storm water management, soil erosion and sediment
control practices are properly designed, constructed and maintained.
(Ord. 109-04, passed 9-20-2004; Ord. 104-10, passed 8-23-2010; Ord. 16-16,
passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1334.31  DISCLAIMER OF LIABILITY.
   Neither submission of a plan under the provisions herein, nor compliance
with the provisions of these regulations, shall relieve any person or entity
from responsibility for damage to any person or property that is otherwise
imposed by law.
(Ord. 109-04, passed 9-20-2004; Ord. 104-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1334.32  CONFLICTS, SEVERABILITY, NUISANCES AND RESPONSIBILITY.
   (A)   Where this subchapter imposes a greater restriction upon land than is
imposed or required by other city provisions of law, ordinance, contract or
deed, the provisions of this subchapter shall prevail.
   (B)   If a court of competent jurisdiction declares any clause, section or
provision of these regulations invalid or unconstitutional, the validity of the
remainder shall not be affected thereby.
   (C)   These regulations shall not be construed as authorizing any person to
maintain a private or public nuisance on their property. Compliance with the
provisions of this regulation shall not be a defense in any action to abate
such nuisance.
   (D)   Failure of the city to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly
conditions or to recommend corrective measures shall not relieve the owner from
the responsibility for the condition or damage resulting therefrom, and shall
not result in the city, its officers, employees or agents being responsible for
any condition or damage resulting therefrom.
(Ord. 109-04, passed 9-20-2004; Ord. 104-10, passed 8-23-2010; Ord. 16-16,
passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1334.33  EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This subchapter and its regulations shall become effective upon their
passage.
(Ord. 109-04, passed 9-20-2004; Ord. 104-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1334.34  SCOPE.
   This subchapter applies to development areas having new or relocated
projects involving highways, underground cables, pipelines, subdivisions,
industrial projects, commercial projects, building activities on farms,
redevelopment of urban areas and all other land uses not specifically exempted.
This subchapter does not apply to:
   (A)   Land-disturbing activities related to producing agricultural crops or
silviculture operations regulated by the Ohio Agricultural Sediment Pollution
Abatement Rules (O.A.C. 1501:15-1-01 to 1501:15-1-06) and existing at the time
of passage of this regulation;
   (B)   Coal surface mining operations regulated by Ohio R.C. Chapter 1513 and
existing at the time of passage of this regulation; or
   (C)   Other surface mining operations regulated by Ohio R.C. Chapter 1514
and existing at the time of passage of this regulation.
(Ord. 109-04, passed 9-20-2004; Ord. 104-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1334.35  CONSULTATIONS.
   In implementing these regulations the City Engineer or other city officials
may consult with the local County SWCD, state and federal agencies and other
technical experts as necessary. Any costs associated with such consultations
may be assessed to the applicant or his or her designated representative.
(Ord. 109-04, passed 9-20-2004; Ord. 104-10, passed 8-23-2010; Ord. 16-16,
passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1334.36  RESERVED
§ 1334.37  CONSTRUCTION SITE CONSERVATION PLAN.
   In order to control storm water damage and sediment pollution of water
resources, wetlands, riparian areas, other natural areas, and public and
private lands, the owner of each development area shall be responsible for
developing a comprehensive Construction Site Conservation Plan. This plan will
address storm water management (volume and peak rate of runoff), soil erosion,
sediment and other wastes control. This plan must contain a description of
controls appropriate for each construction operation covered by these
regulations, and the operator must implement the planned controls in a timely
manner. The plan and BMPs used to satisfy the conditions of these regulations
shall meet the standards and specifications in the current edition of the Ohio
Rainwater and Land Development Manual.  The plan must make use of the practices
that preserve the existing natural condition to the maximum extent
practicable.  The plan shall identify the subcontractors engaged in activities
that could impact storm water runoff. The Construction Site Conservation  Plan
shall contain signatures from all of the identified subcontractors indicating
that they have been informed and understand their roles and responsibilities in
complying with the Construction Site Conservation Plan. If the city intends to
require soil erosion, sediment and storm water management controls on
construction sites that disturb less than one acre (43,560 square feet) the
next section should be included. This section needs to be deleted if small
construction sites are not to be regulated by this chapter. The lower limit of
8,000 square feet of disturbed land area is used in this model because at least
one city in northeast Ohio has used this threshold for several years.  The city
can select an alternate threshold value of its choosing not to exceed one acre
in size.
   (A)   Development Sites Under One Acre in Size.  Individual development
sites that are larger than 8,000 square feet and smaller than one acre (43,560
square feet) in total size of disturbed area, can submit abbreviated soil
erosion and sediment control plans with the topography plan for the requested
permit(s). The abbreviated plan must cover the following items, in addition to
any other items from this subchapter that are required by the City Engineer.
      (1)   Storm Water Issues.  A statement as to how the increased storm
water runoff that will be caused by the planned development project will be
handled. This statement must identify the best management practices (BMPs) the
new construction project will include in order to address storm water runoff.
      (2)   Redevelopment Exemption.  Owners of development sites that were
created by demolishing an older existing structure can request, in writing,
that the City Engineer exempt them from the storm water issues if the total
soil surface area being made impermeable is the same or less than the total
soil surface area that was impermeable due to the structure(s) being torn down
and removed.
      (3)   Riparian and Wetland Setbacks.  All riparian and wetland setback
areas will be identified in the plan and in the field before construction
starts.
      (4)   Soil Erosion and Sediment Issues.  A sketch of the entire
development site must be submitted that identifies the location of:
         (a)   All existing and planned impervious areas, storm water inlets,
drainage swales, wetlands, streams, conservation easements and other natural
features to be saved and protected on the property; and
         (b)   All existing and planned temporary and permanent conservation
practices for the site. Residential lots shall include at a minimum the
following:
            1.   Soil erosion and sediment control BMPs;
            2.   Construction entrance;
            3.   Temporary grass seeding with two tons per acre of straw mulch;
            4.   Storm drain inlet protection around every storm yard inlet on
the site or accepting drainage from the site;
            5.   Silt fence protection for any stream located on or close to
the site and lacking an adequate vegetative buffer;
            6.   Silt fence to prevent sediment discharge into street storm
sewer inlets where no centralized sediment control exists for the drainage area
that includes the lot; and
            7.   Construction fence to protect any conservation easements,
riparian setbacks and wetland setbacks from encroachment by construction
activities.
      (5)   Temporary Seeding and Stockpiling. The schedule for the use of
temporary seeding developed according to the Temporary Seeding Table contained
in the Minimum Standards section of this subchapter must be included.  The
location of construction material stockpile areas, if such have been approved
by the City Engineer, with a description of the soil erosion and sediment
controls to be maintained on the stockpile area prior to, during and after the
area is used for stockpiling.
   (B)   Development Sites One Acre in Size or Larger.  All developments that
have a larger common plan of development or sale equal to or larger than one
acre in size of disturbed area are subject to this subchapter and shall follow
all of the requirements set forth in this subchapter.
      (1)   Description of the Plan of Construction.  The following information
shall be included in the Construction Site Conservation Plan:
         (a)   Site description:
            1.   A description of the prior land uses of the site;
            2.   A description of the nature and type of construction activity
(e.g., low-density residential, shopping mall, highway and the like);
            3.   A description of the total area of the site and the area of
the site that is expected to be disturbed (i.e., grubbing, clearing,
excavating, filling or grading, including off-site borrow, fill or spoil areas
and off-site utility installation areas);
            4.   An estimate of the impervious area and percent imperviousness
created by the construction activity;
            5.   The types of soils within, or affected by, the development
area, and the location of all highly erodible or unstable soils as determined
by the most current edition of the soil survey of the county by the Natural
Resources Conservation Service (NRCS);
            6.   An on-site, detailed soils engineering report if required by
the City Engineer; and
            7.   The name and/or location of the immediate receiving stream or
surface water(s) and the first subsequent named receiving water and the major
river watersheds in which it is located.
         (b)   A vicinity sketch locating:
            1.   The larger common plan of development or sale;
            2.   The development area;
            3.   All pertinent surrounding natural features within 200 feet of
the development site, including, but not limited to:
               a.   Water resources such as wetlands, springs, lakes, ponds,
rivers and streams (including intermittent streams with a defined bed and
bank);
               b.   Conservation easements;
               c.   Other sensitive natural resources; and
               d.   The sensitive areas receiving runoff from the development.
            4.   All off-site borrow or spoil areas; and
            5.   All off-site utility installation areas that are related to
the planned project.
         (c)   The existing and proposed topography shown in the appropriate
contour intervals as approved by the City Engineer (generally one-foot contours
are used);
         (d)   The location and description of existing and proposed drainage
patterns and facilities, including any allied drainage facilities beyond the
development area and the larger common plan of development or sale;
         (e)   Existing and proposed watershed boundary lines, direction of
flow and watershed acreage;
         (f)   The person or entity responsible for continued maintenance of
all vegetative and/or mechanical BMPs for both the construction and post-
construction phases of the development;
         (g)   Long-term maintenance requirements and schedules of all BMPs for
both the construction and post-construction phases of the development;
         (h)   Long-term maintenance inspection schedules;
         (i)   The person or entity financially responsible for conducting the
inspections of, and the maintenance of, permanent storm water conveyance and
storage structures and all other conservation practices;
         (j)   The method of ensuring that funding will be available to conduct
the long-term maintenance and inspections of all permanent storm water, soil
erosion and sediment control and water quality practices;
         (k)   The location of any existing or planned riparian and/or wetland
setback areas on the property;
         (l)   The plan must clearly describe, for each major construction
activity, the appropriate BMPs and the general timing (or sequence) during the
construction process of when the measures will be implemented; and who (which
contractor) will be responsible for implementation (e.g., Contractor A will
clear, grub and  install perimeter controls and Contractor B will maintain
perimeter controls until final stabilization; Contractor C will conduct and
document the scheduled inspections);
         (m)   Location and description of any storm water discharges
associated with dedicated asphalt and concrete plants covered by this
regulation and the best management practices to address pollutants in these
storm water discharges.
      (2)   Construction Site Conservation Plan Elements. The Construction Site
Conservation Plan shall include, at a minimum, the following information.
         (a)   The Construction Site Conservation Plan shall include a map
showing the location of:
            1.   The limits of earth-disturbing activity, including
excavations, filling, grading or clearing;
            2.   Drainage patterns during major phases of construction;
            3.   The location of each proposed soil erosion and sediment
control BMP, including:
               a.   Permanent soil erosion control practices to be left in
place after construction operations have been completed (e.g., level spreaders,
permanent erosion control matting, gabions, rock- lined channels and the like);
               b.   Areas likely to require temporary stabilization during the
course of site development;
               c.   Designated construction entrances where vehicles will
access the construction site;
               d.   In-stream activities, including stream crossings;
               e.   Areas designated for the storage or disposal of solid,
sanitary and toxic wastes;
               f.   Dumpsters;
               g.   Cement truck washout;
               h.   Fuel tanks;
               i.   BMPs that divert runoff away from disturbed areas and steep
slopes where practicable, including rock check dams, pipe slope drains,
diversions to direct flow away from exposed soils, and protective grading
practices; and
               j.   Sediment settling ponds drawn to scale.
            4.   Existing and proposed locations of buildings, roads, parking
facilities and utilities; and
            5.   Boundaries of wetlands and stream channels the owner intends
to fill or relocate for which the owner is seeking approval from the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers and/or Ohio EPA.
         (b)   The Construction Site Conservation Plan shall include a list of
soil erosion and sediment control BMPs being used and the standards and
specifications, including detailed drawings, for each BMP. This list shall
include:
            1.   Methods of controlling the flow of runoff from disturbed areas
so as to prevent or minimize erosion;
            2.   Identification of the structural practices to be used to
control erosion and trap sediment from a site remaining disturbed for more than
14 days. A description shall be included of how each selected control will
store runoff so as to let sediments settle out and/or divert flows away from
exposed soils or act to limit runoff from exposed areas;
            3.   Identification for each structural practice of its size,
detail drawings, maintenance requirements and design calculations;
            4.   The type and amount of plant seed, live plants, fertilizer,
agricultural ground limestone and mulch to be used.  Specification of soil
testing requirements for fertility and lime requirements will be included.
Specification for the use of perennial grass seed will also be included;
            5.   Settling ponds will be identified with basic dimensions and
the calculations for size and volume;
            6.   Detailed drawings and installation requirements of all other
structural control BMPs;
            7.   Any other soil erosion and sediment control related BMPs and
items that are required by the City Engineer; and
            8.   For developments where the overall plan does not call for
centralized sediment control capable of controlling multiple individual lots, a
detail drawing of a project specific typical individual lot showing standard
individual lot soil erosion and sediment control practices and the sequence and
timing of BMP installation for the individual lots. This does not remove or
eliminate the responsibility to designate and install specific soil erosion and
sediment control practices for the storm water discharges.
         (c)   The Construction Site Conservation Plan shall include the
scheduling, phasing and coordination of construction operations and erosion and
sediment control BMPs, including vegetative plantings and mulch.
         (d)   The Construction Site Conservation Plan shall include a
description of the storm water management (SWM) practices to be used on the
site. The SWM element of the Plan shall include, at a minimum, the following:
            1.   A map showing the location, drawn to scale, of permanent SWM
conveyance, detention and retention structures, other SWM control structures
and the SWM easements;
            2.   A general description of the SWM strategy proposed to meet
this subchapter;
            3.   Design calculations for all permanent SWM conveyance,
detention and retention structures, and other SWM control structures; and
            4.   Any other SWM-related items required by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 109-04, passed 9-20-2004; Ord. 104-10, passed 8-23-2010; Ord. 16-16,
passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1334.38  EASEMENTS.
   Future access to floodplains, flood control facilities, runoff drainage
ditches and channels, runoff storage facilities, storm sewers and other
drainage ways and structures, as required by the City Engineer, shall be
secured by means of easements.
   (A)   The easements shall be recorded in the name of the city and, in
single-family residential developments, the homeowners association.
   (B)   Such easements shall be not less than 25 feet in width, in addition to
the width of the ditch, channel or other facility it is to serve. Access
easements of this type shall be provided on one side of the flood control or
storm drainage ditch, channel or similar type facility.
   (C)   Access along the initial drainage system shall be by means of
easements. Such easements shall be not less than 25 feet in width, with a
minimum ten-foot width on either side of the centerline.
   (D)   Access adjacent to storage facilities shall consist of a 25-foot
easement in the case of detention (dry) basins, and a 25-foot easement with a
25-foot level bench in the case of retention (wet) basins, measured from the
top of the bank, and shall include the storage facility itself.
   (E)   Easements for the emergency flow ways shall be a minimum of 25 feet in
width, or larger if required by the City Engineer.
   (F)   Flood control or storm drainage easements containing underground
facilities shall have a minimum width of 25 feet.
   (G)   The easements shall be restricted against the planting within said
easement of trees, shrubbery or plantings with woody growth characteristics,
and against the construction therein of buildings, accessory buildings, fences,
walls or any other obstructions to the free flow of storm water and the
movement of inspectors and maintenance equipment and also restricted against
the changing of final grade from that described by the grading plan.
(Ord. 109-04, passed 9-20-2004; Ord. 104-10, passed 8-23-2010; Ord. 16-16,
passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1334.39  MAINTENANCE.
   Any portion of the permanent drainage and soil erosion systems, including
on-site and off-site storage facilities that are constructed by the owner, will
be continuously maintained into perpetuity.
   (A)   Maintenance Plans.  Maintenance plans shall be provided by the
permittee to both the City Engineer and the post-construction operator of the
BMP (including homeowners associations) upon completion of construction
activities and prior to the City Engineer giving final approval for the
completed construction.
   (B)   Single-Family and Multi-Family Residential Developments.  A homeowners
association shall be created and placed in title of the affected lands and
shall be continuously responsible for post-construction maintenance and
inspections in perpetuity unless such maintenance and inspections become
officially accepted by the city.
   (C)   Apartments, Commercial and Industrial Developments.  The plans will
clearly state that the owner of the property shall be continuously responsible
for post-construction maintenance and inspections in perpetuity unless the city
officially accepts such maintenance and inspections.
   (D)   Maintenance Design.  All temporary and permanent soil erosion and
sediment control practices shall be designed and constructed to minimize
maintenance requirements. Multi-use facilities incorporating assets such as
aesthetics and recreation may be incorporated into the design of the drainage
facilities. All permanent drainage, soil erosion, sediment control, water
quality management systems and BMPs, including on-site and off-site structures
and vegetation that are constructed or planted, must be inspected and
maintained in perpetuity by the responsible party designated in the plans.
Inspections and maintenance will be incorporated periodically throughout the
year to ensure that the facilities are properly operational.
   (E)   Perpetual Maintenance Inspections.  One inspection with a written
report will be performed each year. The written report will be given to the
City Engineer by May 1 of each and every year after the best management
practice (BMP) has been completed.
      (1)   Structures that Require a Permit from the Ohio Division of Water. 
A written and stamped report from a professional engineer on the status of all
structural BMPs that require a permit from the Ohio Department of Natural
Resources (ODNR), Division of Water. This applies to all BMPs that require a
permit either at the time of construction or fall under the jurisdiction of the
ODNR Division of Water at any time after construction is completed.
      (2)   Easements.  A written report from an inspector on the status of all
storm water management easements for each project shall be submitted to the
City Engineer by May 1 of each year in perpetuity. These reports will document
if restricted plantings, fences and structures are on the easement and will
identify the location of the noted easement restriction violations.
      (3)   BMPs That Do Not Have a High Risk for Loss of Life, Bodily Injury,
or Damage to Structures or Infrastructure Related to Imminent Failure as
Determined by the City Engineer.  A written and stamped report from a
professional engineer, landscape architect or certified professional in erosion
and sediment control (CPESC) on the status of permanent soil erosion, sediment
control, water quality management systems and the status of the related
easements shall be submitted to the City Engineer by May 1 of each year in
perpetuity.
      (4)   BMPs That Have a Potential Loss of Life.  A written and stamped
report covering the status of all BMPs that have a potential for loss of life,
bodily injury, or damage to structures or infrastructure will
be prepared by a professional engineer or other individual possessing a valid
state license that authorizes them to design the same type of BMP for
construction.
(Ord. 109-04, passed 9-20-2004; Ord. 104-10, passed 8-23-2010; Ord. 16-16,
passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1334.40  MINIMUM STANDARDS.
   In order to control sediment pollution of water resources, the owner or
person responsible for the development area shall use conservation planning and
practices to maintain the level of conservation established in the following
standards.
   (A)   The Plan.  The plan shall include measures that control the flow of
runoff from disturbed areas so as to prevent soil erosion from occurring.
   (B)   Structural Practices.  Structural practices shall be used to control
erosion and trap sediment from areas remaining disturbed for more than 14 days.
   (C)   Sediment Barriers. 
      (1)   Sheet flow runoff from denuded areas shall be intercepted by silt
fence or diversions to protect adjacent properties and water resources from
sediment. Where intended to provide sediment control, silt fence shall be
placed on a level contour. The relationship between the maximum drainage areas
to silt fence for a particular slope is shown in the table below (placing silt
fence in a parallel series does not extend the size of the drainage area).
 
Table 1: Silt Fence Applicability
Maximum Drainage Area (In Acres) to 100 Range of Slope for a Particular
Linear Feet of Silt Fence               Drainage Area (In Percent)
0.5                                     <2%
0.25                                    2% but < 20%
0.125                                   20% but < 50%
 
      (2)   This does not preclude the use of other sediment barriers designed
to control sheet flow runoff. The total runoff flow treated by a sediment
barrier shall not exceed the design capacity for that sediment barrier. Straw
bale barriers are not acceptable.
   (D)   Storm Water Diversion Practices.  Storm water diversion practices
shall be used to keep runoff away from disturbed areas and steep slopes where
practicable. Such practices, which include swales, dikes or berms, pipe slope
drains and diversions, may receive storm water runoff from areas up to ten
acres.  Storm water diversion practices alone are not considered a sediment
control practice unless those are used in conjunction with a sediment settling
pond.
   (E)   Sediment Control Practices.  All sediment control practices must be
capable of ponding runoff in order to be considered functional.
   (F)   Clearing and Grubbing.  Clearing and grubbing will be done in two or
more phases. The first phase will include only those locations necessary to
install the perimeter soil erosion, sediment and storm water control BMPs.
After the perimeter controls are in place and functioning, the remaining phase
(s) of clearing and grubbing may continue.
   (G)   Timing of Sediment Trapping Practices.  Sediment control practices
shall be functional throughout all phases of up-slope earth-disturbing
activity. Settling facilities, perimeter controls and other practices intended
to trap sediment shall be implemented prior to grading and within seven days
from the start of grubbing. They shall continue to function until the up-slope
development area is permanently restabilized. As construction progresses and
the topography is altered, appropriate controls must be constructed or existing
controls altered to address the changing drainage patterns.
   (H)   Stabilization of Denuded Areas.
      (1)   Disturbed areas must be stabilized as specified in the tables
below, or according to the Ohio EPA NPDES Storm Water Permit Rules, whichever
is most restrictive:
 
Table 2: Permanent Stabilization
Area Requiring Permanent Stabilization   Time Frame to Apply Erosion Controls
Any areas that will lie dormant for 1    Within 7 days of the most recent
year or more                             disturbance
Any areas within 50 feet of a stream and Within 2 days of reaching final grade
at final grade
Any other areas at final grade           Within 7 days of reaching final grade
                                         within that area
 
 
Table 3: Temporary Stabilization
Area Requiring Temporary Stabilization  Time Frame to Apply Erosion Controls
Any disturbed areas within 50 feet of a Within 2 days of the most recent
stream and not at final grade           disturbance if the area will remain
                                        idle for 21 days or more
Disturbed areas that will be dormant    Within 7 days of the most recent
for more than 21 days but less than 1   disturbance within the area
year and not within 50 feet of a stream
                                        Within 7 days of the most recent
                                        disturbance if housing unit
                                        construction on the lot is not
                                        scheduled to begin within 21 days of
Residential subdivisions for            the disturbance. In any case, temporary
disturbance which has occurred on       or permanent stabilization will be
building lots                           property installed, pursuant to the
                                        most recent edition of the Ohio
                                        Rainwater and Land Development Manual,
                                        before the second building permit is
                                        issued
                                        Within 7 days of the most recent
                                        disturbance if further construction
                                        activity will not occur within 21 days
Nonresidential subdivisions and         of the disturbance.
commercial developments                 Where vegetative stabilization
                                        techniques may cause structural
                                        instability or are otherwise
                                        prohibited, alternative stabilization
                                        techniques must be employed
Disturbed areas that will be idle over  Prior to the onset of winter weather
winter
 
      (2)   Where vegetative stabilization techniques may cause structural
instability or are otherwise unobtainable, alternative stabilization techniques
must be employed.
   (I)   Sediment Settling Ponds.
      (1)   A sediment settling pond is required for any one of the following
conditions:
         (a)   Concentrated storm water runoff (e.g., storm sewer or ditch);
         (b)   Runoff from drainage areas, which exceed the design capacity of
silt fence or other sediment barriers;
         (c)   Runoff from drainage areas that exceed the design capacity of
inlet protection;
         (d)   Runoff from common drainage locations with ten or more acres of
disturbed land; or
         (e)   Alternative controls can be used if the owner can show, in
writing, that the Ohio EPA approved the use of alternatives that the owner
demonstrated to be equivalent in effectiveness to a sediment settling pond.
      (2)   (a)   Where storm sewer drainage areas include ten or more acres
disturbed at one time, a temporary (or permanent) sediment settling pond must
be provided until final stabilization of the site. In single-family residential
construction, final stabilization is after the houses are built and permanent
landscaping is done.
         (b)   It is recommended that for drainage locations of less than ten
acres, smaller sediment settling basins and/or sediment traps be used.
      (3)   Each facility’s storage capacity shall be no less than 1,800 cubic
feet of dewatering zone area per acre of total contributing drainage area and
1,000 cubic feet per disturbed acre of sediment storage zone area. The storage
volume will be measured from the bottom of the basin to the top of the primary
(principal) spillway.
      (4)   Permanent storm water management ponds that are designed to trap
sediment during construction shall be designed to provide for a slow release of
sediment-laden water. The draw down time must be at least 48 hours, or meet the
criteria in the Ohio Rainwater and Land Development Manual whichever is most
stringent.
      (5)   The design configuration between inlet(s) and the outlet of
settling ponds must provide at least two units of length for each one unit of
width (> 2:1 length to width ratio); a length to width ratio of 4:1 is
recommended.
      (6)   The depth of the dewatering zone of the sediment settling pond must
be less than or equal to five feet.
      (7)   Sediment must be removed from the sediment settling ponds when the
design capacity has been reduced by 40%.
      (8)   Public safety, especially as it relates to children, must be
considered in the design. Alternative sediment controls must be used where site
limitations would preclude a safe design.
      (9)   Temporary sediment settling ponds will not be constructed in any
stream channel.
   (J)   Storm Sewer Inlet Protection.
      (1)   All storm sewer inlets that accept water runoff from the
development area shall be protected so that sediment-laden water will not enter
the storm sewer, unless the storm drain system drains to a sediment settling
pond and is exempted in writing by the City Engineer. In areas where
construction will be ongoing, such as subdivisions, the storm sewer protection
shall be maintained until all up-slope areas reach final stabilization, as
determined by the City Engineer.
      (2)   All inlets receiving runoff from drainage areas of one or more
acres will require a sediment settling pond.
      (3)   At the end of this period the site owner shall hydraulically clean
the storm sewers to the satisfaction of the City Engineer. All sediments shall
be removed from the system and shall not be flushed downstream.
   (K)   Storm Sewer and Other Drainage Outlets.  All storm sewers, footer
drains, roof gutter drains and all other drains will be outletted at the bottom
of the slope. The slope below the outlet will be able to control the water
being drained through the storm sewer or other drains without causing erosion
of the stream or channel banks or channel bottom or other areas that the water
is outletted on.
   (L)   Working Near, or Crossing Streams and Wetlands.
      (1)   Construction vehicles shall avoid water resources, wetlands,
riparian areas and their setbacks. If construction vehicles must cross these
areas during construction, an approved temporary crossing shall be constructed.
Streams, including intermittent streams with a defined bed and banks, shall be
restabilized immediately after in-channel work is completed, interrupted or
stopped. Erodible materials will not be used in making stream crossings.
      (2)   No soil, rock, debris or any other material shall be dumped or
placed into a water resource or into such proximity that it may slough, slip or
erode into a water resource, unless such dumping or placing is authorized by
the approving authority and, when applicable, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers
and Ohio EPA, for such purposes as, but not limited to, constructing bridges,
culverts and erosion or sediment control structures.
      (3)   If construction activities disturb areas adjacent to streams,
structural practices shall be designed and implemented on site to protect the
adjacent streams from the impacts of sediment runoff.
      (4)   No temporary or permanent sediment controls will be constructed in
a stream channel.
      (5)   Streams and wetland setbacks required by the city will be
implemented. As a minimum, a setback of 50 feet, as measured from the ordinary
high water mark of the surface water, will be maintained in its natural state
as a permanent buffer.
   (M)   Construction Entrance.
      (1)   Measures shall be taken to prevent soil transport onto public
roads, or surfaces where runoff is not checked by sediment controls.
      (2)   Stone with geotextile construction entrance(s) shall be implemented
as required by the City Engineer and the Ohio EPA. These will be planned and
installed according to the requirements in the most recent edition of the Ohio
Rainwater and Land Development Manual.
      (3)   Where soil is transported onto a public road surface, the roads
shall be cleaned thoroughly at the end of each day, or more frequently, in
order to ensure public safety.  Soil shall be removed from paved surfaces by
shoveling or sweeping. Street washing shall be allowed only after shoveling or
sweeping has removed most of the sediment and street sewer inlet protection is
properly installed, unless end of sewer sediment ponds exist and are properly
functioning.  In the event that a site inspection by a representative of the
Community Engineer yields evidence of excessive sediment or debris in the
roadway, sewers or waterways, the building permit holder shall be subject to a
fine of $100 for a first offense and $150 for a second or subsequent offense. 
A photograph indicating the date of the event and a signed statement by the
inspector shall document said conditions.  All fines collected shall be
deposited in an account to support the storm water management program and
expended by the approval of the Storm Water Task Force.
      (4)   Erodible material ramps in streets will not be used to enable
equipment to cross curbs. Nonerosive materials (e.g., wood and stone) can be
used.
   (N)   Unstable Soils.
      (1)   Unstable soils will be as determined by the local county soil
survey or by a detailed soils report.
      (2)   The City Engineer may require detailed soil reports when deemed
necessary.
      (3)   Unstable soils prone to slipping or landsliding shall not be
graded, excavated, filled or have loads imposed upon them unless the work is
performed in accordance with a qualified professional engineer’s
recommendations to correct, eliminate or adequately address the problems.
   (O)   Cut and Fill Slopes.  Cut and fill slopes shall be designed and
constructed in a manner that will minimize erosion and slippage. Consideration
shall be given to the length and steepness of the slope, soil type, up-slope
drainage area, ground water conditions and slope stabilization. The minimum
final unreinforced soil slopes will have a horizontal to vertical ratio of 3:1
(the horizontal will be three times the vertical).
   (P)   Stabilization of Outfalls and Channels.  Outfalls and constructed or
modified channels shall be designed and constructed to withstand the expected
velocity of flow from the planned post-development frequency storm without
eroding. The planned post-construction velocity and flow shall include the
entire contributing watershed.  Velocity dissipation devices shall be placed at
discharge locations and along the length of any outfall channel to provide non-
erosive velocity from the structure to a watercourse so that the natural
physical and biological characteristics and functions are maintained and
protected.
   (Q)   Establishment of Permanent Vegetation.  A permanent vegetative cover
shall be established on denuded areas not otherwise permanently stabilized.
Permanent vegetation shall not be considered established until ground cover is
achieved which, in the opinion of the City Engineer, has 80% vegetative density
over the entire disturbed area and provides adequate cover, and is mature
enough to satisfactorily control soil erosion and survive adverse weather
conditions.
   (R)   Disposition of Temporary Practices.  All temporary soil erosion and
sediment control practices shall be disposed of immediately after final site
stabilization is achieved or after the temporary practices are no longer
needed, unless otherwise required by the City Engineer. Trapped sediment shall
be permanently stabilized to prevent further erosion. The construction
maintenance guarantee shall not be released by the city until all temporary
soil erosion and sediment control practices that are no longer needed have been
removed, properly disposed of, and any trapped sediment has been stabilized.
   (S)   Underground Utility Construction.  The construction of underground
utility lines, pipes and the like shall be subject to the following criteria:
      (1)   Trenches shall remain open for no more than five days.
      (2)   There shall be no turbid discharges to surface waters resulting
from de-watering activities.  If trench or ground water contains sediment, it
must pass through a sediment settling pond or other equally effective sediment
control device, prior to being discharged from the construction site or to
waters of the state.
      (3)   When discharging clean ground water care must be taken to ensure
that it does not become pollutant laden by crossing over disturbed soils or
other pollutant sources.
   (T)   Inspections.
      (1)   If inspections or other information indicates a control has been
used inappropriately or incorrectly or it has failed, it must be replaced or
modified for the site conditions.
      (2)   The owner of the development area shall have the site inspected for
soil erosion, sediment control and other environmental concerns every seven
calendar days, and within 24 hours of a one-half inch or greater rainfall event
until the City Engineer certifies the site as being stable. The City Engineer
certification does not relieve the permittee from meeting the Ohio EPA NPDES
inspection requirements.
      (3)   The inspection frequency may be reduced to at least once every
month if the entire site is temporarily stabilized or runoff is unlikely due to
weather conditions (e.g., the site is covered with snow, ice or the ground is
frozen.) A waiver of inspection requirements is available until one month
before thawing conditions are expected to result in a discharge if all of the
following conditions are met: the project is located in an area where frozen
conditions are anticipated to continue for extended periods of time (i.e., more
than one month); land disturbance activities have been suspended; and the
beginning and ending dates of the waiver period are documented. Once a
definable area has been fully stabilized, you may mark this on your plans and
no further inspection requirements apply to that portion of the site.
      (4)   Following each inspection, a checklist must be completed and signed
by the qualified inspection personnel representative. At a minimum, the
inspection report must include: the inspection date; names, titles, and
qualifications of personnel making the inspection; weather information for the
period since the last inspection including the timing, duration, and depth of
any storms; weather information and a description of any discharges occurring
at the time of the inspection; location(s) of discharges of sediment or other
pollutants from the site; location(s) of BMPs that need to be maintained;
location(s) of BMPs that failed to operate as designed or proved inadequate for
a particular location; location(s) where additional BMPs are needed that did
not exist at the time of the inspection; and, corrective action required
including any necessary changes to the Comprehensive Storm Water Management
Plan and implementation dates.
      (5)   The inspection log will include the date and actions taken to
correct problems noted in past inspection logs. Requiring the owner’s
inspections to be documented and turned into the City Engineer will give the
city the information it needs to see if there are problems on the site and to
ensure that those problems are being taken care of by the owner with a minimum
of city time and expense.
      (6)   If the construction site is subject to Ohio EPA’s National
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit for construction
activity, a copy of all of the required inspection sheets will be submitted to
the City Engineer within three working days of the date that the inspection was
conducted.
      (7)   Disturbed areas and areas used for storage of materials that are
exposed to precipitation shall be inspected for evidence of, or the potential
for, pollutants entering the drainage system.
      (8)   Erosion and sediment controls identified in the Storm Water
Pollution Prevention Plan shall be observed to ensure that they are operating
correctly.
      (9)   Discharge locations shall be inspected to ascertain whether erosion
and sediment control measures are effective in preventing significant impacts
to the receiving waters.
      (10)   Locations where vehicles enter or exit the site shall be inspected
for evidence of off-site vehicle tracking.
      (11)   Sensitive areas including riparian and wetland setbacks shall be
observed to ensure that they remain well marked and undisturbed.
      (12)   If the inspection reveals that a control practice is in need of
repair or maintenance, with the exception of sediment settling ponds, it must
be repaired or maintained within three days of the inspection. Sediment
settling ponds must be repaired or maintained within ten days of the
inspection.
      (13)   If any inspection reveals that a control practice fails to perform
its intended function and that another, more appropriate control practice is
required, the Construction Site Conservation Plan must be amended and the new
control practice must be installed within ten days of the inspection.
      (14)   If the inspection reveals that a control practice has not been
implemented in the time required by this subchapter, it must be installed
within ten days from the date of inspection.
      (15)   If the inspection reveals that a planned control practice is not
needed, the record must contain a statement of explanation as to why the
control practice is not needed.
      (16)   Failure to comply with repair and maintenance requirements as
requested by the Engineering Department will result in the issuance of a stop
work order on the site until all requests are completed.
   (U)   Control of Materials and Debris.  Site management practices shall be
implemented to prevent toxic materials, hazardous materials or other debris
from entering the city’s and state’s water resources or wetlands. These
practices shall include, but are not limited to, the following.
      (1)   A covered dumpster shall be made available for the proper disposal
of construction site waste materials, garbage, plaster, drywall, grout, gypsum
and the like. A second covered dumpster will be provided for the proper
disposal of toxic and hazardous wastes.
      (2)   The washing of excess concrete material into a street, catch basin
or other public facility or natural resource shall not occur. A designated area
for concrete washouts shall be made available and used for all concrete
washouts.
      (3)   All fuel tanks and drums shall be stored in a marked storage area.
A dike shall be constructed around this storage area with a minimum capacity
equal to 110% of the volume of the largest container in the storage area. All
additional requirements of the local fire authority must be followed. If the
fuel tanks have a self-contained dike, the plug will be kept in the dike tank
at all times.
      (4)   Any toxic or hazardous wastes and/or contaminated soils must be
disposed of according to all applicable environmental laws and statutes. Local
health districts and Ohio EPA can provide guidance on these issues.
      (5)   On a site with a prior industrial land use or a site that is
contaminated with gasoline, fuel oil, hydrocarbon based chemicals or other Ohio
EPA regulated contaminates, the storm water is considered wastewater. A permit
from Ohio EPA is required to address these sites.
      (6)   Proper permits shall be obtained for development projects on solid
waste landfill sites.
      (7)   Paint, paint washing liquids, excess paints and other paint wastes
are considered solid wastes and shall be disposed of in accordance with
applicable state regulations. Appropriate handling of these wastes shall occur
at the site so as to prevent the discharge of these wastes into surface or
ground waters.
         (a)   Water-based paint-washing liquids and small quantities of excess
water-based paints may be disposed of by flushing down a connected sanitary
sewer but may not be disposed of in an on-lot disposal system.
         (b)   All other paints, paint thinners and paint cleaning materials
will be disposed of in the site’s hazardous waste disposal dumpster.
      (8)   Restroom facilities will be provided for site workers at all times
that workers are present on the site and during all phases of the construction.
      (9)   All required permits from appropriate federal, state or local
agencies are required to develop land with a previous industrial or commercial
use or another use that may have led to soil contamination by a regulated
pollutant.
   (V)   Pre-Winter Stabilization.  If the development area will, or is planned
to remain, active through the winter months, the owner of the development area
shall hold a pre-winter stabilization meeting. The meeting will be held before
October 1. The owner shall invite the operator, developer, engineer,
contractor, City Engineer and anyone else requested by the City Engineer to the
meeting.
   (W)   Storm Water Basins.
      (1)   Pool Geometry.  The minimum length-to-width ratio for the pond is
3:1 (the length will be three times the width).
      (2)   Riser in Embankment.  The riser shall be located within the
embankment for purposes of maintenance access.  Access to the riser will be by
manholes.
      (3)   Water Drains. Each retention basin shall have a drainpipe that can
completely drain the pond. The drain shall have an elbow within the pond to
prevent sediment deposition from plugging the drain.
      (4)   Adjustable Gate Valves.  Both the storm water management and water
quality basin drains shall have adjustable gate valves. Valves shall be located
inside the riser at a point where they will remain dry and can be operated in a
safe and convenient manner. During the annual inspections the valves shall be
fully opened and closed at least once, and the certifying official shall attest
to this on the inspection form. To prevent vandalism, the handwheel shall be
chained to a ringbolt or manhole step.
      (5)   Principal Spillway.  Each principal spillway shall be designed in
accordance with the NRCS standards and specifications for the office serving
the county. Each principal spillway shall have the capacity to pass the 100-
year design storm flow. The inlet or riser size for the pipe drops shall be
designed so that the flow through the structure goes from weir flow control to
pipe flow control without going into orifice control in the riser. The crest
elevation of the primary spillway shall be no less than one foot below the
emergency spillway crest. Premium joint pipe is required and a removable trash
rack shall be installed at each location. Anti-seep collars shall be provided
for all pipe conduits through an embankment.
      (6)   Emergency Spillway.  An emergency spillway shall be provided on
each storm water management basin. Emergency spillways shall convey flood flows
safely past the embankment, and shall be designed in accordance with NRCS
standards and specifications for the office serving the local county. Emergency
spillways shall have a 100-year design storm capacity unless exempted in
writing by the City Engineer.
      (7)   Embankments.  Each dam embankment shall be designed in accordance
with the NRCS standards and specifications for the office serving the county
that the project is located in.  Anti-seep collars shall be provided for all
pipe conduits through an embankment.
      (8)   Safety Features.
         (a)   The primary spillway opening shall not permit access to the
public and other non- maintenance personnel.
         (b)   The perimeter of all water pool areas that are deeper than three
feet shall be surrounded by benches that meet the following.
            1.   A safety bench, with a maximum slope of 3%, which extends
outward, on dry land, from the shoreline. This bench will be a minimum of 25
feet wide to provide for the safety of individuals and maintenance vehicles
that are adjacent to the water pool. The safety bench may be landscaped,
without the use of structures, to prevent access to the water pool.
            2.   Side slopes between the safety bench and the aquatic bench
shall not be steeper than 3:1 (3 feet horizontal for every 1 foot vertical).
            3.   An aquatic bench that extends inward from the shoreline far
enough to ensure public safety and has a maximum depth of 15 inches below the
normal water surface elevations. The aquatic bench may be landscaped to prevent
access to the deeper water pool.
            4.   Side slopes beyond the aquatic bench and below the permanent
water level shall not be steeper than 2.5:1 (two and one-half feet horizontal
for every one foot vertical).
            5.   The contours of the pond will be designed and managed to
eliminate drop-offs and other hazards.
            6.   Side slopes getting to the pond shall not exceed 3:1 and shall
terminate on a safety bench.
            7.   Soil erosion and sediment control practices used to satisfy
these standards shall meet the standards and specifications in the current
edition of the Ohio Rainwater and Land Development Manual, NRCS Field Office
Technical Guide for the local county or the Ohio EPA, whichever is most
stringent.
   (X)   General Guidelines. These standards are general guidelines and shall
not limit the right of the City Engineer to impose at any time additional, more
stringent requirements, nor shall the standards limit the right of the City
Engineer to waive, in writing, individual requirements.
   (Y)   Soil Limitations. Soil limitations shall be determined by using the
current edition of the county soil survey written by the NRCS, USDA.
   (Z)   Controlling Runoff. Methods for controlling increases in storm water
runoff peaks and volumes may include, but are not limited to:
      (1)   Retarding flow velocities by increasing friction; for example,
grassed road ditches rather than paved street gutters where practical,
discharging roof water to vegetated areas, or grass and rock-lined drainage
channels;
      (2)   Grading and use of grade control structures to provide a level of
control in flow paths and stream gradients;
      (3)   Induced infiltration of increased storm water runoff into soil,
where practical; for example, constructing special infiltration areas where
soils are suitable, retaining topsoil for all areas to be vegetated, or
providing good infiltration areas with proper emergency overflow facilities;
and
      (4)   Provisions for detention and retention, for example, permanent
retention ponds and lakes, dry detention basins and subsurface detention tanks.
(Ord. 109-04, passed 9-20-2004; Ord. 80-05, passed 6-20-2005; Ord. 104-10,
passed 8-23-2010; Ord. 16-16, passed 3-7-2016; Ord. 2-2017, passed 2-20-2017)
§ 1334.41  STREAM CHANNEL AND FLOODPLAIN EROSION DESIGN CRITERIA.
   (A)   Runoff Rate.  The peak runoff rate from the development area shall not
be greater after development than it was before development. The applicant
shall provide calculations proving no increase in the runoff rates from the
one, two, five, ten, 25, 50 and 100-year storms.
   (B)   Runoff Volume.  Increases in the runoff volume shall be offset by
further restricting runoff rates. Based on the increase in runoff volume, the
applicant shall determine the critical storm for the development area. The
runoff rate from the critical storm shall be restricted to the one-year
predevelopment storm runoff rate. The critical storm shall be calculated as
follows:
      (1)   Determine the total volume of runoff from a one-year frequency, 24-
hour storm, occurring on the development area before and after development; and
      (2)   From the volumes in division (A) of this section, determine the
percent of increase in volume of runoff due to development according to the
equation (Q after divided by the Q before) X 100 and, using this percentage,
select the critical storm from this table:
 
Table 4: Critical Storm Selection
The Percentage Increase in Volume of Runoff Is:
Equal to or Greater than And less than The 24-hour Critical Storm for Discharge
                                       Will be
0   10  1 year
10  20  2 years
20  50  5 years
50  100 10 years
100 250 25 years
250 500 50 years
500 — 100 years
 
   (C)   Detention or Retention Basin Exemption for Redevelopment or for
Expansion of Existing Facilities.
      (1)   For any development regulated by this subchapter, the construction
of a detention or retention basin may not be required for the development if
the post-development peak discharge for a 100-year frequency 24-hour storm
increases the existing peak discharge by one cubic foot per second or less
using the TR-55 method of calculation or other method approved by the City
Engineer. The City Engineer can waive this requirement if existing storm sewers
and drainage structures can safely handle the expected increase inflow.
      (2)   Only one exemption will be allowed per parcel. Any subsequent
expansion must provide for detention or retention and must include the
previously exempted area.
   (D)   Runoff Management Alternatives. Where the City Engineer determines
that site constraints exist in a manner that compromises the intent of this
subchapter to improve the management of storm water runoff as established in
this section, practical alternatives may be used to result in an improvement of
water quality and/or a reduction of storm water runoff. Such alternatives must
be in keeping with the intent and likely cost of those measures that would
otherwise be required to meet the objectives of this section. When possible,
all practical alternatives shall be implemented within the drainage area of the
proposed development project.  Practical alternatives can include, but are not
limited to:
      (1)   Fees shall be paid in an amount specified by the City Engineer.
These fees shall be applied by the city to storm water management practices
that reduce existing storm water runoff;
      (2)   Implementation of off-site storm water management practices;
      (3)   Watershed or stream restoration;
      (4)   Retrofitting of an existing storm water management practice; and
      (5)   Other practices approved by the City Engineer in keeping with the
intent of this section.
(Ord. 109-04, passed 9-20-2004; Ord. 104-10, passed 8-23-2010; Ord. 16-16,
passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1334.42  COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER RULES AND REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Ohio Dam Safety Laws.  The provisions of the Ohio Dam Safety Laws
shall be followed. Proof of compliance with the Ohio Dam Safety Law
administered by the ODNR Division of Water shall be, but is not limited to, a
copy of the ODNR Division of Water permit number or a copy of the project
approval letter from the ODNR Division of Water or a letter from the site owner
explaining why the Ohio Dam Safety Law is not applicable. The written proof
will be provided to the City Engineer before a construction permit will be
issued.
   (B)   NPDES Permits.  The provisions of the National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System (NPDES) permits, issued by the Ohio EPA, shall be followed.
Proof of compliance shall be, but is not limited to, a copy of the Ohio EPA
NPDES permit number or a letter from the site owner explaining why the NPDES
permit is not applicable. The written proof will be provided to the City
Engineer before a construction permit will be issued.
   (C)   Federal and State Wetland Permits.  The provisions of the U.S. Army
Corps of Engineers dredge and fill permits for federally-protected wetlands
shall be followed. The provisions of Ohio EPA’s isolated wetlands permits shall
also be followed. Wetlands and other waters of the United States shall be
delineated by protocols accepted by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the
Ohio EPA at the time of the application of these regulations. Written proof of
compliance with both permit programs will be provided to the City Engineer
before a construction permit will be issued. Proof of compliance shall be, but
is not limited to, the following:
      (1)   A copy of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers individual permit, if
required for the project, showing project approval and any restrictions that
apply to site activities;
      (2)   A site plan showing that any proposed fill of waters of the United
States conforms to the general and specific conditions specified in the
applicable nationwide permit; or
      (3)   A letter from the a qualified professional retained by the site
owner verifying that he or she has surveyed the site and found no wetlands or
other waters of the United States. Such a letter shall be noted on site plans
submitted to the city.
(Ord. 109-04, passed 9-20-2004; Ord. 104-10, passed 8-23-2010; Ord. 16-16,
passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1334.43  VIOLATIONS.
   No person shall violate, or cause, or knowingly permit to be violated, any
of the provisions of these regulations, or fail to comply with any such
provisions or with any lawful requirements of any public authority made
pursuant to these regulations, or knowingly use or cause or permit the use of
any lands in violation of these regulations or in violation of any permit
granted under these regulations.
(Ord. 109-04, passed 9-20-2004; Ord. 104-10, passed 8-23-2010)
§ 1334.44  PENALTIES.
   (A)   Whoever violates or fails to comply with any provision of this
regulation is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree and shall be fined no
more than $1,000 or imprisoned for no more than 180 days, or both, for each
offense.
   (B)   A separate offense shall be deemed committed each day during or on
which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.
   (C)   Upon notice from the City Engineer, or designated representative, that
work is being performed contrary to this regulation, such work shall
immediately stop. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the
owner or person responsible for the development area, or person performing the
work, and shall state the conditions under which such work may be resumed;
provided, however, in instances where immediate action is deemed necessary for
public safety or the public interest, the City Engineer may require that work
be stopped upon verbal order pending issuance of the written order.
   (D)   The imposition of any other penalties provided herein shall not
preclude the city, by or through its Law Director and/or any of his or her
assistants, from instituting an appropriate action or proceeding in a court of
proper jurisdiction to prevent an unlawful development or to restrain, correct
or abate a violation, or to require compliance with the provisions of this
regulation or other applicable laws, or ordinances, rules or regulations or the
orders of the City Engineer.
(Ord. 109-04, passed 9-20-2004; Ord. 104-10, passed 8-23-2010; Ord. 16-16,
passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1334.45  CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE GUARANTEE.
   All permanent storm water, soil erosion, other wastes control and water
quality practices not specifically waived by the city shall be constructed
prior to the granting of the final plat approval. Upon the request of the
owner, the city may defer the construction or installation of a permanent storm
water, soil erosion, sediment or other wastes control or water quality practice
prior to the approval of the final plat where, in the City Engineer’s judgment,
such proper construction or installation is not immediately necessary for the
protection of the public health and safety; and where the prior installation or
construction of such improvement would constitute an undue hardship on the
owner because in the case of new vegetation or weather conditions, or because
in the case of concrete, building construction could cause cracking and
excessive wear and tear on new structures. In such event, the city shall
require a security bond, escrow account, certified check or cash to guarantee
that such deferred improvements will be properly constructed or installed
within an agreed specified time, but not to exceed six months after the filing
of such final plat.  The owner will provide a maintenance guarantee for all
permanent improvements, and soil erosion, wastes controls and water quality
practices.  The city shall require a security bond, escrow account, certified
check or cash to guarantee that the planned temporary and permanent soil
erosion, sediment, and other wastes controls and water quality practices will
be constructed and removed in a timely manner, as determined by the City
Engineer.
   (A)   The Guarantee.  The guarantee of both performance and maintenance will
be in the form of a security bond, escrow account, verified check or cash. The
security bond, escrow account, verified check or cash will be used by the city
to complete any guaranteed construction or removal of improvements or temporary
and permanent soil erosion, sediment and other wastes control practices that
are not adequately completed, maintained or removed by the owner in a timely
manner, as determined by the City Engineer. The security bond, escrow account,
verified check or cash will be in the total amount of both the performance
guarantee and the maintenance guarantee. Ohio municipalities and counties may
require performance bonds or other guarantees for water management improvement
as stated in Ohio R.C. 711.101.
      (1)   Security bond, escrow account, verified check or cash shall be
deposited with the city prior to review by the City Engineer and/or its
consultants to cover professional services of the City Engineer, Building
Commissioner, Zoning Inspector and/or other experts required by the City
Engineer, City Council, Mayor or Review Boards.
      (2)   No soil-disturbing activities shall be permitted until a security
bond, escrow account, verified check or cash has been posted to the
satisfaction of the City Engineer sufficient for the city to perform the
obligations otherwise to be performed by the owner or person responsible for
the development area as stated in this regulation, and to allow all work to be
performed as needed in the event that the owner or person responsible for the
development area fails to comply with the provisions of this regulation. The
security bond, escrow account, verified check or cash shall be released only
after all work required by this regulation has been completed to the
satisfaction of the City Engineer and all permit and inspection fees required
by these regulations have been paid in full.
      (3)   No project subject to this regulation shall commence without the
Construction Site Conservation Plan having been approved by the City Engineer.
   (B)   Performance Guarantee.  The furnishing of a performance guarantee will
be maintained in an amount of not less than 120% of the estimate approved by
the City Engineer, of installation of the deferred improvements.
   (C)   Maintenance Guarantee.  The maintenance guarantee shall be maintained
for a period of not less than two years after final acceptance of the storm
water, soil erosion, sediment and other wastes control practices in an amount
equal to 20% of the estimate approved by the City Engineer, of the construction
and, where necessary, removal of such practices.
   (D)   Time Extension.  The City Engineer may extend for cause the time
allowed for the installation of the improvements for which the performance
guarantee has been provided with the receipt of a written request from the
owner.
   (E)   Completion.  Upon completion of the construction of improvements or
temporary and/or permanent, soil erosion, sediment, and other wastes control
practices and the removal of the temporary soil erosion, sediment, and other
wastes control practices for which the performance guarantee has been provided,
the owner shall notify the City Engineer of this fact.
   (F)   Inspection.  The city will not release the security bond, escrow
account, verified check or cash guarantee until the City Engineer has inspected
the site to ensure that the guaranteed item(s) have been completed and/or
removed.
   (G)   Slow Release Device.  Performance and maintenance guarantees will be
maintained on the temporary sediment removal slow release devices installed in
detention and retention basins until the entire site has reached final soil
stabilization. Final stabilization in single-family residential developments is
when 90% of the homes are constructed, with their lawns completely installed
and any remaining unbuilt lots having been permanently stabilized with a
uniform ground cover at a growth density of 80% or better.
   (H)   Release.  The construction maintenance guarantee shall not be released
by the city until all temporary soil erosion and sediment control practices
that are no longer needed have been removed, properly disposed of and any
trapped sediment has been stabilized.
(Ord. 109-04, passed 9-20-2004; Ord. 104-10, passed 8-23-2010; Ord. 16-16,
passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1334.46  APPLICATION PROCEDURES FOR CONSTRUCTION CONSERVATION PLANS (CCP).
   (A)   This plan will be combined with the post-construction water quality,
riparian setback and wetland setback plans that have also been developed for
the site.
   (B)   Plans developed by the site owners and approved by the city in
accordance with this regulation do not relieve the site owner of responsibility
for obtaining and complying with all other necessary permits and/or approvals
from federal, state, county and local agencies and departments. If requirements
vary, the most stringent requirement shall be followed. Plans submitted to the
City Engineer for review and approval, shall be accompanied by all other
required permits and documentation relevant to the project, including, but not
limited to, the permits required and issued by the U.S. Army Corps of
Engineers, Ohio EPA and ODNR Division of Water. If the city will be requiring
that the local soil and water conservation district (SWCD) review the plans,
the city should first discuss this issue and how to implement the plan reviews
with the local SWCD. It should be noted that only the Ohio EPA and the local
communities can state that any plans or activities meet their regulations and
rules.
   (C)   The application must include a letter or report from the local county
SWCD that states that the Construction Site Conservation Plan, the Riparian and
Wetland Setback Plan and the Post-Construction Water Quality Plan have been
reviewed for consistency with Ohio EPA and local regulations.
   (D)   Five sets of the plans and necessary data required by this regulation
shall be submitted to the City Engineer with text material being submitted on
eight and one-half by 11-inch paper and drawings on no larger than 24 by 36-
inch sized paper. Submittals shall include:
      (1)   At the preliminary plan approval request, the preliminary plans
only need to show all of the following existing and planned features: streams,
water bodies, wetlands, riparian and wetland setback areas, permanent BMPs and
storm water management detention and retention basins; and
      (2)   At the improvement plan approval request, the entire Comprehensive
Storm Water Management Plan must be submitted.
   (E)   The City Engineer shall review the plans, including the review report
from the local County SWCD, and shall approve or return these with comments and
recommendations for revisions within 30 working days after receipt of the plan
as described above. A plan rejected because of deficiencies shall receive a
report stating specific problems. At the time of receipt of a revised plan,
another 30 working-day review period shall begin.
   (F)   Approved plans shall remain valid for two years from the date of
approval. After two years, the plan(s) approval automatically expires.
   (G)   No soil-disturbing activity shall begin before all necessary local,
county, state and federal permits have been granted to the owner or operator.
   (H)   The city will do construction inspections at the developer’s expense
until the site reaches final stabilization as determined by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 109-04, passed 9-20-2004; Ord. 104-10, passed 8-23-2010; Ord. 16-16,
passed 3-7-2016)
§ 1334.47  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this subchapter, the following definitions shall apply
unless the context clearly indicates or requires a different meaning.
   “Approving authority.”  The official responsible for administering the
applicable program(s).
   “Best management practice (BMP).” Any practice or combination of practices
that is determined to be the most effective, practicable (including
technological, economic and institutional considerations) means of preventing
or reducing the amount of pollution generated by non-point sources of pollution
to a level compatible with water quality goals. “BMPs” may include structural
practices, conservation practices and operation and maintenance procedures.
   “Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC).”  A person
that has subscribed to the Code of Ethics and have met the requirements
established by the CPESC Council of Certified Professionals in Erosion and
Sediment Control, Inc., to be a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment
Control.
   “Channel.”  A natural stream that conveys water, or a ditch or channel
excavated for the natural flow of water.
   “City.”  Throughout this regulation the city shall mean the City of
Broadview Heights, State of Ohio, and its designated agents and
representatives.
   “Concentrated storm water runoff.”  Surface water runoff which converges and
flows primarily through water conveyance features such as swales, gullies,
waterways, channels or storm sewers, and which exceeds the maximum specified
flow rates of filters or perimeter controls intended to control sheet flow.
   “Conservation.”  The wise use and management of natural resources.
   “Cut and fill slopes.”  A portion of land surface or area from which soil
material is excavated and/or filled.
   “Denuded area.”  A portion of land surface on which the vegetation or other
soil stabilization features have been removed, destroyed or covered, and which
may result in or contribute to erosion and sedimentation.
   “Detention basin.”  A storm water management pond that remains dry between
storm events. Storm water management ponds include a properly engineered/
designed volume which is dedicated to the temporary storage and slow release of
runoff waters.
   “Development area.”  Any tract, lot or parcel of land, or combination of
tracts, lots or parcels of land, which are in one ownership, or are contiguous
and in diverse ownership, where earth-disturbing activity is to be performed.
   “Ditch.”  An excavation, either dug or natural, for the purpose of drainage
or irrigation, and having intermittent flow.
   “Dumping.”  The grading, pushing, piling, throwing, unloading or placing of
soil or other material.
   “Earth-disturbing activity.”  Any grading, excavating, filling or other
alteration of the earth’s surface where natural or human-made ground cover is
destroyed.
   “Earth material.”  Soil, sediment, rock, sand, gravel and organic material
or residue associated with or attached to the soil.
   “Erosion.”  The process by which the land surface is worn away by the action
of water, wind, ice or gravity.
   “Existing.”  In existence at the time of the passage of these regulations.
   “Frequency storm.”  A rainfall event of a magnitude having a specified
average recurrence interval and is calculated with Natural Resources
Conservation Service, USDA Type II 24-hour curves or depth-duration frequency
curves.
   “Grading.”  Earth-disturbing activity such as excavation, stripping,
cutting, filling, stockpiling or any combination thereof.
   “Grubbing.”  Removing, clearing or scalping material such as roots, stumps
or sod.
   “Landslide.”  The rapid mass movement of soil and rock material downhill
under the influence of gravity, in which the movement of the soil mass occurs
along an interior surface of sliding.
   “Larger common plan of development or sale.”  A contiguous area where
multiple separate and distinct construction activities may be taking place at
different times on different schedules under one plan.
   “Local County SWCD”  The local County Soil and Water Conservation District.
   “Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS).”  An agency of the United
States Department of Agriculture, formerly known as the Soil Conservation
Service (SCS).
   “NPDES permit.”  A National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit
issued by Ohio EPA under the authority of the USEPA, and derived from the
Federal Clean Water Act.
   “Ohio EPA.”  The Ohio Environmental Protection Agency.
   “Ordinary high water mark.”  The point of the bank or shore to which the
presence and action of surface water is so continuous as to leave a district
marked by erosion, destruction or prevention of woody terrestrial vegetation,
predominance of aquatic vegetation, or other easily recognized characteristic.
   “Outfall.”  An area where water flows from a structure such as a conduit,
storm sewer, improved channel or drain, and the area immediately beyond the
structure which is impacted by the velocity of flow in the structure.
   “Person.”  Any individual, corporation, partnership, joint venture, agency,
unincorporated association, municipal corporation, township, county, state
agency, the federal government or any combination thereof.
   “Professional engineer.”  A person registered in the State of Ohio as a
professional engineer, with specific education and experience in water
resources engineering, acting in strict conformance with the Code of Ethics of
the Ohio Board of Registration for Engineers and Surveyors.
   “Qualified inspection personnel.”  A person knowledgeable in the principles
and practice of erosion and sediment controls, who possesses the skills to
assess all conditions at the construction site that could impact storm water
quality and to assess the effectiveness of any sediment and erosion control
measures selected to control the quality of storm water discharges from the
construction activity.
   “Redevelopment.”  The demolition or removal of existing structures or land
uses and construction of new ones.
   “Retention basin.”  A storm water management pond that maintains a permanent
pool of water. These storm water management ponds include a properly
engineered/designed volume dedicated to the temporary storage and slow release
of runoff waters.
   “Riparian area.”  Naturally vegetated land adjacent to watercourses which,
if appropriately sized, helps to stabilize streambanks, limit erosion, reduce
flood flows and/or filter and settle out runoff pollutants, or which performs
other functions consistent with the purposes of these regulations.
   “Riparian setback.”  Those lands within the city which are alongside streams
where earth- disturbing activities will not take place and natural vegetation
will not be removed.
   “Sediment.”  Solid material, both mineral and organic, that is in
suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by
wind, water, gravity or ice, and has come to rest on the earth’s surface either
on dry land or in a body of water.
   “Sediment barrier.”  A sediment control device such as a geotextile silt
fence or a grass filter strip, usually capable of controlling only small flow
rates. Straw bale barriers are not acceptable.
   “Sediment control.”  The limiting of sediment being transported by
controlling erosion or detaining sediment-laden water and allowing the sediment
to settle out.
   “Sediment settling pond.”  A temporary sediment pond that releases runoff at
a controlled rate. It is designed to slowly release runoff, detaining it long
enough to allow most of the sediment to settle out of the water. The outlet
structure is usually a designed pipe riser and barrel. The entire structure is
removed after construction. Permanent storm water detention structures can be
modified to function as temporary sediment basins.
   “Sediment pollution.”  A failure to use management or conservation practices
to control wind or water erosion of the soil and to minimize the degradation of
water resources by soil sediment in conjunction with land grading, excavating,
filling or other soil disturbing activities on land used or being developed for
commercial, industrial, residential or other purposes.
   “Sensitive area.”  An area or water resource that requires special
management because of its susceptibility to sediment pollution or because of
its importance to the well-being of the surrounding communities, region or the
state, and includes, but is not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Ponds, wetlands or small lakes with less than five acres of surface
area;
      (2)   Small streams with gradients less than ten feet per mile with
average annual flows of less than three and one-half feet per second,
containing sand or gravel bottoms;
      (3)   Drainage areas of a locally or Ohio Designated Scenic River; and
      (4)   Riparian and wetland areas.
   “Settling pond.”  A runoff detention structure, such as a sediment basin or
sediment trap, which detains sediment-laden runoff, allowing sediment to settle
out.
   “Sheet flow.”  Water runoff in a thin uniform layer or rills and which is of
small enough quantity to be treated by sediment barriers.
   “Slip.”  A landslide as defined under “Landslides.”
   “Sloughing.”  A slip or downward movement of an extended layer of soil
resulting from the undermining action of water or the earth-disturbing activity
of man.
   “Soil.” Unconsolidated erodible earth material consisting of minerals and/or
organics.
   “Soil Conservation Service, USDA.”  The federal agency now titled the
“Natural Resources Conservation Service,” which is an agency of the United
States Department of Agriculture.
   “Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Plan.”  A written and/or drawn soil
erosion and sediment pollution control plan to minimize erosion and prevent
off-site sedimentation throughout all earth-disturbing activities on a
development area.
   “Soil erosion and sediment control practices.”  Conservation measures used
to control sediment pollution, and including structural practices, vegetative
practices and management techniques.
   “Soil stabilization.”  Vegetative or structural soil cover that controls
erosion, and includes permanent and temporary seeding, mulch, sod, pavement and
the like.
   “Soil survey.”  The official soil survey produced by the Natural Resources
Conservation Service, USDA, in cooperation with the Division of Soil and Water
Conservation, ODNR and the local Board of County Commissioners.
   “Storm water control structure.”  Practice used to control accelerated storm
water runoff from development areas.
   “Storm water conveyance.”  All storm sewers, channels, streams, ponds, lakes
and the like, used for conveying concentrated storm water runoff or for storing
storm water runoff.
   “Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan (SWP3).”  The plan required by Ohio
EPA to meet the requirements of its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System (NPDES) permit program for construction activities.
   “Stream.”  A body of water running or flowing on the earth’s surface, or a
channel with a defined bed and banks in which such flow occurs. Flow may be
seasonally intermittent.
   “Unstable soil.”  A portion of land surface or area which is prone to
slipping, sloughing or landslides, or is identified by Natural Resources
Conservation Service methodology as having a low soil strength.
   “USEPA.”  The United States Environmental Protection Agency.
   “Wastewater.”  Any water that is contaminated with gasoline, fuel oil,
hydrocarbon based chemicals, paint, paint washing liquids or other paint
wastes, sanitary wastes or any other Ohio EPA regulated contaminants.
   “Water resources.”  All streams, lakes, ponds, wetlands, watercourses,
waterways, drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of surface
water, either natural or artificial, which are situated wholly or partly
within, or border upon this state, or are within its jurisdiction, except those
private waters which do not combine or affect a junction with natural surface
waters.
   “Watercourse.”  Any natural, perennial, or intermittent channel with a
defined bed and banks, stream, river or brook.
   “Wetland.”  Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground
water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal
circumstances, do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life
in saturated soil conditions, including swamps, marshes, bogs and similar
areas,  40 C.F.R. part 232, as amended. Wetlands shall be delineated by a site
survey approved by the city using delineation protocols accepted by the U.S.
Army Corps of Engineers and the Ohio EPA at the time of application of this
regulation. If a conflict exists between the delineation protocols of these two
agencies, the delineation protocol that results in the most inclusive area of
wetlands shall apply.
   “Wetland setback.”  Those lands adjacent to wetlands where earth-disturbing
activities will not take place and natural vegetation will not be removed.
   “Winter.”  October 1 to April 1 of each year.
(Ord. 109-04, passed 9-20-2004; Ord. 104-10, passed 8-23-2010; Ord. 16-16,
passed 3-7-2016)
CHAPTER 1336:  TEMPORARY DRIVEWAYS AND PROTECTIVE PLANKINGS
Section
   
1336.01   Protection of curbs, treelawns, sidewalks, drainage ditches and
culverts
   
1336.02   Permanent driveways
   
1336.99   Penalty
Cross references:
   Driveway construction specifications, see
Chapter 1023
   Driving upon sidewalks, tree lawns or curbs, see §
432.22
   Right-of-way at private driveway, alley or building, see §
432.20
   Roadway ditch lines, see
Chapter 1322
   Sidewalk obstructions; damage or injury, see §
660.10
Editor’s note:
   This Chapter 1336 was formerly Chapter 1484 of the Building and Housing
Code, which was recodified by Ordinance 62-07, passed June 4, 2007.
§ 1336.01  PROTECTION OF CURBS, TREELAWNS, SIDEWALKS, DRAINAGE DITCHES AND
CULVERTS.
   Before proceeding with the construction, enlargement, alteration, repair or
removal of any building or other structure, when it is desired or may be
necessary to make use of, or to drive across, a curb, treelawn, sidewalk,
drainage ditch or culvert, the owner shall construct and maintain a plank
driveway, to the approval of the Building Commissioner, across and over the
curb, treelawn, sidewalk, drainage ditch or culvert, so that they shall not be
injured or damaged, and shall install upon the property upon which a building
is being constructed, repaired, altered or moved, a temporary driveway of
gravel, slag or other material sufficient to carry construction or material
vehicles and sufficient to prevent the accumulation of mud on the wheels of
such vehicles.
(Ord. 24-71, passed 3-10-1971; Ord. 150-02, passed 9-16-2002)
§ 1336.02  PERMANENT DRIVEWAYS.
   All new main use structures shall have concrete (unless another paving
material is approved by Council) driveways with the following minimum
specifications:
   (A)   Level with surface grade of intersecting sidewalks;
   (B)   Five and one-half-bag mix at 94 pounds per bag of portland cement;
   (C)   Air entrainment of 5% to 7% at time of pour;
   (D)   Shall contain no more water than will permit a slump between four and
six inches;
   (E)   Shall have the following uniform thickness in a private driveway:
      (1)   Four inches with mesh or six inches without mesh; and
      (2)   Six inches in driveway apron.
   (F)   Stone, gravel limestone screenings or other approved material shall be
used as a leveling course;
   (G)   Compacted fill under aprons and the public sidewalk crossed by the
driveway shall be:
      (1)   Four inches for residential; and
      (2)   Six inches under commercial driveways.
   (H)   Subgrade or base shall be dampened if dry before pouring;
   (I)   Control joints shall be to a depth of one-fourth the thickness of the
slab and shall not exceed ten feet apart;
   (J)   One-half-inch expansion joints required every 30 feet on driveways;
   (K)   Isolation joints required where concrete abuts any structure, paved
street or sidewalk;
   (L)   Drop concrete, for 12 inches back from street pavement, to allow for
snow plows; and
   (M)   Apply sealcoat as soon as possible - cold weather precautions shall
prevail.
(Ord. 150-02, passed 9-16-2002)
§ 1336.99  PENALTY. 
Editor’s note:
   See §
1440.99 for general Building and Housing Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.
CHAPTER 1338:  UNSAFE BUILDINGS
Section
   
1338.01   Unsafe structures defined; abatement
   
1338.02   Examination
   
1338.03   Notice and order; service
   
1338.04   Vacation and prohibition of use; posting of notice
   
1338.05   Appeal
   
1338.06   Noncompliance; authority of Law Director
   
1338.07   Emergencies
   
1338.08   Costs
   
1338.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Building and housing regulations, see Part 14
   Declaration of emergency in cases of unsafe building or structure, see §
1348.09
   Inspection required prior to occupancy, see §
1448.08
   Maintenance of buildings, see §
1420.01
   Nonconforming uses, see
Chapter 1282
Editor’s note:
   This Chapter 1338 was formerly Chapter 1486 of the Building and Housing
Code, which was recodified by Ordinance 62-07, passed June 4, 2007.
§ 1338.01  UNSAFE STRUCTURES DEFINED; ABATEMENT.
   All buildings and structures which are structurally unsafe, unsanitary or
not provided with adequate safe egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or
which are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which, in relation to existing
use, constitute a hazard to safety or health by reason of inadequate
maintenance, dilapidation, obsolescence or abandonment, are hereby declared to
be unsafe structures. All such unsafe structures are hereby prohibited and
shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation or demolition in accordance with the
provisions of this chapter.
(Ord. 37-70, passed 7-13-1970)
§ 1338.02  EXAMINATION.
   The Building Commissioner shall examine or cause to be examined every
building or other structure reported to be unsafe or damaged and shall make a
written record of such examination.
(Ord. 37-70, passed 7-13-1970)
§ 1338.03  NOTICE AND ORDER; SERVICE.
   (A)   Whenever the Building Commissioner finds any building or structure, or
a portion thereof, to be an unsafe structure, he or she shall, in accordance
with established procedure, give written notice to the owner, agent or person
in control of such building or structure, which written notice shall state the
defects thereof. This notice shall require the owner, within a stated time,
either to complete specified repairs or improvements or to demolish and remove
the building or structure, or a portion thereof, found to be unsafe.
   (B)   If the person to whom such notice and order is addressed cannot be
found within the city after diligent search, then such notice and order shall
be sent by registered mail to the last known address of such person and a copy
of such notice shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the premises to which
it relates. Such mailings and posting shall be deemed legal service of such
notice.
(Ord. 37-70, passed 7-13-1970)
§ 1338.04  VACATION AND PROHIBITION OF USE; POSTING OF NOTICE.
   (A)   If necessary, the notice referred to in §
1338.03 shall also require the building or structure, or a portion thereof, to
be vacated forthwith and not reoccupied or used until the specified repairs or
improvements are completed, inspected and approved by the Building
Commissioner, who shall cause to be posted at each entrance to such building or
structure a notice as follows:
   THIS STRUCTURE IS IN A DANGEROUS CONDITION AND HAS BEEN CONDEMNED AND ITS
USE HAS BEEN PROHIBITED BY THE BUILDING COMMISSIONER.
   (B)   Such notice shall remain posted until the required repairs are made or
demolition is completed. No person shall remove such notice without written
permission from the Building Commissioner. No person shall use or enter the
building or structure except for the purpose of making the required repairs or
demolishing the building or structure.
(Ord. 37-70, passed 7-13-1970)
§ 1338.05  APPEAL.
   The owner, agent or person in control of the building or structure in
question shall have the right to appeal to the Board of Zoning Appeals from the
decision of the Building Commissioner and to appear before the Board at a
specified time and place to show cause why he or she should not comply with the
notice.
(Ord. 37-70, passed 7-13-1970)
§ 1338.06  NONCOMPLIANCE; AUTHORITY OF LAW DIRECTOR.
   If the owner, agent or person in control cannot be found within the stated
time limit, or if such owner, agent or person in control fails, neglects or
refuses to comply with the notice to repair, rehabilitate or demolish and
remove the building or structure, or a portion thereof, the Law Director shall
be advised of all the facts in the case and shall institute appropriate legal
action to compel such compliance.
(Ord. 37-70, passed 7-13-1970)
§ 1338.07  EMERGENCIES.
   In the case of an emergency which, in the opinion of the Building
Commissioner, involves immediate danger to human life or health, such
Commissioner shall promptly cause such building or structure, or a portion
thereof, to be made safe or removed. For this purpose, he or she may at once
enter such structure with such assistance and at such cost as he or she may
deem necessary; order adjacent structures and premises to be vacated; and
protect the public by an appropriate fence or other such means as may be
necessary, for which purpose he or she may close a public or private way.
(Ord. 37-70, passed 7-13-1970)
§ 1338.08  COSTS.
   Costs incurred under §§
1338.06 and
1338.07, due to the use of employees, materials and equipment of the city, or
by contract for labor, materials and equipment, or both, in the removal of
insecure, unsafe or structurally defective buildings or other structures,
regardless of whether such removal is authorized under Ohio R.C. 715.26 or
Article XVIII, Section 3, of the Ohio Constitution, including the cost of
service or publication of the notice, together with a proper description of the
premises, shall be certified by the Clerk of Council to the County Auditor and
by him or her placed on the tax duplicate. Such costs shall be a lien upon such
lands from and after the date of entry and shall be controlled and collected as
other taxes and returned to the city.
(Ord. 37-70, passed 7-13-1970)
§ 1338.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1440.99 for general Building and Housing Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.
CHAPTER 1340:  SAFETY FORCES RADIO SIGNAL COMMUNICATION REQUIREMENTS
Section
   
1340.01   Signal booster
Editor’s note:
   This Chapter 1340 was formerly Chapter 1478 of the Building and Housing
Code, which was recodified by Ordinance 62-07, passed June 4, 2007.
§ 1340.01  SIGNAL BOOSTER.
   All new commercial buildings two stories in height, or buildings over 7,000
square feet in total habitable area, including sub-levels (below grade),
constructed of Type I or Type II construction, including existing buildings
with the above-mentioned requirements when a change of occupancy occurs, shall
have emergency radio signal booster equipment installed to help assist in
safety force signal communication.
(Ord. 32-07, passed 3-5-2007)
CHAPTER 1342:  WASTEWATER TREATMENT PLANTS
Section
   
1342.01   Intent
   
1342.02   New construction; plans and specifications; maintenance and
inspection contracts
   
1342.03   Inspection fee schedule
   
1342.04   Existing buildings; plans and specifications; maintenance and
inspection contracts
   
1342.05   Compliance required prior to issuance of building permits
   
1342.06   Continuous inspection
   
1342.07   Notice, maintenance orders and corrective action
   
1342.08   Bond required
   
1342.09   Prohibition against faulty operation
   
1342.10   Improper discharge prohibited
   
1342.11   Connections to sewers required when available
   
1342.12   License required
   
1342.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Connection with sanitary sewers required when available, see §
1042.02
Editor’s note:
   This Chapter 1342 was formerly Chapter 1488 of the Building and Housing
Code, which was recodified by Ordinance 62-07, passed June 4, 2007.
Statutory reference:
   Regulations to control house sewers and connections to sewerage system, see
Ohio R.C. 729.51
   Untreated sewage, see Ohio R.C. 3701.59
§ 1342.01  INTENT.
   It is the intent of Council, for the health, safety and welfare of all the
residents of the city, to provide adequate controls for the proper operation of
mechanical wastewater treatment plants heretofore and hereafter constructed
within the city.
(Ord. 45-79, passed 5-7-1979)
§ 1342.02  NEW CONSTRUCTION; PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS; MAINTENANCE AND
INSPECTION CONTRACTS.
   No person seeking a building permit to construct any building or subdivision
improvement, other than a single- or two-family dwelling unit, within the city,
when a mechanical wastewater treatment plant is to be constructed to service
the waste from such building, shall fail to:
   (A)   Obtain written approval of the plans, specifications and discharge
point from the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency;
   (B)   Place on file with the Division of Engineering a copy of the plans,
specifications and written approval of the Ohio Environmental Protection
Agency;
   (C)   Submit an executed copy of a contract, between the owner of the real
property upon which the building and wastewater treatment plant are to be
constructed, and a licensed state wastewater treatment plant operator,
providing for the perpetual maintenance and repair of such plant until its use
can be discontinued and connection is made to the sanitary sewerage system of
the city, which contract shall be binding upon heirs, administrators, executors
and assigns of the owner; and
   (D)   Enter into a contract with the city providing for bimonthly inspection
of the wastewater treatment plant by the City Engineer or the inspector
designated for such purpose. The contract shall be in such form as determined
by the Director of Law and approved by Council. Inspection fees shall be
provided therein in accordance with the fee schedule set forth in §
1342.03, which fees shall be paid annually in advance by the owner to the
Director of Finance.
(Ord. 45-79, passed 5-7-1979)
§ 1342.03  INSPECTION FEE SCHEDULE.
   For each wastewater treatment plant facility, an annual inspection fee shall
be payable in advance on or before January 1 as follows:
 
Gallons Per Day Fee
1,000 to 5,000  $260
5,001 to 20,000 $300
20,001 or more  $350
 
(Ord. 45-79, passed 5-7-1979)
§ 1342.04  EXISTING BUILDINGS; PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS; MAINTENANCE AND
INSPECTION CONTRACTS.
   On or before January 1, 1980, no person owning or operating any building,
structure or subdivision, other than individually owned single- or two-family
dwelling units, within the city, wherein or whereon or in connection with which
a mechanical wastewater treatment plant is used to service such building,
structure or subdivision, shall fail to:
   (A)   Obtain written approval of the plans, specifications and discharge
point from the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency;
   (B)   Place on file with the Division of Engineering a copy of the plans,
specifications and written approval of the Ohio Environmental Protection
Agency;
   (C)   Submit an executed copy of a contract, between the owner of the real
property upon which the building and wastewater treatment plant is constructed,
and a licensed state wastewater treatment plant operator, providing for the
perpetual maintenance and repair of such plant until its use can be
discontinued and connection is made to the sanitary sewerage system of the
city, which contract shall be binding upon heirs, administrators, executors and
assigns of the owner; and
   (D)   Enter into a contract with the city providing for bimonthly inspection
of the wastewater treatment plant by the City Engineer or the inspector
designated for such purpose. The contract shall be in such form as determined
by the Director of Law and approved by Council. Inspection fees shall be
provided therein in accordance with the fee schedule set forth in §
1342.03, which fees shall be paid annually in advance by the owner to the
Director of Finance.
(Ord. 45-79, passed 5-7-1979)
§ 1342.05  COMPLIANCE REQUIRED PRIOR TO ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS.
   No building permit shall be issued to construct any building within the city
until the applicant therefor has complied with §
1342.02.
(Ord. 45-79, passed 5-7-1979)
§ 1342.06  CONTINUOUS INSPECTION.
   The application submitted for a wastewater treatment plant permit shall be
deemed to be a perpetual license to the city, its agents or employees, to enter
upon the premises wherein the wastewater treatment plant and its appurtenances
are located, for the purpose of inspecting the condition and operation of such
plant and to perform whatever tests are necessary to ascertain that the plant
is operating in accordance with the standards established by the Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency, which standards are attached to original
Ordinance 45-79, passed May 7, 1979, and made a part hereof as though fully
rewritten herein.
(Ord. 45-79, passed 5-7-1979)
§ 1342.07  NOTICE, MAINTENANCE ORDERS AND CORRECTIVE ACTION.
   Upon inspection, if the inspector finds that the wastewater treatment plant
is not being properly maintained, or is in need of repair or is not operating
in accordance with the standards set forth in §
1342.06, he or she shall forthwith serve a notice upon the owner by certified
mail, setting forth therein the maintenance to be performed or the repairs to
be made. A copy of such notice shall be sent to the Ohio Environmental
Protection Agency and a copy shall be sent to the person with whom the owner
contracted for maintenance and repair of such plant. The owner, within ten days
of the date of the notice, shall cause the specified maintenance or repairs
therein prescribed to be performed.
(Ord. 45-79, passed 5-7-1979)
§ 1342.08  BOND REQUIRED.
   (A)   No permit to construct any building referred to in §
1342.02 shall be issued until the applicant therefor has posted with the
Director of Finance a cash bond as follows:
 
Gallons Per Day (of Plant) Bond
1,000 to 5,000             $500
5,001 to 20,000            $750
20,001 or more             $1,000
 
   (B)   This bond shall remain on deposit with the city until the wastewater
treatment plant has been discontinued and the sewerage system serviced by such
plant has been attached to the sanitary sewerage system of the city.
   (C)   The applicant, in posting this bond, authorizes the inspector, in the
event that proper maintenance or repairs are not performed within ten days,
after notice as specified in §
1342.07, to notify the maintenance firm, authorize maintenance or repairs and
pay the cost of maintenance or repairs out of the cash bond on deposit.
   (D)   When the wastewater treatment plant is discontinued and connection
made to the sanitary sewerage system of the city, any undistributed cash from
the cash bond shall be returned to the owner.
(Ord. 45-79, passed 5-7-1979) 
§ 1342.09  PROHIBITION AGAINST FAULTY OPERATION.
   No person, being the owner of land upon which there is a wastewater
treatment plant in connection with the use of the property under the provisions
of this chapter, shall maintain or continue the operation of a plant that is
not operating in accordance with the standards established by the Ohio
Environmental Protection Agency and adopted by this chapter.
(Ord. 45-79, passed 5-7-1979)
§ 1342.10  IMPROPER DISCHARGE PROHIBITED.
   No person shall discharge, or permit or cause to be discharged, sewage or
the overflow, drainage or contents of a wastewater treatment plant onto the
surface of the ground, or onto any street, road or alley, or into a storm
sewer, drainage ditch or watercourse creek, except in a manner provided by the
Ohio Environmental Protection Agency.
(Ord. 45-79, passed 5-7-1979)
§ 1342.11  CONNECTIONS TO SEWERS REQUIRED WHEN AVAILABLE.
   No wastewater treatment plant shall be installed and maintained on property
accessible to a sanitary sewer. Whenever a sanitary sewer is made available,
the treatment plant shall be abandoned and the sewage shall be discharged
directly from the building to the sanitary sewer without passage through the
treatment plant. The plant shall thereafter be dismantled in accordance with
the regulations prescribed by the City Engineer.
(Ord. 45-79, passed 5-7-1979)
§ 1342.12  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   No person shall operate a wastewater treatment plant within the city without
first having obtained a wastewater treatment plant operator’s license from the
state. Operators licensed by the state shall place on file with the Division of
Engineering a certified or photostatic copy of such license.
(Ord. 45-79, passed 5-7-1979)
§ 1342.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1440.99 for general Building and Housing Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.
CHAPTER 1344:  WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES
Section
1344.01   Intent
1344.02   Definitions
1344.03   Permitted and prohibited locations
1344.04   General requirements
1344.05   Use regulations
1344.06   Permit fees
1344.07   Exemptions for facilities located on city-owned property
1344.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Cable television, see
Chapter 811
   Fees for wireless telecommunications facilities, see
Chapter 1344
   Prosecutions for theft of utilities, see §
642.26
   Satellite signal-receiving earth stations, see
Chapter 1326
   Threatening or harassing telecommunications, see §
636.15
Editor’s note:
   This Chapter 1344 was formerly Chapter 1489 of the Building and Housing
Code, which was recodified by Ordinance 62-07, passed June 4, 2007.
Statutory reference:
   Interrupting or impairing television, radio, telephone, telegraph or other
mass communication service, see Ohio R.C. 2909.04
   Telegraph and telephone companies, see Ohio R.C. 4931
§ 1344.01  INTENT.
   (A)   Consistent with the Telecommunications Act of 1996, the city intends
to: 
      (1)   Regulate the placement, construction and modification of
telecommunications towers and other wireless service facilities throughout the
city to protect and promote the economic vitality of the city and to protect
property values;
      (2)   Minimize the visual impacts of telecommunications towers through
careful design siting and landscape screening;
      (3)   Accommodate the growing need for telecommunications towers;
      (4)   Promote and encourage co-location of existing and new
telecommunications towers as a primary option rather than construction of
additional single-use towers;
      (5)   Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from
telecommunications tower failure through engineering and careful siting of
tower structures;
      (6)   To the greatest extent feasible, provide that proposed
telecommunications facilities shall be designed in harmony with the natural
setting and the surrounding development pattern as well as to the highest
industry standards; and
      (7)   Establish criteria designed to minimize adverse health, safety,
public welfare and visual impacts through siting, design and construction and
buffering requirements.
   (B)   By requiring applicants to document the need for wireless
telecommunications facilities in specific locations, the city will reduce the
establishment of such facilities when such establishment can be found to
duplicate existing and approved services. 
(Ord. 16-97, passed 6-2-1997)
§ 1344.02  DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions pertain to the general installation of wireless
telecommunications facilities.
   “Broadcast telecommunications.” The technology which enables information to
be transmitted to a receiver for public use through the use of voice, video or
data signals by means of electrical or electromagnetic systems and equipment. 
   “Co-location.” The location on a single telecommunications tower or other
telecommunications structure with a telecommunications antenna or other
wireless telecommunications equipment belonging to more than one wireless
provider or other entities, including governmental agencies. Existing
structures such as water tanks, smoke stacks, walls or roofs are applicable.
   “Lot.” A discreet permanent parcel, identified as such by permanent parcel
number upon the public record.
   “Monopole.” A support structure, erected for wireless telecommunications
purposes, constructed of a self-supporting hollow metal tube securely anchored
to a foundation. 
   “Wireless telecommunications.” The technology which enables information to
be exchanged through the transmission of voice, video or data signals by means
of electrical or electromagnetic systems. 
   “Wireless telecommunications antenna.” The physical device through which
electromagnetic, wireless telecommunications signals authorized by the Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) are transmitted and received. Antennas used by
amateur radio operators or for broadcast telecommunications of radio and video
signals as regulated by the FCC are excluded from this definition.
   “Wireless telecommunications equipment shelter.” The structure, whether it
is situated above or below finished grade, in which the electronic receiving
and/or transmitting equipment for a wireless telecommunications facility is
housed. 
   “Wireless telecommunications facility.” A facility consisting of a
telecommunications tower or other antenna-supporting structures and any
accessory structures required to provide support services. 
   “Wireless telecommunications tower.” A monopole structure intended to
support antennas used to transmit and/or receive telecommunications signals.
(Ord. 16-97, passed 6-2-1997)
§ 1344.03  PERMITTED AND PROHIBITED LOCATIONS.
   (A)   Subject to the approval of the Planning Commission and City Council,
wireless telecommunications facilities are permitted as a conditional use in C-
1, C-2, C-4, E-1, E-2 and D-1 (as otherwise limited herein) zoning districts,
contingent on a number of criteria being met. Co-location will not require
additional conditional use permits, provided that the original conditions for
approval are maintained.
   (B)   Wireless telecommunications facilities are not allowed in any
residential districts (classes A-1, A-2, B-1, B-2, B-3 and B-5), in community
districts (D-1), except to the extent the same are appurtenant to permitted
uses, or in C-3 districts. 
(Ord. 16-97, passed 6-2-1997)
§ 1344.04  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   The following requirements apply to all wireless telecommunications
facilities regardless of the zoning district in which they are to be located.
   (A)   Prior to the issuance of any permit to construct, alter or modify any
wireless telecommunications tower existing on the effective date of this
chapter (Ordinance 16-97, passed June 2, 1997), the owner shall provide to the
city a written and notarized statement agreeing to make said wireless
telecommunications tower available for use by others, subject to reasonable
technical limitations. The willful and knowing failure of a wireless
telecommunications tower owner to agree to a shared use or to negotiate in good
faith with potential users shall be cause for the withholding of a requested
permit as well as future permits to the same owner to install, build or modify
antennas or wireless telecommunications towers within the city. 
   (B)   Prior to the issuance of any permit to install, build or modify any
wireless telecommunications tower, the wireless telecommunications facility
owner shall furnish the Building Department with an inventory of all wireless
telecommunications facilities in or within one mile of the proposed site,
including adjoining cities and counties, and agree to the shared use of such
facilities subject to such technical limitations as are reasonable. The
inventory shall include the wireless telecommunications facilities reference
name or number, the street location, latitude and longitude, structure type and
height. 
   (C)   (1)   Any new wireless telecommunications tower shall be designed and
constructed to accommodate additional users as set forth below:
 
Maximum Height (Ft.) Number of Antenna Arrays to Be Supported (Each Array to
                     Consist of Not less than 12 Panel Antennas)
Up to 99             Up to 1
100 to 119           Up to 2
120 and over         Up to 3
 
      (2)   The maximum height, irrespective of the number of antenna arrays,
shall be 199 feet.
   (D)   When the proposed wireless telecommunications facility is to include a
new wireless telecommunications tower, a plot plan at a scale of not less than
one inch equal to 100 feet shall be submitted as a part of the application for
Planning Commission approval. This plot plan shall include the tower height,
type of materials, the name of the tower manufacturer, a soil investigation
(where required for footing design), a listing of the type and location of all
antennas, cables or other appurtenances which will be installed at the time the
tower is erected, all lot lines, all structures and all uses within 300 feet of
the proposed wireless telecommunications facility and an actual construction
drawing bearing the seal of a registered professional engineer. Aerial
photographs and architectural renderings may also be submitted to support the
application. 
   (E)   Security fencing eight feet in height shall surround the wireless
telecommunications tower and equipment shelter either completely or
individually as determined by the Planning Commission. Security fencing may not
include any barbed wire and/or electrified wire or razor wire.
   (F)   A landscaping plan shall be submitted to the Planning Commission
showing buffer plantings located around the perimeter of the security fence as
deemed appropriate by the Planning Commission. Existing vegetation (trees and
shrubs) shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible, during and after the
proposed construction. The wireless telecommunications facility owner shall be
responsible for securing regular maintenance of said landscaping.
   (G)   The wireless telecommunications tower shall be painted or finished a
non-contrasting gray or similar color minimizing its visibility, unless
otherwise required by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) or the
Federal Aviation Authority (FAA). 
   (H)   No advertising is permitted anywhere on the wireless
telecommunications facility. Identification signage as approved by the Planning
Commission is permitted. “No Trespassing” signs shall be posted around the
wireless telecommunications facility, which signs shall include the telephone
number to contact for emergency purposes. 
   (I)   All towers above 100 feet shall be artificially lighted.  In addition,
all FAA regulations addressing safety marking and obstruction lighting shall be
followed when necessary.  Security lighting around the equipment shelter is
permitted, provided that it is shielded when required by the Planning
Commission.  A description of the lighting scheme(s) shall be made part of the
application to install, build or modify the telecommunications antenna or
support structure.
   (J)   Underground wireless telecommunications equipment shelters are
encouraged and may be requested by the Planning Commission.
   (K)   Applicants will provide evidence of legal access to the wireless
telecommunications facilities site and shall maintain this access regardless of
other developments and/or improvements that may take place on the site. This
must include a hard surface driveway for emergency vehicles. 
   (L)   No two wireless telecommunications towers shall be located within a
one-mile radius of each other. Separation distances between wireless
telecommunications towers shall be applicable for and measured between the
proposed wireless telecommunications tower and those wireless
telecommunications towers that are existing or have received approval on the
effective date of this chapter (Ordinance 16-97, passed June 2, 1997) from any
governmental entity, including wireless telecommunications towers located in
the city, adjoining cities and adjoining counties. The separation distances
shall be measured by drawing or following a straight line between the base of
the existing wireless telecommunications tower and the proposed base, pursuant
to a site plan, of the proposed wireless telecommunications tower. 
   (M)   The one-time replacement of any wireless telecommunications tower
existing on the effective date of this chapter (Ordinance 16-97, passed June 2,
1997), or subsequently approved in accordance with these regulations, is
permitted so long as the purpose of the replacement is to accommodate shared
use of the site or to eliminate a safety hazard. The new wireless
telecommunications tower must be replaced by a monopole and meet the
requirements set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 16-97, passed 6-2-1997; Ord. 159-98, passed 9-8-1998; Ord. 137-12, passed
9-17-2012)
§ 1344.05  USE REGULATIONS.
   (A)   Sole Use on Lot. A wireless telecommunications facility is permitted
as the sole use on a lot subject to the following.
      (1)   Minimum lot area is two and one-half acres in all permitted
districts except D-1 Community Districts. In D-1 Community Districts, minimum
lot area is ten acres. 
      (2)   Minimum yard requirements in all permitted districts: 
         (a)   Wireless telecommunications tower: the minimum distance to any
lot line from the base of the telecommunications tower shall be 160 feet.
Notwithstanding this provision, in D-1 Community Districts, the minimum
distance from the base of the telecommunications tower to any lot line of an
abutting A-1, A-2, B-1, B-2, B-3 and/or B-5 Residential District shall be 600
feet;
         (b)   Wireless telecommunications equipment shelter: the minimum
setback for all yards shall be 100 feet; and
         (c)   Notwithstanding the minimum yard requirements otherwise
contained herein, Council may modify said requirements when an applicant can
demonstrate to the satisfaction of Council that such modification will not
impede the public health, safety and welfare, and not depreciate adjoining
property values.  Prior to making a determination of modification pursuant to
this section, Council shall hold a public
hearing with notice as otherwise provided in this Code of Ordinances, as well
as notice sent via regular U.S. mail to all landowners within a 700-foot radius
of the proposed tower location, for the purpose of hearing any comments and/or
objections to the proposed modification to minimum yard requirements.
      (3)   Maximum height in all permitted districts: 
         (a)   Wireless telecommunications tower and antenna: see §
1344.04(C); and
         (b)   Wireless telecommunications equipment shelter: 20 feet.
      (4)   Maximum number and size of wireless telecommunications equipment
shelters in all permitted districts: 
         (a)   Number. There may be no more than one wireless
telecommunications equipment shelter per wireless telecommunications tower; and
         (b)   Size.  The maximum area of any one wireless telecommunications
equipment shelter shall be 1,000 square feet. 
   (B)   Combined Use on Lot. A new wireless telecommunications facility is
permitted on a property with an existing use subject to the following
conditions.
      (1)   The existing use on the property may be any permitted use in the
district or any lawful nonconforming use, and need not be affiliated with the
wireless telecommunications provider. 
      (2)   The minimum lot area shall be not less than that which is required
for a wireless telecommunications facility as the sole use of the property.
      (3)   The minimum yard requirements shall not be less than that which is
required for a wireless telecommunications facility as the sole use of the
property. 
      (4)   Access to all uses on the property shall be combined whenever
feasible in order to minimize traffic congestion to the satisfaction of the
Planning Commission. 
      (5)   The maximum height of the wireless telecommunications facility is
the same as that which is required for a wireless telecommunications tower and
antenna and wireless telecommunications equipment shelter as the sole use of
the property. 
   (C)   Combined Use With an Existing Structure. Where possible, an antenna
for a wireless telecommunications facility shall be attached to an existing
structure or building subject to the following conditions.
      (1)   The maximum height shall be 20 feet or 20% of the building height
above the existing building or structure, whichever is greater.
      (2)   If the applicant proposes to locate the wireless telecommunications
equipment in a separate shelter (not located on, or attached to, the building)
the shelter shall comply with the same requirements as for a sole use.
(Ord. 16-97, passed 6-2-1997; Ord. 40-98, passed 3-2-1998; Ord. 58-08, passed
5-5-2008)
§ 1344.06  PERMIT FEES.
   The Building Commissioner shall collect the fees set forth in the following
schedule at the time of issuing the building permit and/or conducting an annual
inspection: 
   (A)   New wireless telecommunications tower and facility: $2,000;
   (B)   New wireless telecommunications antenna: $500;
   (C)   Co-location of a wireless telecommunications antenna on an existing
tower or building: $500; and
   (D)   Annual inspection fee: $1,000.
(Ord. 16-97, passed 6-2-1997)
§ 1344.07  EXEMPTIONS FOR FACILITIES LOCATED ON CITY-OWNED PROPERTY.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any wireless
telecommunications facility located on property owned by the city may be
exempted from any provision of this chapter (except those provisions relating
to permit and inspection fees), provided that any proposal for such a facility
will be reviewed by the Planning Commission, which may recommend exemption from
such sections of this chapter as are deemed practicable by the Commission, and
further provided that Council may determine on a case-by- case basis whether to
grant such an exemption.
   (B)   In granting or denying any exemption hereunder, Council shall consider
the recommendation of the Planning Commission, if any, but is not bound by said
recommendation.
   (C)   Notwithstanding any provision contained in this section to the
contrary, Council may initiate and approve an exemption from any provision of
this chapter (except those pertaining to permit and inspection fees) for any
wireless telecommunications facility to be located on city property without
prior recommendation of the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 120-98, passed 6-15-1998)
§ 1344.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1440.99 for general Building and Housing Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.
CHAPTER 1345:  SMALL WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS
Section
1345.01   Intent
1345.02   Definitions
1345.03   Permitted use
1345.04   General requirements
1345.05   Use regulations
1345.06   Conditional use permit
1345.07   Visual appearance
1345.08   Climb prevention/locks
1345.09   Exemptions for wind energy systems located on city-owned property
1345.10   Dismantling and removal of wind turbine systems
1345.11   Variances
1345.99   Penalty
§ 1345.01  INTENT.
   The city intends to:
   (A)   Regulate the placement, construction and modification of small wind
turbines throughout the city to protect and promote the economic vitality of
the city and to protect property values;
   (B)   Minimize the visual impacts of wind turbines through careful design
siting and landscape screening;
   (C)   Accommodate the growing need for small wind energy systems;
   (D)   Avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from small wind turbines
failure through engineering and careful siting of tower structures;
   (E)   To the greatest extent feasible, provide that proposed small wind
turbine shall be designed in harmony with the natural setting and the
surrounding development pattern as well as to the highest industry standards;
and
   (F)   Establish criteria designed to minimize adverse health, safety, public
welfare and visual impacts through siting, design and construction and
buffering requirements.
(Ord. 47-09, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 1345.02  DEFINITIONS.
   The following definitions pertain to the general installation of small wind
turbines.
   “Hub height.” The distance measured from the surface of the tower foundation
to the height of the wind turbine hub, to which the blade is attached.
   “Lot.”  A distinct permanent parcel, identified as such by permanent parcel
number upon the public record.
   “Monopole.” A support structure, erected for small wind turbines purposes,
constructed of a self- supporting hollow metal tube securely anchored to a
foundation.
   “Small wind energy system.”  A wind energy conversion system consisting of a
turbine, a tower and associated control or conversion electronics, which has a
capacity of not more than ten kW and which is intended to primarily reduce
consumption of utility power.
   “Tower height.”  The vertical component of a wind energy system that
elevates the wind turbine generator and attached blades above the ground.
“Tower height” shall be measured to the turbine mounting point.
(Ord. 47-09, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 1345.03  PERMITTED USE.
   Subject to the approval of the Planning Commission, small wind turbines are
permitted as a conditional use in all zoning districts, contingent on a number
of criteria being met.
(Ord. 47-09, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 1345.04  GENERAL REQUIREMENTS.
   The following requirements apply to all small wind turbines regardless of
the zoning district in which they are to be located:
   (A)   When the proposed small wind turbine is to include a new tower, a plot
plan at a scale of not less than one inch is equal to 100 feet shall be
submitted as a part of the application for Planning Commission approval. This
plot plan shall include the tower height, type of materials, the name of the
tower manufacturer, a soil investigation (where required for footing design), a
listing of the type and location of cables or other appurtenances which will be
installed at the time the tower is erected, all lot lines, all structures and
all uses within 300 feet of the proposed wind turbine;
   (B)   The name, address and telephone number of the applicant;
   (C)   The address and zoning district of the subject property;
   (D)   An affidavit or similar evidence of agreement between the property
owner and the facility owner or operator demonstrating that the facility owner
or operator has the permission of the property owner to apply for necessary
permits for construction and operation of the wind energy facility;
   (E)   Other relevant studies, reports, certifications and approval as may be
reasonably requested by the city to ensure compliance with this chapter and
Code; and
   (F)   The fee as established pursuant to §
1345.06(B).
(Ord. 47-09, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 1345.05  USE REGULATIONS.
   A small wind energy system is permitted as the sole use on a lot subject to
the following.
   (A)   Minimum lot area is three acres in all permitted districts.
   (B)   Minimum yard requirements in all permitted districts:
      (1)   The minimum distance to any lot line from the wind system
structure, including guy wire anchors, shall be 100 feet;
      (2)   The minimum distance from any inhabited dwelling shall be 300 feet;
      (3)   The tower height shall be limited to 60 feet, and shall follow FAA
regulations;
      (4)   Small wind energy systems shall not exceed 45 dBa, as measured at
the closest property line. The level, however, may be exceeded during short-
term events such as utility outages and/or severe windstorms;
      (5)   Wall wind energy systems shall be equipped with manual (electronic
or mechanical) and automatic over speed controls to limit the blade rotation
speed to within the design limits of the wind energy system;
      (6)   Small wind energy systems shall be accompanied by a line drawing
showing the electrical components in sufficient detail to allow for a
determination that the manner of installation conforms to the National
Electrical Code;
      (7)   A capacity of not more than ten kilowatts maximum power;
      (8)   No small wind energy system shall be installed until evidence has
been given that the utility company has been informed of the customer’s intent
to install an interconnected customer-owned generator. Off-grid systems shall
be exempt from this requirement; and
      (9)   A wind energy facility shall be permitted in any interstate highway
right-of-way pursuant to the provisions as set forth in this chapter where
applicable.
(Ord. 47-09, passed 5-4-2009; Ord. 157-13, passed 11-18-2013)
§ 1345.06  CONDITIONAL USE PERMIT.
   (A)   Building Permit Required.  No wind energy facility, or addition of a
wind turbine to an existing wind energy facility, shall be constructed or
located within the city unless the Building Commissioner, pursuant to the
requirements of §
1345.03 , has issued a building permit.
   (B)   Fees.  Application for conditional use approval by the Planning
Commission shall follow the fee schedule set forth in §
1449.02 (B) of the Code of Ordinances of the city:
      (1)   Building permit fee(s) established pursuant to §
1449.08; and
      (2)   Any physical modification to an existing conditionally permitted
wind energy facility that materially alters the size, type and number of wind
turbines or other equipment shall require conditional use approval by the
Planning Commission pursuant to §
1345.03.  Like-kind replacements as determined by the Building Commissioner
shall not require review by the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 47-09, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 1345.07  VISUAL APPEARANCE.
   (A)   Wind turbine systems shall appear before the Planning Commission for
review and recommendation to Council for their approval.
   (B)   Wind turbines shall be a non-obtrusive color such as white, off-white
or gray.
   (C)   Wind energy facilities shall not be artificially lighted, except to
the extent required by the Federal Aviation Administration or other applicable
authority that regulates air safety.
   (D)   On-site transmission and power lines between wind turbines shall, to
the maximum extent practicable, be placed underground.
(Ord. 47-09, passed 5-4-2009; Ord. 137-12, passed 9-17-2012)
§ 1345.08  CLIMB PREVENTION/LOCKS.
   (A)   Wind turbines shall not be climbable up to 15 feet above ground
surface.
   (B)   All access doors to wind turbines and electrical equipment shall be
locked or fenced, as appropriate, to prevent entry by non-authorized persons.
(Ord. 47-09, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 1345.09  EXEMPTIONS FOR WIND ENERGY SYSTEMS LOCATED ON CITY-OWNED PROPERTY.
   (A)   Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any small wind
energy system located on property owned by the city may be exempted from any
provision of this chapter (except those provisions relating to permit and
inspection fees), provided that any proposal for such a system will be reviewed
by the Planning Commission, which may recommend exemption from such sections of
this chapter as are deemed  practicable by the Commission, and further provided
that Council may determine on a case-by-case basis whether to grant such an
exemption.
   (B)   In granting or denying any exemption hereunder, Council shall consider
the recommendation of the Planning Commission, if any, but is not bound by said
recommendation.
   (C)   Notwithstanding any provision contained in this section to the
contrary, Council may initiate and approve an exemption from any provision of
this chapter (except those pertaining to permit and inspection fees) for any
small wind turbine systems to be located on city property without prior
recommendation of the Planning Commission.
(Ord. 47-09, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 1345.10  DISMANTLING AND REMOVAL OF WIND TURBINE SYSTEMS.
   (A)   If the property upon which a small wind turbine facility is located,
sold or otherwise transferred, or the wind turbine structure is in any way
abandoned or neglected or becomes dilapidated, the seller or conveyor of such
premises shall cause the facility to be dismantled completely, including all
support structures and appurtenances, and removed from the property. However,
if the purchase contract or other means of conveyance provides specifically for
the wind turbine facility to remain in place for use by the successive
possessor of the property, then this section shall not apply.
   (B)   The owner and any subsequent purchaser or transferee of a small wind
turbine facility shall be required to post and maintain a performance bond
satisfactory to the Building Commissioner in an amount equivalent to the cost
of removing a tower if it is abandoned.
(Ord. 47-09, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 1345.11  VARIANCES.
   The Board of Zoning Appeals, with the recommendation of the Planning
Commission, may vary or permit exceptions to any of the provisions of this
chapter if it finds that such variance or exception will not violate the spirit
or intent of this chapter and that a more harmonious and useful development
will result.
(Ord. 47-09, passed 5-4-2009)
§ 1345.99  PENALTY.
   See §
1440.99 for general Building and Housing Code penalty.
(Ord. 47-09, passed 5-4-2009)
CHAPTER 1346:  CONSTRUCTION MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES
Section
1346.01   Introduction
1346.02   Constructability review
1346.03   Pre-bid meeting
1346.04   Preconstruction conference
1346.05   Monitoring progress
1346.06   Project documentation
1346.07   Construction contract requirements for EEO, DBE and prevailing wage
compliance
1346.08   EEO and DBE requirements on federally funded projects
1346.09   State only funded projects
1346.10   Materials quality control; quality assurance
1346.11   Change orders
1346.12   Claims
1346.13   Termination
1346.14   Method of measurement
1346.15   Billing
1346.16   Project closeout
1346.17   Maintenance of state funded projects
1346.18   Exclusion of certain projects
Editor’s note:
   This Chapter 1346 was formerly Chapter 1491 of the Building and Housing
Code, which was recodified by Ordinance 62-07, passed June 4, 2007.
§ 1346.01  INTRODUCTION.
   (A)   This chapter covers the topics related to the administration of
construction contracts. The administration of these projects relating to
construction supervision, project documentation, change orders, materials,
disputed work and claims will comply with the policies, requirements and
procedures set forth in Federal-Aid Policy Guide (FAPG), Parts 635 and 637.
   (B)   Construction contract administration shall be the responsibility of
the Department of Engineering (DOE), through its City Engineer (CE). The CE and
his or her staff will perform detailed inspections with a frequency appropriate
for the work being performed. Detailed inspections include verification that
the materials are as specified in the contract documents, the project is built
in accordance with approved plans and specifications, and that quantities are
documented sufficiently to make payments for completed work. The DOE is
designated by the city to serve as the main contract for the contractor, ODOT,
OPWC and any other agencies having an interest in the project.
   (C)   Department of Engineering responsibilities for construction contract
administration include, but are not limited to, the following:
      (1)   Furnish qualified and experienced engineering and inspection staff
for the duration of the project. Staff supplied for the project shall be as
proposed prior to the beginning of construction;
      (2)   Secure required level of workmanship by the contractor. This
requires monitoring by the CE’s staff for compliance with all construction
contract documents;
      (3)   When the contractor files a complaint, dispute or claim, decisions
shall be made in a thoughtful and timely manner after due consideration of all
facts involved as determined by the CE or his or her designee when the
resolution of the complaint, dispute or claim extends the contract time frame
and/or adds to project costs;
      (4)   All project decisions should be made in a timely manner to avoid
undue delay;
      (5)   Promptly pay the contractor for completed work. Every attempt
should be made to pay the contractor within 30 days per Ohio R.C. 126.30;
      (6)   Prepare reimbursement requests for the contractor and/or
consultants. After written approval by the CE and if required, any other
authorized officials per agreement, submit reimbursement requests to the
Finance Director for review and payment;
      (7)   When unforeseen conditions, plan errors or other events occur that
require the consideration of contract change orders for the contractor, the DOE
will follow the approved change order review process. The DOE must obtain
approval of the Service Committee for all change orders of significance. The
DOE’s review and determination shall be timely and not unduly burden the
contractor nor add unnecessary costs to the project. The level at which this
process requires Service Committee approval, shall be established prior to
contract award by City Council as part of its bid review process;
      (8)   If the project has Disadvantaged Business Enterprise (DBE)
requirements, any contractor requests for waivers will be reviewed and approved
by DOE with the concurrence of City Council. Said decision on the waiver is
final;
      (9)   Monitor and require compliance by the contractor with contract
provisions such as prevailing wage, equal employment opportunity and
disadvantaged business enterprise legal requirements. Notify the appropriate
agency promptly of noncompliance with any of these programs for guidance and
assistance;
      (10)   Review daily and promptly require maintenance and/or adjustment of
the contractor’s maintenance of traffic work zones to ensure the public can
pass safely with the least amount of interference;
      (11)   Respond to any complaints or questions by the public in a timely
manner; and
      (12)   Provide for and ensure that all materials incorporated in the
project are tested, sampled and/or certified according to the project’s
approved materials management process and plan specifications. See §
1346.10 for testing, sampling and certification requirements.
   (D)   Contractor responsibilities for construction administration include,
but are not limited to, the following.  The contractor shall designate one
individual as the main contact for the DOE. The designated person should have
the authority to speak on behalf of the contractor. This individual should be
capable of reading and thoroughly understanding the plans and specifications
and be experienced in the types of work being performed. This individual should
have full authority to execute instructions of the CE and should be in charge
of all construction operations regardless of who performs the work.
      (1)   The contractor must notify the DOE of the project starting date and
keep the DOE informed of the proposed schedule of operations. This allows the
DOE to anticipate engineering and inspection needs and therefore efficiently
manage staff.
      (2)   The contractor shall provide a list of material suppliers and
subcontractors. The DOE will review the proposed lists of material suppliers
and subcontractors; obtain required samples along with supporting
documentation/certifications and work experience and references of
subcontractors. The lists should be submitted early to avoid delays associated
with sampling and testing and checking of experience and references of
subcontractors. Unless otherwise approved as part of the project’s materials
management process, the contractor shall utilize ODOT certified material
suppliers and established job mix formulas (JMFs).
      (3)   The contractor must carry out the work in a diligent manner
utilizing adequate labor that is trained, experienced and with appropriate,
functional equipment as shown on his or her accepted progress schedule.
      (4)   The contractor must be knowledgeable of all federal, state and
local laws that apply. Many of the legal requirements of the contract are
addressed in the proposal, additionally the contractor must also be aware of
other regulations such as safety, which may not be thoroughly detailed in the
DOE’s specifications, but are extremely important. The contractor is required
to protect and indemnify the DOE and city from all claims and liability
resulting from negligence or willful violations.
      (5)   The contractor must maintain the project in order to permit the
public to move safely through. This includes using clean, readable signs, and
traffic control devices, as well as maintaining the project free of debris.
      (6)   The contractor must respond quickly to correct a problem once
notified. This is extremely important when the situation involves public
safety.
      (7)   The contractor must promptly notify the DOE of any changed site
conditions so they can be resolved in a timely manner. It is the contractor’s
responsibility to mitigate any delays caused by changed conditions.
(Ord. 131-05, passed 10-17-2005)
§ 1346.02  CONSTRUCTABILITY REVIEW.
   (A)   Avoiding claims and reducing bidder risk and uncertainty can be
accomplished by removing or lessening the factors that contribute to claims and
higher than estimated bids. A constructability review is one way to help avoid
claims and provide for competitive bids within the engineer’s estimate.
Usually, the Design  Project Engineer (DPE), Service Director and the CE review
the final design plans with the assistance of a knowledgeable third party when
appropriate. When conducting a constructability review the team should:
      (1)   Review general notes and special provisions;
      (2)   Review any subsurface investigations;
      (3)   Field review the project paying particular attention to:
         (a)   Right-of-way encroachments or obstructions, existing or impacted
by the construction activity;
         (b)   Utilities, to remain and/or be relocated, accuracy of location
both horizontally and vertically;
         (c)   Drainage systems/appurtenances, maintained or reconstructed, as
part of project area, detoured area or adjacent facilities;
         (d)   Pavement or bridge condition (i.e., heaving, cracking,
deterioration) of existing facility and area over which traffic is shifted and/
or detoured, further deterioration since last quantity estimate;
         (e)   Stream and stream diversions, sediment and erosion problems and
other geological features, maintained, reconstructed, and storm water
management plan, if required;
         (f)   Railings and signs, existing and proposed meet current
standards;
         (g)   Railroads, adequate force account funds for flaggers, time for
plan reviews, approval of permits, need for temporary crossings;
         (h)   Maintenance of traffic, phasing, impact on adjacent facilities,
detours;
         (i)   Impact on signals, within project limits, detoured area or
adjacent facilities; and
         (j)   Quantities, basis of estimates, time since last estimate,
magnitude of contingencies.
   (B)   The focus of the review should be very practical. The team should look
for the obvious discrepancies in location, missing information, obstructions,
conditions or quantities.
(Ord. 131-05, passed 10-17-2005)
§ 1346.03  PRE-BID MEETING.
   During the bidding period, a pre-bid meeting may be held including
prospective bidders, the CE, DPE and Service Director at a minimum. Other
agencies and/or parties may be also requested to do so by the DOE. The purpose
of this meeting is to encourage face to face discussion regarding plan intent
and any areas of concern prior to bid opening. This meeting is strongly
recommended for complex, large and high impact  projects. Often, this meeting
will result in plan addendum that could have resulted in change orders and/or
claims after the project has been bid. For those reasons, the time and effort
required for a pre-bid meeting is valuable to both contractors and the city.
(Ord. 131-05, passed 10-17-2005)
§ 1346.04  PRECONSTRUCTION CONFERENCE.
   (A)   A preconstruction conference (pre-con) shall be held for the project
prior to the beginning of construction. Note that the contract may be signed at
the pre-con. The CE should be familiar with all project documents and terms of
the contract prior to the pre-con meeting. Special attention should be given to
the following items:
      (1)   Project staffing list including normal business and emergency
contact phone numbers for key staff members of the DOE, contractor,
subcontractors, emergency or other designated agencies;
      (2)   List of material suppliers, materials management process;
      (3)   Plan notes;
      (4)   Completion date;
      (5)   Interim completion dates;
      (6)   Special uses of “As Per Plan” reference items;
      (7)   Proposal notes;
      (8)   Phasing requirements;
      (9)   Special provisions;
      (10)   Addenda;
      (11)   Change order review and claims resolution processes;
      (12)   Status of utility relocations, especially those that need to be
addressed immediately to avoid delays with the project;
      (13)   Prevailing wage requirements and procedures;
      (14)   EEO responsibilities, nondiscriminatory hiring requirements, and
requirements under the on- the-job training program;
      (15)   DBE goals and procedures; and
      (16)   Protection and restoration of property.
   (B)   The purpose of the pre-con meeting is to discuss details on the
constructing of the project, bid proposal, specifications, plans, method of
payment, and contractor’s progress schedule. Other items that should be
discussed are the necessary utility adjustments, railroad permits and
requirements, availability of right-of-way, maintenance of traffic, special
provisions and responsibilities of the DOE and the contractor. At this meeting,
the involved parties must express any and all concerns regarding the
construction project.
   (C)   The CE should facilitate the pre-con as well as prepare and distribute
minutes and an attendance sign-in sheet to those who attend the meeting. The
attendees at the pre-con meeting should include the CE and designated staff,
the contractor, Prevailing Wage Coordinator, and EEO Contract Compliance
Coordinator/Officer (as needed) and any other departments or agencies that have
involvement in the project including utilities. The CE should obtain a list of
contacts for all parties involved with the project prior to the pre-con
meeting. This list is useful in the future for timely resolution of problems
which surface during the project construction.
   (D)   The contractor shall provide a progress schedule, list of material
sources, list of subcontractors, and a list of haul roads and designated local
detours. The contractor needs to request permission from the DOE for both the
use of local roadways to be used for hauling materials and equipment to and
from the project, and designated local detours.
(Ord. 131-05, passed 10-17-2005)
§ 1346.05  MONITORING PROGRESS.
   (A)   Progress Meetings.
      (1)   Regularly scheduled progress meetings are a very productive tool
for monitoring the status of a project. They enhance communications, and help
solve problems before they turn larger and more costly. Attendance at progress
meetings is required for the contractor’s superintendent, DOE staff and others
as the point in progress dictates including representatives of subcontractors,
suppliers, utilities and the like. The main tool for monitoring a project is
the progress schedule. The schedule must be updated periodically to ensure an
accurate measure of the progress of the work and to maintain the status of the
project with respect to time. The progress schedule may be used in any
assessment of liquidated damages or incentives/disincentives, and a
consideration with respect to any termination action. The progress schedule
shall be reviewed with the DOE staff and the contractor at different intervals
of the project as follows:
         (a)   At the start of the project to detect if the contractor began as
scheduled;
         (b)   Every two weeks or monthly, depending on the complexity of the
project;
         (c)   Following the completion of a major item of work;
         (d)   Following the completion of a phase or sub-phase of work; and
         (e)   Before, during and after any type of delay to determine whether
or not the delay was owner caused, contractor caused or both.
      (2)   The situations and decisions that pertain to the project should be
recorded in a diary. It is very important to keep a daily diary of activities
of the project. The diary entry should list the reasons the
contractor cannot proceed with certain portions of the work. Accuracy and
details in the daily diary concerning delays will protect the city against
potential contractor claims.
   (B)   Behind Schedule.  When the project progression is 15 days behind the
original progress schedule, the CE on behalf of the DOE should send the
contractor a letter requesting a revised progress schedule and reason for the
delay. Once the contractor gives the CE a revised progress schedule including
the reason for the delays, the CE should review the revised progress schedule
and check the daily diary to see if the reason for the project’s delay agrees
with the contractor’s explanation. If delays are due to inexpediency or
incompetence of the contractor or subcontractor, the CE can request the removal
of the individual(s) or subcontractors involved. When a delay in the project
has occurred, the contractor must request a time extension in writing.
   (C)   Time Extension and Waiver Of Liquidated Damages.
      (1)   The CE shall have adequate written procedures for the determination
of contract time as described in Chapter 9 (Ref: FAPG 635.120(C)). Contract
time extensions submitted by the contractor shall be subject to the concurrence
of the CE. Contract time extensions submitted for approval to the CE must be
fully justified and adequately documented by the contractor (Ref: FAPG 635.120
(C)). The CE shall notify the Service Committee of the need for a contract time
extension, which may require a change in the agreement. The Service Committee
will review the proposed request for a contract time extension with the CE or
designee and determine if a change in the agreement is necessary. The CE or
designee will coordinate with the Service Committee so that any agreement
change is completed promptly.
      (2)   If a contractor fails to complete the work by the contract
completion date, the contractor shall submit to the DOE a written request to
continue the contract work. In the written request, there shall be a plan for
completion of the work. The contractor must include a detailed explanation that
will justify the granting of the extra time. Certain plan notes may require
interim dates for phase completion and include special liquidated damages. The
Service Committee may grant a time extension or waiver of liquidated damages
for excusable delays.
      (3)   If the contractor causes the delay, the Service Committee may
consider liquidated damages or disincentives. Liquidated damages shall be
applied in accordance with the requirements of the contract.
   (D)   Progress Schedule.
      (1)   The progress schedule must show the contractor’s plan to carry out
the different work types, including the procurement of materials and equipment,
ordering of special manufactured articles, working drawings, required permits
and the planned dates of critical project milestones. The CE must review the
progress schedule to see if the schedule is acceptable. The following items are
to be used in determining an acceptable schedule:
         (a)   All major items of work are included;
         (b)   The contractor’s plan for the execution of the work is shown;
         (c)   Adherence to contract requirements is demonstrated;
         (d)   Critical or controlling work activities and material deliveries
are identified;
         (e)   Start and finish dates for the specific activities of work
required by the contract are furnished;
         (f)   Special provisions in the contract, including milestone dates
and/or interim completion dates, are accounted for;
         (g)   Duration of activities is reasonable;
         (h)   Activities reflecting procurement of materials and equipment are
identified;
         (i)   Special material requirements of the plans are included;
         (j)   Time for permit completion, review and approval by utilities,
Ohio EPA and the like is included;
         (k)   Maintenance of traffic requirements are provided;
         (l)   Sequence of operations is logical and clear relationships
between activities is shown;
         (m)   Graphically depicts sequence of work;
         (n)   Appropriate consideration for progress during winter months; and
         (o)   The arrangement of project phases per the plan, if required.
      (2)   The progress schedule is the responsibility of the contractor.
However, the CE should review and accept the progress schedule. If the schedule
is not logical or is unreasonable, the CE should ask for clarification. The
progress schedule is the main tool with which the DOE shall monitor the
progress of the contract. It is, therefore, very important that the CE
accurately review the schedule before accepting it. Monitoring the progress
schedule can determine the responsible party for project delays.
(Ord. 131-05, passed 10-17-2005)
§ 1346.06  PROJECT DOCUMENTATION.
   (A)   Record keeping is an integral part of contract administration and is
especially important when considering any contract changes including, but not
limited to, change orders and claims/dispute resolution. Adequate records must
be maintained to document the need for changes and to establish pricing for
extra work. The primary goal of project records is to ensure that documentation
exists for the acceptance of materials and work items for both quality and
quantity. The basis of acceptance for quality, the method of measurement and
the basis of payment are established by the specifications. The records shall
indicate that work was accomplished, what inspections and tests were made and
the results. The DOE must ensure that each item in the contract is documented
sufficiently to satisfy an audit. Documentation is also required for work
performed by utilities that is to be paid on a force account basis.
Documentation shall also demonstrate that the contract was administered in
compliance with the general provisions of the contract and specs, e.g., wage
rates, equal employment opportunity, safety and the like.
   (B)   Project records shall always be available for inspection by
appropriate personnel. The DOE staff, EEO Contract Compliance Coordinator/
Officer and Prevailing Wage Coordinator will periodically review the level and
completeness of project documentation. Should the level of documentation not
exist to the satisfaction of the reviewer, he or she shall inform the CE in
writing the specific findings and required remedies. If within a specified
period of time the documentation has not been improved, the CE may request
reimbursements to any involved consultant be withheld until such time as
documentation improves. Additionally, the CE may request that the consultant
not be permitted on construction contracts in the future.
(Ord. 131-05, passed 10-17-2005)
§ 1346.07  CONSTRUCTION CONTRACT REQUIREMENTS FOR EEO, DBE AND PREVAILING WAGE
COMPLIANCE.
   At the pre-con, ODOT, the DOE and the contractor will designate key
personnel responsible for the mandatory activities in the following sections.
(Ord. 131-05, passed 10-17-2005)
§ 1346.08  EEO AND DBE REQUIREMENTS ON FEDERALLY FUNDED PROJECTS.
   The District EEO Contract Compliance Coordinator/Officer shall monitor the
DOE to ensure they are in compliance with the following DBE and EEO
requirement, provide guidance when requested and to inform the DCE if
corrective actions are required by the DOE. ODOT reserves the right to withhold
reimbursement until such time that DBE and EEO requirements are being met and
appropriately monitored.
   (A)   Projects with Disadvantaged Business Enterprise (DBE) Goals.
      (1)   Any project with federal funds and a dollar value greater than
$500,000 is eligible for a DBE goal. The goal is assigned by the ODOT Central
Office Goal Setting Committee. The Committee reviews each eligible project
taking into consideration the size of the project, work types, location and
available DBE’s who are located within a reasonable proximity. Once the goal is
set, the CE will be notified by the ODOT Office of Local Projects. The CE will
then include the required goal in their bidding documents.
      (2)   The contractor must use DBE firms certified by ODOT. A listing of
certified DBE firms is available on the Office of Contracts web page. The
contractor shall identify how they will meet the DBE goal and in the event the
contractor is unable to meet the goal, the ODOT waiver process must be
followed. The prime contractor must contract with DBE subcontractors prior to
the signing of the contract with the CE. The waiver process is found on the
ODOT Office of Contracts website.
   (B)   Commercially Useful Function.  The DOE is required to monitor DBE
subcontractors to ensure they are performing a commercially useful function. A
DBE is performing a commercially useful function when it is responsible for
execution of the work of the contract and is carrying out its responsibilities
by actually performing, managing and supervising the work involved with the
DBE’s employees. The DBE must also be responsible, with respect to materials
and supplies used on the contract, for negotiating price, determining quality
and quantity, ordering the materials and installing (where applicable) and
paying for the material itself (49 C.F.R. § 26.55(c)(1)).
   (C)   EEO Contract Compliance.
      (1)   The DOE is required to monitor the contractor and subcontractors to
ensure they are meeting the required contract provisions in Federal-Aid
Construction Contracts (Form FHWA 1273 - Rev. 4-93), Executive Order 11246, 23
C.F.R. part 230, 41 C.F.R. § 60-1.7(b)(1), 41 C.F.R. § 60-4, 41 C.F.R. § 60-4.3
(a), Governor’s Executive Order (11-30-84).
      (2)   The goals and timetables for minority and female participation,
expressed in percentage terms for the contractor’s aggregate workforce in each
trade on all construction work in the covered area, are as follows: economic
area percentage goals for minority participation are established for the
geographical area where the work is being performed; goals are identified in
the economic area. The goal for female participation in each trade for Ohio is
6.9%.
      (3)   These goals are applicable to all the contractor’s construction
work (whether or not it is federal or federally-assisted) performed in the
covered area. If the contractor performs construction work in a geographical
area located outside of the covered area, it shall apply the goals established
for such geographical area where the work is actually performed. With regard to
this second area, the contractor also is subject to the goals for both its
federally involved and non-federally involved construction.
      (4)   The contractor’s compliance with the Executive Order and the
regulations in 41 C.F.R. § 60-4 shall be based on its implementation of the
Equal Opportunity Clause, specific affirmative action obligations required by
the specifications set forth in 41 C.F.R. § 60-4.3(a), and its efforts to meet
the goals. The hours of minority and female employment and training must be
substantially uniform throughout the length of the contract, and in each trade,
and the contractor shall make a good faith effort to employ minorities and
women evenly on each of its projects. The transfer of minority or female
employees or trainees from contractor to contractor or from project to project
for the sole purpose of meeting the contractor’s goals shall be a violation of
the contract, the Executive Order and regulations in 41 C.F.R. § 60-4.
Compliance with the goals will be measured against the total work hours
performed.
(Ord. 131-05, passed 10-17-2005)
§ 1346.09  STATE ONLY FUNDED PROJECTS.
   (A)   Discrimination Prohibited. The hiring of employees for performance of
work under a state funded contract shall be done in accordance with Ohio R.C.
153.59 and 153.591, Governor’s amended Executive Order 84-9 of November 30,
1984. The contractor shall not discriminate against or intimidate any person
hired for the performance of the work by reason of race, color, religion,
national origin, ancestry, sex or handicap. For any violation, the contractor
shall suffer such penalties as provided for in Ohio R.C. 153.60. The DOE must
ensure that the bidder also agrees that upon the award of this contract he or
she shall incorporate this certification on all subcontracts on this project
regardless of tier.
   (B)   Minority Utilization Goals. An appendix item with minority utilization
goals on state funded projects for each trade to be used by the contractor in a
designated area is located at the end of Ordinance 131-05, passed October 17,
2005. Designated areas are defined as Ohio’s Standard Metropolitan Statistical
Areas (SMSA). They are Akron, Cincinnati, Cleveland, Columbus, Dayton, Toledo
and Youngstown- Warren. In cases where the project is not located in a
designated area, the contractor may adopt minority utilization goals of the
nearest designated area.
   (C)   Monthly Forms. The CE must ensure that the contractor submits
statewide Input 29 Forms monthly to the Ohio Department of Administrative
Services.
   (D)   Prevailing Wage Requirements.
      (1)   The Prevailing Wage Compliance Officer shall monitor the contractor
to ensure they are in compliance with the following prevailing wage
requirements and to provide guidance when requested. When corrective actions
are required, the Prevailing Wage Compliance Officer shall inform the CE. The
DOE reserves the right to withhold reimbursement until such time that
prevailing wage requirements are being met and appropriately monitored.
      (2)   The DOE is required to monitor the contractor and subcontractors to
ensure prevailing wages are paid to all laborers and mechanics employed on the
project. The prime contractor is responsible for all forms to be furnished to
subcontractors along with wage rates or any other modification vital to the
project. An owner, foremen and/or supervisor performing any kind of work on the
project must be added to payrolls. If an owner, foremen and/or supervisor is
working more than 20% in a given work week on the project, they are to be paid
prevailing wage for the classification of work performed and listed on the
payroll. If the owner, foreman and/or supervisor are the sole worker(s) on the
job, they are to be included on the payroll. The contractors and subcontractors
shall submit to the DOE certified payrolls each week beginning three weeks
after the start of work. The original payroll with an original signature must
be submitted on the Statement of Compliance Form, WH-347, or equivalent and
shall show the following:
         (a)   Employee name, address, Social Security number, classification
and hours worked;
         (b)   The basic hourly and overtime rate paid, total pay and the
manner in which fringe benefit payments have been irrevocably made;
         (c)   The project number and pay week dates; and
         (d)   Original signature of a company officer on the certification
statement.
      (3)   This form (located at the end of Ordinance 131-05, passed October
17, 2005) must accompany each certified payroll.
      (4)   It is the DOE’s responsibility to check every payroll to ensure
those employees working in crafts covered by the prevailing wage laws are being
paid the correct wage and fringe benefits for the craft they are performing.
The prevailing wages must be supplied in the bidding documents. The Prevailing
Wage Coordinator will monitor the DOE’s prevailing wage compliance efforts.
      (5)   All apprentices must be registered with the U.S. Department of
Labor (USDOL), Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training (BAT) (BAT, Columbus
Office 614-469-7375). A copy of the apprentice certification obtained from the
USDOL, BAT, must accompany the first certified payroll submitted for all
apprentices working on the project. The apprentice agreement from the union is
not acceptable.
   (E)   Bulletin Board Requirements.
      (1)   It is the DOE’s responsibility to ensure the contractor has a
bulletin board placed in a location easily accessible to both the employee and
the public and should include, but not be limited to, the following:
         (a)   The law;
         (b)   The law (en Espanol);
         (c)   Ohio Fair Employment Practices Law;
         (d)   FHWA Notice (1022);
         (e)   Wage rate information (FHWA 1495);
         (f)   Wage rate information (FHWA 1495A) (en Espanol);
         (g)   Contractually required wage rates;
         (h)   Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993;
         (i)   Minor labor laws;
         (j)   Federal minimum wage;
         (k)   U.S. Department of Labor (1321);
         (l)   Contractor’s EEO Policy; and
         (m)   The company EEO Officer’s name and telephone number.
      (2)   If a bulletin board is not practical (e.g., no field office), the
project superintendent may keep the bulletin board requirements in a notebook
in his or her vehicle.
(Ord. 131-05, passed 10-17-2005)
§ 1346.10  MATERIALS QUALITY CONTROL; QUALITY ASSURANCE.
   (A)   The quality of materials and workmanship on a project must conform to
the contract specifications so that the public funds expended will have
purchased a safe, economical and fully functional purpose. The DOE must make
arrangements to provide for and administer a materials management process.
Manufacturers, suppliers, contractors or ODOT certifications as sole
documentation of acceptability are not always sufficient. The acceptability
should be consistent with the specifications and may require independent
assurance testing.
   (B)   The DOE through its CE is responsible for material testing and
inspection pursuant to the minimums listed below and as described in the
project’s approved materials management process. The DOE’s proposed materials
management process shall be submitted by the CE prior to being finalized at the
pre-award meeting. Approval is contingent on meeting or exceeding the minimum
standards listed below and the intent of the plans and specifications. In
addition, the materials management process should list the individuals
responsible for testing and inspection, their certifications and those of an
independent testing laboratory to be utilized. Only laboratories certified by
AASHTO Materials Reference Laboratory (AMRL) for the materials to be tested are
permitted.
   (C)   Reimbursement of federal/state funds may be denied for materials
incorporated into the work without or contrary to the accepted materials
management process and contract documents.
   (D)   FHWA does not require specific testing and inspection of materials off
the NHS (National Highway System). However, ODOT does require testing and
inspection of materials on all projects no matter the highway designation. This
requirement is being passed to the DOE by accepting federal and/or state funds.
In order to protect the interest of public safety and to protect the city from
receiving substandard materials, the following minimum standards are required.
For all DOE administered projects that exceed $2,000,000 of federal and/or
state funds, all ODOT materials testing and inspection standards and
requirements are to be enforced. The minimum standards that follow apply only
to those projects less than $2,000,000.
   (E)   All materials not specifically listed below, must be supplied by
certified ODOT suppliers. The contractor will notify the DOE of the start date
of the project, a minimum of three days before actual work begins:
      (1)   Aggregate, to be provided by a certified ODOT supplier;
      (2)   Asphalt concrete production and testing will be performed according
to ODOT Supplement 1056. Simply stated, all asphalt concrete specified in plans
will be ODOT item 448. All asphalt concrete supplied will be from ODOT approved
Job Mix Formulas (JMFs). As part of ODOT’s quality assurance procedures, ODOT
will perform periodical plant testing and monitoring of asphalt concrete
production. Forty-eight hours before significant asphalt concrete production is
to begin, the contractor shall notify the DOE so that plant monitors are
available and aware of the JMF to be used;
      (3)   Portland cement concrete for paving will be batched from an ODOT
approved concrete plant, delivered to the project site in an ODOT inspected
mixer, from an ODOT approved Job Mix Formula (JMF) and according to ODOT
Supplemental Specification 899. For each day’s pour, air, slump, temperature
and yield tests shall be taken for each 50-100 yards of delivered concrete. A
beam tensile test shall be performed to represent that day’s production.
Further testing and quality control requirements are found in the ODOT Manual
of Procedures for Concrete. The individual performing the tests shall be ACI
Level I Field Technician certified. Forty-eight hours before significant
concrete production is to begin, the contractor shall notify the DOE so that
plant monitors are available and aware of the JMF to be used;
      (4)   Miscellaneous portland cement concrete, concrete will be batched
from an ODOT approved concrete plant, delivered to the project site in an ODOT
inspected mixer, from an ODOT approved Job Mix Formula (JMF) and according to
ODOT Supplemental Specification 899. Each 50 yards of delivered concrete, or
fraction thereof, air, slump, temperature and yield tests shall be taken and
one set of cylinders made according to the ODOT Manual of Procedures for
Concrete;
      (5)   Miscellaneous materials, such as guardrail, pipe, catch basins,
manholes, signs, posts, lighting fixtures and the like shall be provided by a
certified ODOT supplier and field inspected for defects prior to incorporation
into the project;
      (6)   Small quantities, with the written approval of the CE, non-tested
portland cement concrete and asphalt concrete materials may be incorporated
into the project, from ODOT certified suppliers provided the quantity is less
than 50 cubic yards;
      (7)   Structures, minimum requirements are as follows:
         (a)   Two test cylinders, made of the concrete incorporated in each
day of work, will be made from each 200 cy (150 m3) or fraction thereof, on
structures over 20 feet clear span (6.1 m), as per § 511 of the Construction &
Material Specifications (C&MS);
         (b)   Two test cylinders, made of the concrete incorporated in each
day of work, will be made from each 50 cy (35 m3) or fraction thereof, on
structures 20 feet clear span (6.1 m) or less, as per § 511 of the C&MS;
         (c)   When necessary to permit early removal of false work or to
permit backfilling, a concrete test beam shall be made and tested in accordance
with Supplement 1023, as per Specification 511 of the C&MS;
         (d)   Air, slump and yield tests shall be performed on the first
several loads of each day’s production of concrete to ensure the concrete meets
the required specifications and to ensure the proper adjustments have been made
to bring the concrete into the required specifications, as per § 704.1.2 of the
Manual of Procedures for Structures;
         (e)   Following the initial testing, concrete for substructures shall
have air, slump and yield tests performed as often as necessary to assure the
required specifications are met, as per the Manual of Procedures for
Structures;
         (f)   Following the initial testing, concrete for superstructures
shall have an air test completed on each load of concrete. Slump and yield
tests shall be performed as often as necessary to assure the required
specifications are met, as per the Manual of Procedures for Structures;
         (g)   Each time test cylinders or test beams are made, an air, slump
and yield test shall also be performed; and
         (h)   For structural members, steel members, pre-stressed concrete box
and I-beams shall be from ODOT certified producers.
      (8)   For any materials neither listed above nor available from ODOT
certified suppliers, the appropriate testing, sampling and inspection
requirements will be as submitted and approved in the materials management
process.
(Ord. 131-05, passed 10-17-2005)
§ 1346.11  CHANGE ORDERS.
   (A)   Change orders amend the contract by adding or deleting work, making
reimbursement for additional costs incurred, making material substitutions and
changing specifications. Only work necessary to complete the project as
originally intended may be added by change order.
   (B)   All significant change orders must be approved by the Service
Committee or CE prior to the contractor performing the work. Should the
contractor perform added work prior to receipt of written approval,
reimbursement may be denied.
   (C)   Prior to contract award, the DOE will submit for City Council approval
a change order review process. It is the Service Committee’s intent to only
review contract changes of significance, not simple quantity adjustments. The
Service Committee’s level of review will be a function of contract size,
complexity, the DOE’s experience, prior construction contract administration
experience and the city’s ability to fund the project should the cap be
exceeded. Contract changes that establish new items of work will receive more
review than extensions of existing as bid work items.
   (D)   When the DOE through its CE is satisfied with the proposed change
order, the CE will forward the change order to the Service Committee for review
and/or approval. The Service Committee will confer with the DOE coordinator, if
necessary, to assure the applicability of federal, state, county and/or local
funding for the change order. A change order is prepared and processed for any
of the following reasons:
      (1)   An increase or decrease in any of the contract pay items;
      (2)   Changes in the work which were not originally delineated in the
contract such as revised design considerations;
      (3)   The addition of a new or modified pay item required to complete the
work in accordance with the contract;
      (4)   Changes caused by outside agencies such as utilities and the like;
      (5)   Payment adjustments due to contract provisions;
      (6)   Quality changes to meet field conditions;
      (7)   Plan errors;
      (8)   Suspension of work;
      (9)   Final measurements/calculations; and
      (10)   Settlement of a dispute or claim resulting from any of the above
reasons.
   (E)   The change order must provide sufficient explanation to ascertain that
the work is necessary, consistent with specifications, within the scope and
intent of the contract agreement and approved by the DOE or Service Committee.
If the change order is approved by ODOT and FHWA and/or state funds are
available above current ODOT project encumbrances, but under the project capped
amount, funding may be permitted. Funding of change orders not approved or for
which no remaining FHWA and/or state funds remain, is the sole responsibility
of the city.
   (F)   The processing of change orders usually begins with the recognition of
a need for a change order at the project level. There is usually communication
between the contractor and the DOE. If all parties agree that a change order
should be generated, a decision is made as to the type of change order that is
needed.
   (G)   Note that the performance of extra work or additional quantities of
work may warrant an extension of contract time. Extensions of contract time may
involve additional direct project overhead cost.
   (H)   Once the need to perform extra work on a project has been identified,
a basis of payment for this work must be established. The two types of pricing
for extra work are usually agreed unit price or force account price.
   (I)   Agreed unit price is used when the extra work can be broken down into
measurable units. The number of units necessary to perform the work is
estimated and a unit price determined and agreed upon. The agreed upon unit
price should be a unit price already established in the contract or comparative
pricing may be used. The DOE may reference ODOT’s website of average bid prices
to assist with this effort.
   (J)   Force account price is used when the work cannot be broken into
measurable units or when a unit price cannot be agreed upon. This method
reimburses the contractor the actual costs of labor, equipment and materials
incurred in the performance of the work including allowable overhead and
markup. This method requires a significant amount of record keeping.
   (K)   The records required for force account pricing of extra work must
accurately depict all labor, equipment and materials used by the contractor to
perform the work. The Blue Book for heavy highway equipment costs with the ODOT
procedure for establishing appropriate equipment costs shall be utilized as per
the 2002 ODOT C&MS, § 109.05. The items that are necessary to record are shown
below:
      (1)   Description of work;
      (2)   Contractor’s work force;
      (3)   Employee name;
      (4)   Classification;
      (5)   Hours worked - regular and overtime;
      (6)   Contractor equipment:
         (a)   Type;
         (b)   Model;
         (c)   Age;
         (d)   Capacity hours worked; and
         (e)   Hours idle;
      (7)   Materials:
         (a)   Description; and
         (b)   Quantity;
      (8)   Invoices.
   (L)   Quantity Measurements.
      (1)   The DOE shall record the measurements of the quantities of work in
the units prescribed by the plan actually performed by the contractor. Change
orders must be prepared to make adjustments for any differences between
contract quantities and the quantities actually performed.
      (2)   Issues of efficiency or other similar factors may arise that may
impact unit costs when the quantities actually performed differ significantly
from those shown in the plan. For these occurrences the quantity records shall
be thorough enough to determine actual production rates and other such items.
(Ord. 131-05, passed 10-17-2005)
§ 1346.12  CLAIMS.
   (A)   Terms of Agreement. The city is subject to claims by the contractor
who performs the work. The terms of the project between the city and the
contractor exist in the contract, the specifications and the plans. There are
certain terms that are not stated in the contract documents. These are known as
implied terms. For instance there is an implied warranty that the plans and
specifications are free from defects and, unless stated otherwise, that there
will be safe and continuous access to all areas within the project’s
boundaries. Claims arise from both stated and implied terms.
   (B)   Claims Management Process. The city’s claims management process must
meet the general framework and intent of ODOT’s Proposal Note 25, Dispute
Resolution and Claims Process. This proposal note has formalized a claims
management process at ODOT that requires progressive administrative reviews of
a contractor’s claim prior to a filing in the Court of Claims. By requiring
administrative reviews beginning at the project level, construction contract
claims have been reduced. Likewise, a process for the fair hearing of a claim
or dispute reduces a contractor’s risk and ultimately results in more
competitive bids.
   (C)   Formalized Claims Process. It is required that the city formalize a
claims management process that includes progressive administrative reviews
prior to formal legal action by the contractor. The city’s claims management
process must be prepared and approved by City Council prior to the contract
award. Preferably, the claims management process would be included in the
city’s bid documents.
   (D)   Use of Process Required. Resolution of all claims must be according to
the project’s approved claims management process and approved the Service
Committee or CE if the resolution affects the contract completion date and/or
increases project costs.
   (E)   Who Can Make A Claim.  The only entity that may assert a claim against
the city is the legal contractor of record. If the project is being performed
by a joint venture, then only the joint venture may assert a claim. A single
party to the venture cannot assert a claim. Likewise, a subcontractor may not
assert a claim against the city, but may make a claim against the prime
contractor who, in turn, may assert a claim against the city for damages
incurred by the subcontractor.
   (F)   Elements Of A Claim.  Every claim has two distinct elements:
entitlement; and damages. Entitlement is the theory under which the contractor
asserts the claim. The contractor must prove entitlement. Examples are work not
shown on plans, conflict between plans and specifications, third party delays,
and unforeseen conditions. Damages are the cost impacts incurred by the
contractor which are over and above normal costs and which are caused by the
claim event. Each claim must have both of these elements. If a contractor
encounters a situation where there would be an entitlement but incurs no
monetary impact, there is no claim. Likewise, a contractor may state that he or
she has incurred additional costs but cannot establish an entitlement, then
there is no claim.
   (G)   Types Of Claims.
      (1)   The contractor shall make a reasonable effort to mitigate damages.
Mitigation might include re-sequencing, reducing, re-mobilizing or changing
manpower. The contractor is entitled to recover the costs of mitigation.
Certain types of disputes by their nature may result in a claim. Claims may be
due to plan discrepancies or omissions, allowable costs in calculating change
orders, unforeseen site conditions, quantity variations, interferences and
delays. Delays require careful analysis to determine who is responsible. The
contractor must demonstrate that the delay was critical. It should be
demonstrated that the delay in question affected the overall project schedule
and was a controlling operation with respect to project completion.
      (2)   Delays that are unforeseeable and beyond the control of the
contractor are excusable delays. Excusable delays may be either compensable or
noncompensable. Delays caused by the city, such as lack of site access, late
approval of shop drawing, and redesign, may be compensable. Delays caused by
third parties outside the contractor’s control, such as area-wide labor
disputes, floods, transportation industry delays, fire and vandalism may be
noncompensable. Non-excusable delays are always noncompensable. These delays,
such as subcontractor delay, late mobilization, production longer than
scheduled and equipment breakdowns are caused by the contractor or under his or
her control.
      (3)   Very often delays may occur from various sources at the same time.
These delays are known as concurrent delays. The city-caused compensable delay
occurring at the same time as an excusable delay that is noncompensable should
result in a time extension but no recovery of costs. The city-caused delay
occurring at the same time as a contractor delay should result in a time
extension but no recovery of costs. Both cases relieve the contractor from
liquidated damages for the time in question.
      (4)   The contractor is entitled to plan and pursue the work in order to
finish ahead of the contract completion date. If the city delays the
contractor, the contractor may be entitled to impact costs.
   (H)   Proof Of Claim.  Proof of entitlement and proof that additional costs
were incurred rests solely with the contractor. The contractor should put the
city through the DOE on notice of each instance where the contractor intends to
file a claim (§ 104.02 of the Ohio Department of Transportation C&MS). This
notice requirement allows the DOE the opportunity to mitigate the claim
situation and to begin to keep careful and specific records of the contractor’s
activities, manpower, equipment and materials that are related to the claim.
   (I)   Analyzing A Claim.
      (1)   To analyze a claim the following steps should be taken.
         (a)   Determine the element of entitlement.
         (b)   Was the claim filed timely and was the DOE given the required
notice?
         (c)   Identify the contractor’s position.
         (d)   What does the contract plans and specifications say about it?
         (e)   What do the contract documents say?
         (f)   Determine the actual conditions giving rise to the claim.
         (g)   Identify each specific claim issue. What is the position of both
sides on each issue?
         (h)   Identify responsibility. If delay related, is it excusable vs.
non-excusable, compensable or is there an issue of concurrent delay?
         (i)   Was there actually an impact?
      (2)   At this point of the analysis if there is no entitlement, then
there is no claim. If there is entitlement, then continue on.
         (a)   Determine the element of damages.
         (b)   Review the contractor’s cost.
         (c)   Compare with the DOE records.
         (d)   Analyze the damages.
   (J)   Claim Avoidance.  The avoidance of claims is best affected by proper
contract management practices. The city can help prevent claims by practicing
the following activities:
      (1)   Constructability reviews;
      (2)   Prequalification of contractors;
      (3)   Proper scheduling;
      (4)   Prompt resolution of change orders;
      (5)   Pre-bid and pre-con meetings; and
      (6)   Partnering.
(Ord. 131-05, passed 10-17-2005)
§ 1346.13  TERMINATION.
   (A)   There are two types of termination: termination for convenience; and
termination by default. Termination for convenience means the city can
terminate the contract at anytime. This usually occurs when project plans have
huge errors or the project is severely affected by other projects or
emergencies outside the control of the city.
   (B)   Termination by default means the city can terminate the contract for
the following reasons:
      (1)   Contractor fails to commence his or her work within a reasonable
time;
      (2)   Contractor does not perform with reasonable progress;
      (3)   Contractor abandons, fails or refuses to complete work;
      (4)   Contractor improperly performs the work; or
      (5)   Contractor goes out of business or files bankruptcy.
   (C)   Termination by default is not an immediate event. This type of default
requires a series of events to occur over a period of time, all of which must
be documented by the DOE. The use of a daily diary is a very critical aspect of
this termination.
(Ord. 131-05, passed 10-17-2005)
§ 1346.14  METHOD OF MEASUREMENT.
   (A)   In determining the proper method of measurement for a particular item
of work encountered on a project, several sources of information exist. The
ODOT Construction and Material Specifications Manual (C&MS) § 109.01 provides
general information for the determination of various units of measurement.
These include items measured by weight, area and volume.
   (B)   For items of work not covered in the C&MS, other sources can be
utilized to determine the proper method of measurement.
(Ord. 131-05, passed 10-17-2005)
§ 1346.15  BILLING.
   (A)   The DOE shall have the responsibility to make sure the contractor
receives prompt payment for all completed and accepted items of work. After an
item of work is completed, but before payment is made, a detailed inspection is
necessary to determine the quantities of the various items of work performed.
The basis of payment for any item of work details that the unit bid price is
full compensation for certain work and/or materials essential to that item. As
such, this work and/or material will not be measured or paid for under any
other item of work. The CE shall approve all invoices prior to payment. The
payment should be made to the contractor within 30 days of receiving the
contractor’s invoice after the completion of the work per  Ohio R.C. 126.30. To
assure prompt payment, the measurement of quantities and the recording for
payment should be performed on a daily basis as the items of work are completed
and accepted.
   (B)   The DOE is responsible for preparing documentation to support payment
for work performed by the contractor by measurement of completed and accepted
quantities of work. The documentation shall provide validation that the
quantity for payment has been determined in accordance with contract
requirements with necessary measurements, calculations, weight tickets and the
like, and that the work was done in close conformity to the plans and
specifications.
(Ord. 131-05, passed 10-17-2005)
§ 1346.16  PROJECT CLOSEOUT.
   After the completion of the physical work, it is time to closeout the
project. This process ultimately leads to the final payment and release of the
contractor from further responsibility for the project. This process includes
gaining acceptance of the project from all participating agencies,
determination of and agreement on the final value of the contract and the
completion of all remaining contract requirements.
   (A)   Final Inspection.
      (1)   When work on a project has been completed to the satisfaction of
the DOE, a final inspection is conducted. It is required that ODOT lead and
perform the final inspection in accordance with Policy 27-001(P) and Standard
Procedure 510-007(SP) for ODOT funded projects. The final inspection team shall
include the CE, the Service Director, the contractor and representatives of
other agencies, utilities and DOE representatives as required. The team should
determine the need for any corrective or additional work and create the punch
list detailing this work. The CE shall provide a punch list to the contractor
in writing along with specified time frame or specified date for completion of
the prescribed work. It is the responsibility of the CE to do any necessary
follow-up to assure that the contractor completes the punch list work in a
timely manner.
      (2)   Upon completion of all physical work, including punch list work,
the CE shall forward to the Service Committee or City Council written
acceptance and final project certification.
   (B)   Determination Of Final Contract Value.  A key element of the project
closeout is the determination of the final dollar value of the construction
project. This is accomplished by determining the final number of units to be
paid for each item of the contract and by processing all necessary change
orders, including a final change order and/or another document noting agreement
by all parties to the final contract value.
   (C)   Prepare and Audit Contract Quantities.  The DOE is responsible for
determining and preparing support documentation for the final quantity to be
paid for every item of work contained in the construction contract. Ideally,
this is accomplished progressively as the items are completed during the course
of construction of the project. Once the physical work has been completed for
the project, the CE shall audit all project records. Upon completion of the
audit, a list of approved final quantities is prepared and is forwarded to the
contractor for concurrence. Once agreement with final quantities has been
obtained, a final change order and/or other document is prepared to make any
necessary adjustments between the final and original contract quantities and
signify agreement by all parties to the final quantities and value.
   (D)   Final Material Acceptance.  All materials incorporated into
construction projects must be approved by the DOE for use. Once the work is
completed for the project an audit should be performed to ensure that
sufficient quantities of materials have been approved for each reported final
quantity. As the final quantity audit is being performed and final quantities
are approved, the quantities are reported for testing purposes. The CE shall
review the project testing and acceptance records to ensure that sufficient
materials are approved for the final quantity for every contract item.
Resolution of material deficiencies are the responsibility of the CE. Once the
CE has resolved all material deficiency issues, final project certification may
proceed.
   (E)   Final Payment and Release.
      (1)   The final report shall be certified by the CE stating that the
project was developed and delivered in compliance with the terms, conditions
and requirements of the project agreement with his or her professional
engineer’s seal and signature. Once submitted, the final package is audited and
approved for payment. Items that should be provided in the final report are as
followed:
         (a)   Final invoice which reconciles payment to final quantities;
         (b)   Final inspection report;
         (c)   Waiver of liens;
         (d)   Certification of payroll affidavit;
         (e)   Receiving ticket for salvaged materials (when applicable); and
         (f)   Affidavit of subcontractor payment.
      (2)   The Finance Director shall issue final payment and release the
contractor from further responsibility.
(Ord. 131-05, passed 10-17-2005)
§ 1346.17  MAINTENANCE OF STATE FUNDED PROJECTS.
   (A)   After completion of the project and in accordance with 23 U.S.C. § 116
and applicable provisions of the Ohio Revised Code, the city shall provide
adequate maintenance activities for the project, unless otherwise agreed. If
the project is not being adequately maintained, the Service Director shall be
notified of deficiencies and if the maintenance deficiencies are not corrected
the city may be ineligible for future participation in the ODOT local-let
process.
   (B)   The city is responsible to maintain the project to design standards
after completion. A Maintenance Quality Survey (MQS) or similar process is
recommended to ensure the integrity of the maintenance program for this
project. Details pertinent to instituting an MQS are available from the Office
of Maintenance Administration, Ohio Department of Transportation.
(Ord. 131-05, passed 10-17-2005)
§ 1346.18  EXCLUSION OF CERTAIN PROJECTS.
   Emergency projects to repair damaged infrastructure or normal maintenance
programs that fall under the Director of Public Service jurisdiction whether
performed by city personnel or outside contractors shall be excluded from the
requirements of this chapter.
(Ord. 131-05, passed 10-17-2005)
CHAPTER 1348:  INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY MAINTENANCE CODE
Section
1348.01   Edition adopted
1348.02   File and distribution copies
1348.03   Purpose
1348.04   Scope
1348.05   Definitions
1348.06   Existing buildings
1348.07   Inspections
1348.08   Amendments
1348.09   Emergencies
1348.10   Expenses and costs
1348.11   Conflicts of laws
1348.99   Penalty
Cross references:
   Building and housing regulations, see Part 14
   Floor area of sleeping rooms, see §§
1268.07,
1270.03
   Inspection required prior to occupancy, see §
1448.08
   Maintenance of buildings, see §
1420.01
   Unsafe buildings, see
Chapter 1338
Editor’s note:
   This Chapter 1348 was formerly Chapter 1494 of the Building and Housing
Code, which was recodified by Ordinance 62-07, passed June 4, 2007.
Statutory reference:
   Adoption of technical codes by reference, see Ohio R.C. 731.231
   Removal of unsafe structures, see Ohio R.C. 715.26(B)
§ 1348.01  EDITION ADOPTED.
   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 731.231, there is hereby adopted by the municipality,
for the control of buildings and structures as therein provided, the current
edition of the International Property Maintenance Code, save and except such
portions as may be hereinafter deleted or amended, which Code is incorporated
as fully as if set out at length herein.
(Ord. 74-04, passed 5-17-2004; Ord. 35-2018, passed 11-5-2018)
§ 1348.02  FILE AND DISTRIBUTION COPIES.
   At least one copy of the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted
in §
1348.01, is on file with the Building Department for inspection by the public.
Copies of such Code may be purchased from International Code Council (ICC)
Mideast Regional Office, 1245 South Sunbury Road, Suite 100, Westerville, OH
43081-9444 (Tel: 614/890-1064).
(Ord. 123-98, passed 7-27-1998; Ord. 74-04, passed 5-17-2004; Ord. 35-2018,
passed 11-5-2018)
§ 1348.03  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted is to
establish minimum standards necessary in order to:
   (A)   Make all property, dwelling structures and other structures safe,
sanitary, free from fire and health hazards, fit for human habitation and
beneficial to the public welfare;
   (B)   Establish minimum standards governing the maintenance of property,
dwelling structures and other structures in such condition as will not
constitute a blighting or deteriorating influence on the neighborhood and the
community;
   (C)   Fix responsibilities for owners and occupants of properties, dwellings
and other structures with respect to sanitation, repair and maintenance;
   (D)   Authorize the vacation or condemnation of dwelling units and other
structures unsafe or unfit for human habitation;
   (E)   Authorize the inspection of properties, dwellings and other
structures, establish enforcement procedures and fix penalties for violations;
   (F)   Provide adequate space for all physical needs of a family, space for
each family function, housekeeping activity and facility, and space for
circulation, without overuse of space;
   (G)   Provide space for all the social needs, amenities and psychological
well-being of a family, and for privacy and association for a family and the
individual members thereof, without overcrowding; and
   (H)   Assure the maintenance of an adequate environment in the city.
(Ord. 123-98, passed 7-27-1998; Ord. 74-04, passed 5-17-2004; Ord. 35-2018,
passed 11-5-2018)
§ 1348.04  SCOPE.
   The International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted shall be
supplementary to all other ordinances of the city relating to the construction,
use and maintenance of property, buildings and other structures, and shall
apply to all vacant land as well as structures, buildings or portions thereof
which are designed or intended to be used for residential and other occupancy
and/or their accessory uses.
(Ord. 123-98, passed 7-27-1998; Ord. 74-04, passed 5-17-2004; Ord. 35-2018,
passed 11-5-2018)
§ 1348.05  DEFINITIONS.
   As used in the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted the
definitions set forth in the Planning and Zoning Code shall supplement the
definitions set forth in the International Property Maintenance Code. In the
event of a conflict, the most recent definition adopted by the city shall
prevail.
(Ord. 123-98, passed 7-27-1998; Ord. 74-04, passed 5-17-2004; Ord. 35-2018,
passed 11-5-2018)
§ 1348.06  EXISTING BUILDINGS.
   An existing building or portion thereof, presently used for residential or
other purposes, may continue to be occupied and used if the building complies
with the International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted except as to any
variance heretofore or hereafter specifically granted by the city, in
accordance with the city charter, or by the state.
(Ord. 123-98, passed 7-27-1998; Ord. 74-04, passed 5-17-2004; Ord. 35-2018,
passed 11-5-2018)
§ 1348.07  INSPECTIONS.
   The Code Official is hereby authorized to make or cause to be made
inspections of all structures or premises and all secondary or appurtenant
structures to determine whether such structures or premises conform to this
chapter and other provisions of this Title 8.  See also §
1440.17 of the Building and Housing Code.
(Ord. 123-98, passed 7-27-1998; Ord. 74-04, passed 5-17-2004; Ord. 35-2018,
passed 11-5-2018)
§ 1348.08  AMENDMENTS.
   The International Property Maintenance Code, as adopted in §
1348.01, is hereby amended as follows:
Section 101.1.   Insert: “City of Broadview Heights, Ohio.”
Section 111.0 MEANS OF APPEAL
   (page 5)            Insert: “See Section 1440.25 of the Building and Housing
Code of the City of Broadview Heights for provisions relating to appeals.”
Section 202.0 GENERAL DEFINITIONS (Amended):
   Substitute the following definitions:
Code official: The Building Commissioner or any duly authorized representative
of the Building Commissioner or the Mayor.
One-family dwelling: A building containing one dwelling unit with not more than
two lodgers or boarders.
Two-family dwelling: A building containing dwelling units with not more than
two lodgers or boarders per family.
Family: An individual or married couple and the children thereof with not more
than two other persons related directly to the individual or married couple by
blood or marriage; or a group of not more than three unrelated persons, living
together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.
Lawn: An open space between woods; ground that is covered with grass and is to
be kept mowed.
Section 302.1 Sanitation (Amended):  All exterior property and premises shall
be maintained clean, safe, sanitary and free from any accumulation of rubbish
or garbage. No nonresidential use receptacle shall be stored or placed closer
than 25 feet to any building used in whole or in part as a place for human
habitation. No such receptacle shall be stored or placed in the front of any
building setback line. Any receptacle on property shall comply with Section
307.2.1 (Rubbish storage facilities).
Section 302.3 Sidewalks and driveways and driveway aprons (Amended): All
sidewalks, walkways, stairs, driveways, driveway aprons, parking spaces and
similar areas shall be kept in a proper state of repair, free from hazardous
conditions. Changes in the level of public sidewalks up to 1/4 inch may be
vertical and without edge treatment. Changes in level between 1/4 inch and 1/
2 inch shall be beveled with a slope no greater than 1:2. Changes in level
greater than 1/2 inch shall be accomplished by means of a ramp that complies
with Ohio Accessibility Guidelines for Persons With Disabilities. Stairs shall
comply with the requirements of Sections PM-304.10 and PM-702.9.
Section 302.3.1 Unpaved public sidewalks, driveways, driveway aprons and
parking areas (Added): All existing unpaved public sidewalks as well as all
unpaved nonresidential use driveways, driveway aprons and parking areas shall
be replaced with a hard-surface public sidewalk, driveway, driveway apron and/
or parking area in accordance with city surface requirements and construction
specifications within 60 days of receipt of written notice to do so by the Code
Official or Director of Service. No unpaved driveway or parking area shall be
expanded or enlarged without paving all unpaved areas. Paving of tree lawns and
areas that are traditionally landscaped shall be prohibited unless approved by
the Planning Commission.
Section 302.3.2 Off-street parking and loading facilities and buildings
(Added):  All existing off-street parking spaces and passenger loading zones
that are subject to the Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA), Stat.
327 U.S.C. 12101, as amended, the Fair Housing Amendments of 1988, 102 Stat.
1619, 42 U.S.C. 3601, as amended, and buildings that are governed by OAC 4101:
1-1 et seq.(Ohio Building Code, Chapter 11), shall comply with the Ohio
Accessibility Guidelines.  This shall include, but not be limited to, the Ohio
(ADA) Accessibility Guidelines to ADA Title III, issued at 28 CRF, Part 36,
Appendix A, known as ADAAG 4.1 (Minimum Requirements) and ADAAG 4.6 (Parking
and Passenger Loading Zones).
Section 302.4 Weeds and grass (Amended): All premises and exterior property,
whether improved or unimproved, including tree lawns, shall be maintained free
from weeds or plant growth in excess of 6 inches after May 1 of each year. All
noxious weeds shall be prohibited. Weeds shall be defined as all grasses,
annual plants and vegetation, other than trees or shrubs. However, the term
“weeds” does not include cultivated flowers and gardens.
Section 302.4.1 Compliance time (Added): Compliance shall be commenced within
seventy-two hours after receipt of notice sent by first class and hand
delivered or posted at the premises. One notice per calendar year shall be
considered notice for the entire calendar year.
Section 302.4.2 Noncompliance; remedies of city; costs (Added): Upon failure of
the owner, lessee, agent, tenant having charge of the land in the city, after
being given notice to do so, to cut or destroy grass or weeds, or to remove
debris or other material described in Sections 302.4 and 302.12 a citation to
appear in court for noncompliance with these provisions may be issued. Also,
any duly authorized employee of the city and/or any contractor hired by the
city may enter upon the property in violation and cut and destroy the grass or
weeds growing thereon or remove the debris or other material. Costs shall be
billed in accordance with the Fee Schedule in Chapter 1449 of the Building and
Housing Code of the city or at cost, whichever is higher. Those costs may be
collected by any of the following methods: (a) by means of appropriate civil
court action; (b) an additionally penalty and fine in any criminal proceeding
associated with a violation of this Chapter 1348 of the Code of Ordinances of
the city; or (c) the Director of Finance may send to the owner of the property
an invoice for the cost of the work done. The invoice shall be sent to the last
known address of the owner or the address to which tax bills with respect to
that lot or parcel of land are sent. If the amount of the invoice is not paid
with 30 days from the date of the invoice, the amount of the delinquency shall
be reported to the Council, which may order that amount to be assessed and
certified to the County Auditor for collection in the same manner that real
property taxes are collected.
Section 302.8 Motor vehicles (Amended): Except as provided in other
regulations, no unlicensed and/or uninsured vehicle, seldom moved (as
determined by the Code Official) vehicle, or an immovable motor vehicle, shall
be parked, kept or stored on any public or private property, and no vehicle
shall at any time be in a state of major disassembly, disrepair or in the
process of being stripped or dismantled, regardless of whether it has valid
license plates, with the following exception: A vehicle of any type is
permitted to undergo major overhaul, including body work, provided such work is
performed inside a structure or similarly enclosed area designed and approved
by the Fire Chief and the Building Commissioner of the city for such purposes.
Section 302.8.1 Parking (Added): Motor vehicles shall be parked only in
approved and designated parking areas. Parking lines and signs, where required,
shall be maintained, including parking provisions for the disabled. Parking on
lawn areas is prohibited except for special events.
Section 302.10 Outside display of goods (Added): Where the display of goods is
permitted by the Planning and Zoning Code and/or the Business Regulation and
Taxation Code, there shall be no outside display of goods within 20 feet of any
public sidewalk and/or street right-of-way line.
Section 302.11 Landscaping (Added): All lawn areas shall be properly seeded and
maintained on a continuing basis. All developed nonresidential land, which is
not paved, shall be landscaped. Paving shall not be substituted for
landscaping. Landscaping shall be maintained on a continuing basis in
accordance with any city approved landscape plan, when applicable.
Section 302.12 General (Added): The exterior property area of all properties
shall be kept free of any debris, object, material or condition which, in the
opinion of the Code Official, may create a health, accident or fire hazard, is
a public nuisance or constitutes a blighting or deteriorating influence on the
neighborhood. Lawns, tree lawns, signs, fences, walls, landscaping, trees,
walks, driveway aprons, driveways and parking areas shall also be maintained so
as not to constitute a blighting or deteriorating effect in the neighborhood
and the community.
304.2(A) Algae on Exterior Surfaces (Added): Exterior synthetic and natural
material shall be maintained free and clear of algae and mold growth or build-
up. Removal of both algae and mold build-up should be achieved through
application of an environmentally safe cleaning agent or power washing.
Section 304.7.1 Gutters and downspouts (Added): All roofs of every building,
including secondary or appurtenant structures, shall be equipped with gutters
and downspouts connected to a public storm sewer if the storm sewer is
available and deemed adequate for such purposes by the city, or as otherwise
approved by the Code Official.
Section 304.14 (page 10, first and second lines).
         Insert: “May 1 to October 1.”
Section 307.2 Disposal of rubbish(Amended): Every occupant of a structure shall
dispose of all rubbish and garbage in a clean and sanitary manner by placing
such rubbish or garbage in approved leakproof containers with closed, tight-
fitting covers. An approved mechanical food waste grinder in a dwelling unit
may be used for disposal of garbage.
Section 307.2.1 Rubbish storage facilities (Amended): The owner of every
occupied premises shall supply approved leakproof, tight-fitting, covered
containers for rubbish and garbage, and the owner of the premises shall be
responsible for the removal of rubbish and garbage. Any receptacle on any
property, other than a single-family or two-family dwelling, that can be seen
from the first floor of a residence, or any street, shall be totally fenced and
screened from sight in a manner approved by the Building Commissioner. Every
dumpster-type trash receptacle enclosure shall include an approved separate
employee entrance in addition to the loading/unloading gates.
Section 307.3.2 Containers.  Portable Temporary Storage Units. Placement of a
portable temporary storage units are permitted in a commercial and residential
district for a period not to exceed sixty (60) consecutive days per address and
not more than 2 non-consecutive times per year, provided that the unit is
placed on an approved firm surface not more than five (5) feet from the
dwelling with a 10’ side setback and at least 25’ from the right-of-way and not
obstructing traffic in residential zones and behind the rear building line in
commercial zones. If additional time is needed in case of hardship, this would
be at the discretion of the Building Commissioner.
Section 602.3 (page 17, fifth line).   Insert: “September 1 to June 1 of the
following year.”
Section 602.4 (page 17, third line).   Insert: “September 1 to June 1 of the
following year.”
Section 604.4 Outside illumination (Added): Every building, structure or
premises that has illumination in or about its yard shall have such
illumination so designed and located that light sources shall be shielded from
neighboring residential properties and streets and shall not be of excessive
brightness. Flickering, moving or intermittent illumination shall not be
permitted.
(Ord. 123-98, passed 7-27-1998; Ord. 9-00, passed 1-18-2000; Ord. 74-04, passed
5-17-2004; Ord. 73-07, passed 6-4-2007; Ord. 36-16, passed 6-20-2016; Ord. 16-
2017, passed 6-19-2017; Ord. 34-2017, passed 12-18-2017; Ord. 35-2018, passed
11-5-2018)
§ 1348.09  EMERGENCIES.
   Whenever, in the opinion of the Building Commissioner, the condition of a
building, structure or premises, or part thereof, constitutes an immediate
hazard to human life or health, or constitutes a blighting or deteriorating
influence on the neighborhood, he or she shall declare a case of emergency and
may order immediate vacation of the building, structure or premises or part
thereof and/or may cause the violation to be corrected and for such purpose may
employ the necessary labor and materials to carry out the provisions of the
International Property Maintenance Code. The Building Commissioner shall report
all expenses to the Mayor or Council.
(Ord. 123-98, passed 7-27-1998; Ord. 74-04, passed 5-17-2004; Ord. 35-2018,
passed 11-5-2018)
§ 1348.10  EXPENSES AND COSTS.
   Any expenses or costs incurred by the city for correcting violations or for
demolition provided for in the International Property Maintenance Code shall be
paid by the owner of the building, structure or premises.
(Ord. 123-98, passed 7-27-1998; Ord. 74-04, passed 5-17-2004; Ord. 35-2018,
passed 11-5-2018)
§ 1348.11  CONFLICTS OF LAWS.
   In the event of a conflict, the Building Codes adopted in Chapters 1420 and
1421 shall apply and supersede the referenced standards listed in Chapter 8 of
the International Property Maintenance Code.
(Ord. 123-98, passed 7-27-1998; Ord. 74-04, passed 5-17-2004; Ord. 35-2018,
passed 11-5-2018)
§ 1348.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty
of a minor misdemeanor. Each day’s continued violation shall constitute a
separate offense.
   (B)   The imposition of the penalty provided in §
1440.99 or any other penalty provided for in the International Property
Maintenance Code shall not preclude the Director of Law from instituting an
appropriate action or proceeding in a court of proper jurisdiction to prevent
an unlawful repair or maintenance, to restrain, correct or abate a violation,
to prevent the occupancy of a building, structure or premises, or to require
compliance with this Code or other applicable laws, ordinances, rules or
regulations, or the orders or determinations of the Code Official.
(Ord. 123-98, passed 7-27-1998; Ord. 74-04, passed 5-17-2004; Ord. 16-2017,
passed 6-19-2017; Ord. 35-2018, passed 11-5-2018)
CHAPTER 1350:  DONATION BOXES
Section
1350.01   Donation boxes
§ 1350.01  DONATION BOXES.
   (A)   Donation boxes prohibited. No person shall place, use or allow the
installation or operation of a donation box within the city without permit. The
owners, lessee or other person or legal entity in control of a property where
donation boxes are maintained in violation of this section and the owner or
operator of said box shall be liable for any violation of this section.
   (B)   Definitions. A DONATION DROP BOX is defined as any receptacle or
container located outside of an enclosed building designed, intended to be used
for collection and storage of donated items or materials, including, but not
limited to clothing, shoes, books and other like items.
   (C)   Notice of violation. In the event that a clothing donation box has
been located within the city, a notice shall be provided by the property
maintenance officers or any other city employee that a donation drop box has
been placed or is being maintained in violation of this section. The notice
shall be provided by a certificate of mailing to the property owner, lessee,
donation drop box owner, tenant or primary contact person designated by the
donation drop box information, or other person or legal entity in control of a
property. The notice shall inform the party that they have 30 days within which
to remove the donation drop box from the property and from the city.
   (D)   Impoundment and redemption.
      (1)   If the donation drop box has not been removed within the 30-day
time period, the city may seize and impound the donation drop box for failure
to comply with the provisions of this chapter.
      (2)   Such impounding of the donation drop box shall require the donation
drop box to be stored by the city until it has been reclaimed by the owner,
consistent with the provisions of this chapter. The owner of the donation drop
box shall be sent notice of such impoundment at the owners' last known address
by certified mail within five days after the impoundment. Neither the city nor
any agency thereof shall be liable for any damages arising out of the provision
of an erroneous name or address of such owner. The owner of the donation drop
box utilized in violation of this chapter may redeem the same upon satisfactory
proof of ownership and payment of a redemption fee of $1,000. Such impounded
donation drop box may only be released to the owner of a donation drop box or
his or her agent as evidenced by a written common notarized agent agreement or
duly executed power of attorney.
      (3)   If the owner of the impounded donation drop box does not reclaim
such donation drop box within one year of the date of impoundment, the city
may, at its discretion, dispose of such box.
(Ord. 27-2020, passed 7-6-2020)
PART XIV: BUILDING AND HOUSING CODE
TITLE TWO - BUILDING STANDARDS
   
CHAP. 1420.   OHIO STATE BUILDING CODES
   
CHAP. 1421.   RESIDENTIAL CODE OF OHIO FOR ONE-, TWO- AND THREE-FAMILY
DWELLINGS
TITLE FOUR - ADMINISTRATION
   
CHAP. 1440.   BUILDING DEPARTMENT
   
CHAP. 1445.   LICENSING OF BUILDING TRADESMEN
   
CHAP. 1446.   REGISTRATION OF CONTRACTORS
   
CHAP. 1448.   PERMITS, INSPECTIONS AND FEES
   
CHAP. 1449.   FEE SCHEDULE
TITLE TWO:  BUILDING STANDARDS
   
CHAP. 1420.   OHIO STATE BUILDING CODES
   
CHAP. 1421.   RESIDENTIAL CODE OF OHIO FOR ONE-, TWO- AND THREE-FAMILY
DWELLINGS
CHAPTER 1420: OHIO STATE BUILDING CODES
Section
1420.01   Certification to enforce the Ohio State Building Codes
1420.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Construction of buildings and structures; sidewalks required, see §
1024.10
   Key boxes on commercial and industrial buildings, see §
1650.04
   Smoke detection system for apartments and condominiums, see §
1650.05
   Traffic regulation at construction sites, see §
440.14
Statutory reference:
   Abandoned service stations, see Ohio R.C. 3791.12 et seq.
   Adoption of technical codes by reference, see Ohio R.C. 731.231
   Application, see Ohio R.C. 3781.06, 3781.061, 3781.10(A), 3781.11(A)
   Dead bolt locks in apartment buildings, see Ohio R.C. 3781.103
   Enforcement, see Ohio R.C. 3781.03, 3781.031, 3781.10(E), 3781.102, 3781.19
   Final jurisdiction, see Ohio R.C. 3781.04
   Power to enact further and additional regulations, see Ohio R.C. 3781.01
   Removal of unsafe structures, see Ohio R.C. 715.26(B), 715.261
   Safety standards for refuse containers, see Ohio R.C. 3791.21
   Smoke detection system for apartments and condominiums, see Ohio R.C.
3781.104;
   Submission of plans, see Ohio R.C. 3791.04
   Use of public buildings by handicapped persons, see Ohio R.C. 3781.111
§ 1420.01  CERTIFICATION TO ENFORCE THE OHIO STATE BUILDING CODES.
   Ohio Administrative Code 4101:1 - the Ohio Building Code, Ohio
Administrative Code 4101:2 - the Ohio Mechanical Code, and Ohio Administrative
Code 4101:3 - the Ohio Plumbing Code as promulgated by the Ohio Board of
Building Standards, shall apply and be enforced within the city.
(Ord. 45-02, passed 4-1-2002)
§ 1420.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1440.99 for general Building and Housing Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.
CHAPTER 1421:  RESIDENTIAL CODE OF OHIO FOR ONE-, TWO- AND THREE-FAMILY
DWELLINGS
Section
1421.01   Certification to enforce the Residential Code of Ohio
1421.02   File and distribution copies
Cross-reference:
   Construction of buildings and structures; sidewalks required, see §
1024.10
   Traffic regulation at construction sites, see §
440.14
Statutory reference:
   Adoption of technical codes by reference, see Ohio R.C. 731.231
   Removal of unsafe structures, see Ohio R.C. 715.26(B), 715.261
§ 1421.01  CERTIFICATION TO ENFORCE THE RESIDENTIAL CODE OF OHIO.
   Pursuant to Ohio Administrative Code 4101:8-1 to 4101:8-43, there is hereby
adopted by and for the municipality, for the purpose of establishing rules and
regulations for the construction, alteration, removal, demolition, equipment,
use and occupancy, location and maintenance of one-, two-, and three-family
dwellings and their accessory structures, the Residential Code of Ohio for
One-, Two- and Three-Family Dwellings, as promulgated by the Ohio Board of
Building Standards.
(Ord. 69-98, passed 4-20-1998; Ord. 13-01, passed 2-5-2001; Ord. 66-04, passed
5-3-2004; Ord. 77-06, passed 5-15-2006)
§ 1421.02  FILE AND DISTRIBUTION COPIES.
   Copies of the Residential Code as adopted in §
1421.01, are on file with the Building Department for inspection by the public.
Copies may be purchased from the International Code Council, Mideast Regional
Office, 1245 South Sunbury Road, Suite 100, Westerville, Ohio 43081-9444
(telephone: (614) 890-1064).
(Ord. 69-98, passed 4-20-1998; Ord. 13-01, passed 2-5-2001; Ord. 66-04, passed
5-3-2004; Ord. 77-06, passed 5-15-2006)
TITLE FOUR:  ADMINISTRATION
   
CHAP. 1440.   BUILDING DEPARTMENT
   
CHAP. 1445.   LICENSING OF BUILDING TRADESMEN
   
CHAP. 1446.   REGISTRATION OF CONTRACTORS
   
CHAP. 1448.   PERMITS, INSPECTIONS AND FEES
   
CHAP. 1449.   FEE SCHEDULE
CHAPTER 1440:  BUILDING DEPARTMENT
Section
1440.01   Purpose of chapter
1440.02   Application of chapter
1440.03   Definitions
1440.04   Standards of workmanship
1440.05   Authority of Building Department
1440.06   Composition of Building Department; appointments; duties
1440.07   Conflicts of interest; qualifications of Building Commissioner
1440.08   Alternative materials and methods
1440.09   Existing installations
1440.10   Prefabricated construction
1440.11   Construction, alteration, repairs; permit required
1440.12   Permit fees
1440.14   Scope of permit
1440.15   Filing of construction and plot plans; quality of materials; waiver
1440.16   Copy of plans required on job site
1440.17   Right of entry; credentials
1440.18   Posting of permit on job site
1440.19   Inspections during construction
1440.20   Mandatory inspections
1440.21   Inspection reports
1440.22   Nonliability of Building Commissioner
1440.23   Nonliability of city
1440.24   Stop work orders
1440.25   Appeals
1440.26   Certificates of use and occupancy
1440.27   Conflicts of laws
1440.99   Penalty; equitable remedies
Cross-reference:
   Building Department, see
CHTR. Art. V, § 5
   Ohio State Building Codes, see
Chapter 1420
   Residential Code of Ohio for One-, Two- and Three-Family Dwellings, see
Chapter 1421
   Security for correction of violations of Building and Housing Code, see §
1262.08
Editor’s note:
   This chapter was repealed in its entirety and re-enacted by Ordinance 70-98,
passed April 20, 1998.
§ 1440.01  PURPOSE OF CHAPTER.
   The purpose of this chapter is to provide minimum administrative standards
for the protection of life, limb, health, property and the environment, and for
the safety and welfare of the consumer, the general public and the owners and
occupants of buildings regulated by this Building and Housing Code.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 1440.02  APPLICATION OF CHAPTER.
   (A)   The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the construction,
prefabrication, alteration, repair, use, occupancy and maintenance of detached
one-, two- or three-family dwellings and their accessory structures. (See
Chapter 1421 for the Building Code itself).
   (B)   The provisions of this chapter shall also supplement Chapter One
(O.A.C. 4101:2-1), Administration, of the Ohio Building Code (OBC), as adopted
by §
1420.01.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998) 
§ 1440.03  DEFINITIONS.
   For the purpose of this chapter, certain abbreviations, terms, phrases,
words and their derivatives shall be construed as defined in other adopted city
ordinances. Where terms are not defined in other city ordinances, such terms
shall have the ordinarily accepted meanings given in other adopted codes, in
the most recent edition of Webster’s New Collegiate Dictionary, in the latest
edition of Means Illustrated Construction Dictionary, or as the context
implies.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 1440.04  STANDARDS OF WORKMANSHIP.
   All erection, construction, alteration and repair of buildings, structures,
systems or appurtenant structures shall be performed in a workmanlike manner,
including, but not limited to, those performance standards recognized by the
applicable trade or industry.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998) 
§ 1440.05  AUTHORITY OF BUILDING DEPARTMENT.
   The Building Department shall have the authority to administer the
provisions of this Building and Housing Code.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 1440.06  COMPOSITION OF BUILDING DEPARTMENT; APPOINTMENTS; DUTIES.
   The persons comprising the Building Department shall be appointed by the
Mayor. In the event of the temporary absence of any member of the Building
Department, the Mayor shall, in his or her discretion, appoint a temporary
replacement to serve during such absence. Such temporary appointment shall be
paid an amount not to exceed the rate of the official who is being temporarily
replaced. The persons employed within the Building Department shall include,
but not be limited to, the following full-time and/or part-time positions.
   (A)   Building Commissioner. Under the direction of the Mayor, this position
is responsible for the performance and oversight of the duties of the Building
Department, which shall include directing and organizing the Department,
program administration and service delivery in the areas of economic
development, planning, zoning, building inspections and Code enforcement.
   (B)   Assistant Building Commissioner. Under the direction of the Building
Commissioner, this position is responsible for assisting the Building
Commissioner in the performance and oversight of the duties of the Building
Department, which shall include building inspections, Code enforcement and such
other duties as may be directed by the Building Commissioner.
   (C)   Building Inspector. Under the direction of the Building Commissioner,
this position shall perform duties as required in this Building and Housing
Code and in the adopted building codes and such other duties as may be directed
by the Building Commissioner. Any building, electrical, plumbing, mechanical or
automatic sprinkler systems inspector shall be classified as a Building
Inspector.
   (D)   Zoning Inspector. Under the direction of the Building Commissioner,
this position shall perform duties as required in this Building and Housing
Code, the Planning and Zoning Code and the adopted property maintenance codes,
and other duties as may be directed by the Building Commissioner.
   (E)   Secretary. Under the direction of the Building Commissioner, this
position shall perform secretarial duties as may be directed by the Building
Commissioner.
   (F)   Clerical Assistant. Under the direction of the Building Commissioner,
this position shall perform clerical duties as may be directed by the Building
Commissioner.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998; Ord. 165-03, passed 11-17-2003; Ord. 171-06,
passed 12-18-2006)
§ 1440.07  CONFLICTS OF INTEREST; QUALIFICATIONS OF BUILDING COMMISSIONER.
   (A)   No Building Commissioner, Building Inspector or Zoning Inspector shall
engage in, or directly or indirectly be connected with, the furnishing of
labor, materials or appliances for the construction, alteration  or maintenance
of a building or structure, the preparation of plans or specifications, or the
brokerage of real estate therefor, within the city, unless he or she is the
owner or tenant of the building or structure.
   (B)   The Building Commissioner shall hold a certification as a Building
Official as set forth in O.A.C. §§ 4101:2-1-01 - 4101:2-98-01.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 1440.08  ALTERNATIVE MATERIALS AND METHODS.
   (A)   The provisions of this Building and Housing Code are not intended to
limit the appropriate use of materials, appliances, equipment or methods of
design or construction not specifically prescribed by this Code, provided that
the proposed alternative materials, appliances, equipment or methods of design
or construction are at least equivalent to that prescribed in this Code in
suitability, quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability,
dimensional stability, safety and sanitation.
   (B)   The Building Commissioner may require that evidence or proof be
submitted to substantiate any claims that may be made regarding any proposed
alternative.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 1440.09  EXISTING INSTALLATIONS.
   Buildings and structures in existence at the time of the adoption of this
Building and Housing Code may have their existing use continued if such use was
legal at the time of the adoption of this Code, provided such continued use is
not dangerous to life and conforms to the city’s property maintenance codes,
except as otherwise provided for in this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 1440.10  PREFABRICATED CONSTRUCTION.
   A certificate of approval by an approved agency shall be furnished with
every prefabricated assembly, except where all elements of the assembly are
readily accessible to inspection at the site. Placement of prefabricated
assemblies at the building site shall be inspected by the Building Commissioner
or his or her authorized representative to determine compliance with this
Building and Housing Code, and a final inspection shall be made in accordance
with the inspection requirements of this Code.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 1440.11  CONSTRUCTION, ALTERATION, REPAIRS; PERMIT REQUIRED.
   (A)   A permit shall be obtained before beginning construction, alterations,
repairs, other than ordinary repairs, or landscaping of new buildings, using
application forms furnished by the Building Commissioner.
   (B)   Ordinary repairs are nonstructural repairs and do not include addition
to, alteration of, or replacement or relocation of, water supply, sewer,
drainage, drain leader, gas, soil, waste, vent or similar piping, electrical
wiring, or mechanical or other work for which a permit is required by the
Building Commissioner.
(Ord. 160-98, passed 9-8-1998)
§ 1440.12  PERMIT FEES.
   Permit fees are established in Chapter 1449 of this Code of Ordinances.
There shall be no fee for a landscaping permit.
(Ord. 160-98, passed 9-8-1998)
§ 1440.14  SCOPE OF PERMIT.
   (A)   The issuance of a permit shall not authorize the violation of any
portion of this chapter or of this Code of Ordinances. The issuance of a permit
or the approval of construction documents shall not be construed to be a permit
for, or an approval of, any violation of any provision of this Code of
Ordinances. A permit presuming to give authority to violate or cancel the
provisions of any code adopted by the city shall be invalid.   
   (B)   The issuance of a permit based upon construction documents and other
data shall not prevent the Building Commissioner from thereafter requiring the
correction of errors in said construction documents and other data or from
preventing building or construction operations from being carried on thereunder
when in violation of this Code of Ordinances.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 1440.15  FILING OF CONSTRUCTION AND PLOT PLANS; QUALITY OF MATERIALS; WAIVER.
   (A)   The application for a permit shall be accompanied by not less than
three sets of plans, drawn to scale, of sufficient clarity to indicate the
nature and extent of the work proposed, and showing in detail that the work
will conform to the provisions of this Building and Housing Code and all other
relevant laws, ordinances, rules and regulations, including the Ohio Building
Code, when applicable.
   (B)   There shall also be filed, prior to a permit being granted for the
excavation or the erection of any building or structure, three plot plans,
drawn to scale, showing the location of all easements, drainage facilities,
adjacent grades and property lines, as well as the location of the proposed
building and of every existing building and structure on the property.
   (C)   When quality of materials is essential for conformity to this Building
and Housing Code, specific information shall be given to establish such
quality, and this Code shall not be cited, or the term “legal” or its
equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific information.
   (D)   The Building Commissioner may waive the requirement for filing plans
when the work involved is of a minor nature.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 1440.16  COPY OF PLANS REQUIRED ON JOB SITE.
   A copy of approved plans shall be kept on the site of the building or work
at the time of inspection. See §
1449.12 for reinspection fee.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 1440.17  RIGHT OF ENTRY; CREDENTIALS.
   (A)   The Building Commissioner, or his or her designee, is authorized to
enter a structure or premises at reasonable times to inspect or to perform the
duties imposed by this Code, provided credentials are presented to the occupant
and that entry is requested and obtained. Where permission to enter has not
been obtained, is denied, or the Building Commissioner has probable cause to
believe that there exists in a structure or upon a premises a condition which
is a serious hazard, the Building Commissioner shall have the recourse to the
remedies provided by law to secure entry.
   (B)   Before entering upon a premises, or while on a premises in the
performance of his or her duties in the enforcement of this Code, the Building
Commissioner or his or her authorized representative shall show his or her
credentials upon request by the owner of the premises involved or by the
contractor performing work on said premises.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998; Ord. 17-03, passed 2-18-2003)
§ 1440.18  POSTING OF PERMIT ON JOB SITE.
   The permit holder or his or her agent shall post a building permit posting
card on the job site in an accessible and conspicuous place until the final
inspection has been made and approved.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 1440.19  INSPECTIONS DURING CONSTRUCTION.
   (A)   Examination of Buildings and Structures; Reports of Violations. The
Building Commissioner or his or her authorized representative shall examine all
buildings and structures in the course of erection, alteration, repair or
removal, as often as required to ensure efficient supervision, and shall file
written reports in the Building Department as to all violations of any law or
ordinance which the Commissioner is required to enforce.
   (B)   Approval or Disapproval of Construction. For on-site construction, the
Building Commissioner shall, from time to time, upon notification from the
permit holder or his or her agent, make or cause to be made any necessary
inspections and shall either approve that portion of the construction as
completed or shall notify the permit holder or his or her agent wherein the
same fails to comply with this Building and Housing Code.
   (C)   Notice to Inspect. The permit holder or his or her agent shall give
the Building Commissioner 24 hours’ notice prior to the time when inspections
need to be performed. The Building Commissioner or Building Inspector shall
make the inspection within 48 hours after such notification.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 1440.20  MANDATORY INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Grade Inspection. A determination shall be made that the building,
including any accessory buildings, paving and drainage, conforms to the grades
as shown on the plan approved by the City Engineer. If the aforesaid grade is
questioned by the general contractor, such grade shall be rechecked and
approved
by the City Engineer and the Building Commissioner prior to starting the
excavation for such building or completing the project, subject to the right to
appeal.
   (B)   Footing Inspection. Inspection and approval of the footings for any
structure or building shall be made before foundation wall, chimney or support
post work proceeds. Such inspection is commonly made after the poles or piers
are set, or after trenches or basement areas are excavated, and after forms are
erected and any required reinforcing steel is in place, and prior to the
placing of concrete. The footing inspection shall include excavations for
thickened slabs intended for the support of bearing walls, partitions,
structural supports or equipment and special requirements for wood foundations.
   (C)   Sewer Inspection. Inspection and approval of sewer connections and any
private sewage system shall be made prior to backfill.
   (D)   Foundation and Waterproofing or Dampproofing Inspection. Inspection
and approval of foundation walls and the waterproofing or dampproofing system
shall be made before backfill and any superstructure work proceeds.
   (E)   Elevation of Foundation Walls Inspection. Inspection of the elevations
of the foundation walls shall be made to determine compliance with the approved
grade plan. Any deviation shall be referred to the Building Commissioner.
Revisions or adjustments shall be made by the owner or his or her general
contractor to the satisfaction of the Building Commissioner and the City
Engineer.
   (F)   Plumbing, Mechanical and Electrical Inspection. A rough inspection of
plumbing, mechanical and electrical work and fixtures shall be made. Such
inspection is commonly made prior to covering or concealment, before fixtures
are set and prior to a framing inspection.
   (G)   Framing Inspection. A framing inspection shall be made, usually after
the rough inspection of plumbing, mechanical and electrical work and fixtures.
   (H)   Insulation Inspection. An inspection of all insulation and
firestopping that will be concealed or covered shall be made, usually after the
framing inspection.
   (I)   Wallboard and/or Lath Inspection. Wallboard and/or lath inspections
are commonly made after all lathing and/or wallboard interiors are in place,
but before any plaster is applied or other wallboard joints and fasteners are
taped and finished.
   (J)   Other Inspections. In addition to the inspections set forth above, the
Building Commissioner may require any other inspections to ascertain compliance
with this Building and Housing Code and other laws enforced by the Building
Department.
   (K)   Final Inspection. Inspection and approval of all permitted work,
finished building and any site improvements shall be made after the permitted
work or building is completed and ready for occupancy. The inspection and
approval shall include the permitted work, grading, applicable landscaping and
paving of the property. The City Engineer shall approve the final grade for
conformance to the grades as shown on the approved plan. The landscaping and
seeding of all disturbed, unimproved areas of the property shall be completed
prior to the return of any cash bonds for landscaping or seeding.
   (L)   Special Professional Services. The Building Commissioner may require
special inspections for any unusually large project, analysis, investigation or
consultation, or for architectural or structural work and/or site improvements.
Costs for such inspections shall be charged to the permit holder or property
owner at a rate specified by separate ordinance of Council or at cost,
whichever is greater.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998; Ord. 160-98, passed 9-8-1998; Ord. 17-2017,
passed 6-19-2017)
§ 1440.21  INSPECTION REPORTS.
   All inspection reports shall be kept in the property file for the subject
property and shall be available to the public for inspection upon request.
Photocopies may be requested upon payment of prescribed fees. (See § 222.03 of
the Administration Code.)
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 1440.22  NONLIABILITY OF BUILDING COMMISSIONER.
   In accordance with and subject to Ohio R.C. Chapter 2744, the Building
Commissioner or his or her authorized representative(s), acting in good faith
and without malice, in the discharge of his or her duties, shall not render
himself or herself personally liable for any damage that may accrue to persons
or property as a result of any act or by reason of any act or omission in the
discharge of his or her duties. Any suit brought against the Building
Commissioner or employees of the city because of such an act or omission
performed in the enforcement of this Building and Housing Code, or the Planning
and Zoning Code, shall be defended by the city to the extent required under
Ohio R.C. Chapter 2744 until final determination, and any judgment thereon
shall be assumed by the city. The Building Commissioner or his or her
authorized representative(s) shall not be liable for costs in any action, suit
or proceeding that is instituted in pursuance of the provisions of the Building
and Housing Code or the Planning and Zoning Code. This Code shall not relieve
or lessen the responsibility of an owner, operator or controller of a building
or structure for any damage to any person or property caused by defects, nor
shall the Building Department or the city be held to assume any such liability
by reason of inspections or permits authorized by this Code.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 1440.23  NONLIABILITY OF CITY.
   In accordance with and subject to Ohio R.C. Chapter 2744, no authorization
or inspection of any building, structure, system or plan, under the
requirements of this Building and Housing Code, shall be construed in any court
as a warranty of the physical condition of such building, structure, system or
plan, or the adequacy of the same. The city and its employees shall not be
liable in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition of
such building, structure, system or plan, or the adequacy of the same. The city
and its employees shall not be liable in tort for damages for any defect or
hazardous or illegal condition of inadequacy in such building, structure,
system or plan, nor for any failure of any component of such, which may occur
subsequent to such authorization or inspection.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 1440.24  STOP WORK ORDERS.
   Upon notice from the Building Commissioner or his or her authorized
representative, work on any building, structure or electrical, gas, mechanical
or plumbing system that is being done contrary to the provisions of this
Building and Housing Code shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be in
writing and  shall be given to the owner of the property, to his or her agent,
or to the person doing the work, and shall state the specific violations and
the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, the
Building Commissioner or his or her authorized agent shall not be required to
give a written notice prior to stopping the work.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 1440.25  APPEALS.
   (A)   Except for those matters covered by the Ohio Building Code, any person
affected by a decision of the Building Commissioner or a notice or order issued
under this Building and Housing Code shall have the right to appeal to the
Board of Zoning Appeals, provided that a written application for appeal is
filed within ten days after the day the decision, notice or order was served.
An order may be reversed or modified by the Board of Zoning Appeals if it
finds:
      (1)   The order is contrary to a provision of this Code;
      (2)   The order is contrary to a fair interpretation or application of
this Code; and
      (3)   A variance from the provisions of this Code, in a specific case,
will not be contrary to the public interest where literal enforcement of this
Code will result in unnecessary hardship.
   (B)   The Board shall schedule a hearing within 30 days of receipt of the
application for appeal and notify the party of the date and time of such
hearing.
      (1)   For purposes of conducting hearings, the Board may require the
attendance of witnesses and the production of records and papers, and may take
depositions of witnesses in accordance with Ohio R.C. 119.09.
        (2)   Testimony shall be under oath. A stenographic or mechanical
record of testimony and other evidence submitted shall be taken at the expense
of the Board.
      (3)   The Board may postpone or continue any hearing on its own motion or
upon the application of any party.
   (C)   The Board shall render its decision within 30 days after the
conclusion of the hearing.
   (D)   A quorum shall consist of two-thirds of the members, and the
concurring vote of two-thirds of the members of the Board shall be necessary to
reverse, affirm or modify, in whole or in part, the order, interpretation,
requirement, direction or failure to act, which is the subject matter of the
appeal.
   (E)   Following the hearing, an order shall be entered, and the Board shall
serve, by mail, upon the party affected thereby, a copy of the order and a
statement of the time and method by which the appeal may be perfected. A copy
of the order shall be mailed to the attorney or other representatives of record
representing the party.
   (F)   Any municipal officer or person who was a party to the hearing before
the Board may appeal to the Court of Common Pleas of the county.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998; Ord. 137-12, passed 9-17-2012)
§ 1440.26  CERTIFICATES OF USE AND OCCUPANCY.
   See §
1448.08 for provisions relating to certificates of occupancy.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 1440.27  CONFLICTS OF LAWS.
   (A)   In the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of this
Building and Housing Code and a provision of state law, the state law shall
control.
   (B)   ln the event of a conflict between any of the provisions of this
Building and Housing Code, and a provision of any city ordinance, the most
recent ordinance adopted by the city shall prevail.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 1440.99  PENALTY; EQUITABLE REMEDIES.
   (A)   Any owner, tenant, lessee, contractor, architect, subcontractor,
mechanic, firm, corporation or other person who or which violates or fails to
comply with any provision of this Building and Housing Code, for which no
penalty is otherwise provided, is guilty of a misdemeanor of the first degree
and shall be subject to the penalty provided in §
202.99 of this Code of Ordinances. A separate offense shall be deemed committed
each day during or on which a violation or noncompliance occurs or continues.
   (B)   For provisions relating to security for the correction of violations,
see §
1262.08 of the Zoning Code.
   (C)   The application of the penalty provided for in division (A) hereof
shall not prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary
to prevent or remedy any violation, including the enforced removal of
prohibited conditions.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998)
CHAPTER 1445:  LICENSING OF BUILDING TRADESMEN
Section
1445.01   License required
1445.02   License application; issuance or denial
1445.03   License fee; expiration and renewal
1445.04   License contents
1445.05   Use of name by others
1445.06   Bond required
1445.07   Insurance
1445.08   Revocation or disapproval of license
1445.09   License exemptions
1445.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Building Commissioner, see §
1440.06(A)
   Issuance of building permits restricted; registration of contractors
required, see §
1446.02
§ 1445.01  LICENSE REQUIRED.
   (A)   No general contractor, contractor, subcontractor or landscaper shall
perform work of any nature in the city for which a permit is required by the
Building Commissioner, the Fire Chief or the Service Director, without first
obtaining a license from the city to do so.
   (B)   Any specialty contractor (electrical, HVAC, plumbing, refrigeration,
hydronics) shall hold a valid state license issued pursuant to Ohio R.C.
Chapter 4740. Such state license number shall be stated on the city license
application.
(Ord. 160-98, passed 9-8-1998; Ord. 103-04, passed 8-23-2004)
§ 1445.02  LICENSE APPLICATION; ISSUANCE OR DENIAL.
   (A)   Application for a license required by §
1445.01 shall be upon a form issued by the Building Commissioner, and a license
shall be granted if the Commissioner finds that the applicant is qualified to
perform the work for which the application is sought.
   (B)   The applicant for a license shall be advised that the city recommends
the use of certified, bonded and insured subcontractors only in the performance
of any construction work in the city.
   (C)   Evidence of repeated violations of this Building Code or other city
ordinances shall be sufficient evidence to disqualify the applicant from
receiving a license.
   (D)   This license requirement is in addition to any registration or
licensing requirements set forth in other chapters of this Building Code,
except that only one license fee and one bond will be required.
(Ord. 56-83, passed 11-7-1983; Ord. 71-84, passed 10-15-1984; Ord. 89-149,
passed 12-4-1989)
§ 1445.03  LICENSE FEE; EXPIRATION AND RENEWAL.
   Upon application, a license for any work described in §
1445.01 shall be issued to the applicant by the Building Commissioner, upon
payment by the applicant of a license fee in accordance with the Fee Schedule
as set forth in
Chapter 1449, and the furnishing of a bond as hereinafter provided. Such
license shall be issued for a period of one year from January 1 of the year
that it is issued and shall expire on December 31 next following the date of
issuance. Such license shall be required each year thereafter, for a like
period, upon the payment of another license fee in accordance with the Fee
Schedule as set forth in
Chapter 1449.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 1445.04  LICENSE CONTENTS.
   The building trade license shall state the name of the licensee, the firm
name in the case of a partnership or corporation, the place of business, the
date of issuance and the expiration date, and shall be signed by the Building
Commissioner.
(Ord. 56-83, passed 11-7-1983)
§ 1445.05  USE OF NAME BY OTHERS.
   No person or entity licensed under this chapter shall allow or permit his,
her or its name to be used in acquiring any permit.
(Ord. 89-149, passed 12-4-1989)
§ 1445.06  BOND REQUIRED.
   (A)   Before approval of any application for a license by the Building
Commissioner, every applicant shall furnish and file with the Commissioner a
bond in the amount of $25,000, which bond shall be furnished by a reputable
bonding company, acceptable to the city, and approved as to form by the
Director of Law. Such bond shall guarantee full and faithful compliance by the
applicant with all provisions of this Building Code, ordinances of the city
and/or rules and regulations, and shall bind the surety thereon to correct or
abate any violation of this Building Code, ordinances of the city or such rules
and regulations, whenever the applicant for a license named as the principal on
such bond refuses, neglects or fails to correct or abate such violation within
a reasonable time limit set by the Commissioner. Such bond shall provide, and
it shall be so stated therein, that it shall inure to the benefit of any person
making a complaint of such violation, as well as to the city.
   (B)   If any bonds taken under this section are executed by a bonding
company, the Building Commissioner may not approve such bonds unless there is
attached a certificate of the superintendent of insurance that the company is
authorized to transact business in this state, and a copy of the power of
attorney of the agent of the company.
   (C)   Further, by accepting a license from the city, any approved applicant
for the license shall be deemed to have consented to indemnify and save
harmless the property owner and the lessee, tenant or other person contracting
for work and materials, guaranteeing that all workmanship and materials are in
conformity with this Building Code, ordinances of the city or such rules and
regulations, to protect the city and the said property owner, lessee, tenant or
other person contracting for the aforesaid services, from all loss and damage
that may be occasioned in any way by accident, negligence or want of care,
skill or attention by the principal or the agents of the principal in
performing such work.
   (D)   This change in the amount of the bond shall become effective for all
licenses after this change is adopted by Council and becomes law. Bonds in
effect at the time of adoption of this change shall not be required to be
increased until January 1 of the year following.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998; Ord. 141-07, passed 12-3-2007)
§ 1445.07  INSURANCE.
   Each applicant for a license under this chapter shall furnish evidence of
insurance for bodily injury in the amount of $100,000/$300,000, and for
property damage in the amount of at least $50,000.
(Ord. 56-83, passed 11-7-1983)
§ 1445.08  REVOCATION OR DISAPPROVAL OF LICENSE.
   The Building Commissioner may disapprove or revoke any license or renewal
thereof issued under this chapter for one or several of the following reasons:
   (A)   Misrepresentation of a material fact by the applicant in obtaining the
license or renewal thereof; or
   (B)   Violation of or noncompliance with any provision of any applicable
code or ordinance of the city in the performance of any work done pursuant to a
license issued hereunder.
(Ord. 56-83, passed 11-7-1983; Ord. 89-149, passed 12-4-1989; Ord. 70-98,
passed 4-20-1998)
§ 1445.09  LICENSE EXEMPTIONS.
   (A)   This chapter shall in no way be interpreted so as to require the owner
of a single- or two-family dwelling to be licensed hereunder, to personally
perform work upon the premises occupied or to be occupied by the owner as the
owner’s established residence. This exception shall not apply to plumbing or
sewer installations, but only to minor repairs to existing systems.
   (B)   This chapter shall not be interpreted so as to require a license for
officials or employees of public utility organizations to engage in the
installation, alteration, repair, maintenance or utilization of any device,
appliance, installation or appurtenance forming part of the equipment for
generation, transmission or distribution of any commodity or service which such
public utility organization is authorized by law to furnish or provide.
   (C)   If, in the opinion of the Building Commissioner, the work to be
performed under this chapter amounts to $1,000 or less, he or she may waive all
compliance with the license, bond, insurance and other conditions of this
chapter.
   (D)   Homeowners shall be exempt from the provisions of this section. For
purposes of exemption from the licensing of a building tradesman only, a
“homeowner” shall be defined as a person who owns or leases a single
condominium unit or parcel of land on which he or she intends to reside, on
which there is, or is intended to be, a dwelling of three units or less and/or
attached or detached structures accessory to such residential use. A person who
constructs more than one home in a two-year period in the state shall not be
considered a homeowner.
   (E)   The exempted homeowner shall assume full responsibility for compliance
with this Building Code, including workmanship, and with the Zoning Code of the
city, as well as all other codes, laws and regulations which cover the
construction and use of the referenced job location, and shall further agree to
be present on the site at some point to inspect and approve work that the
homeowner receives a permit for. If any person, other than the homeowner or his
or her immediate family, is to participate in said construction, he or she is
required to obtain a building tradesman license and any required permits. The
homeowner shall also abide by the city’s minimum inspection procedures and
requirements.
(Ord. 56-83, passed 11-7-1983; Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998)
 
§ 1445.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1440.99 for general Building and Housing Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.
CHAPTER 1446:  REGISTRATION OF CONTRACTORS
Section
1446.01   Registration with Income Tax Administrator required
1446.02   Issuance of building permits restricted
1446.03   Responsibility of Income Tax Administrator
1446.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Earned income tax, see
Chapter 880
   Having an unlawful interest in a public contract, see §
606.17
§ 1446.01  REGISTRATION WITH INCOME TAX ADMINISTRATOR REQUIRED.
   Any and all general contractors, contractors and/or subcontractors
performing any work within the city shall register with the City Income Tax
Administrator prior to the issuance of any permits with respect to
construction.
(Ord. 126-92, passed 12-7-1992)
§ 1446.02  ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS RESTRICTED.
   The Building Department shall not issue a building permit until the general
contractor, contractor and/or subcontractor has registered with the Income Tax
Administrator as provided in §
1446.01. The Building Commissioner shall note upon the permit that the Income
Tax Administrator has been advised as to the name and address of the general
contractor, contractor and/or subcontractor for whom the building permit is
being issued.
(Ord. 29-72, passed 3-20-1972)
§ 1446.03  RESPONSIBILITY OF INCOME TAX ADMINISTRATOR.
   The Income Tax Administrator shall note upon the general contractor’s,
contractor’s and/or subcontractor’s application for a building permit that such
general contractor, contractor and/or subcontractor has registered with him or
her in accordance with rules and regulations promulgated by such Administrator
and transmit such information to the Building Department.
(Ord. 126-92, passed 12-7-1992)
§ 1446.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1440.99 for general Building and Housing Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.
CHAPTER 1448:  PERMITS, INSPECTIONS AND FEES
Section
1448.01   Permits required; posting of applications
1448.02   Permits for nonresidential developments
1448.03   Additional fee for tree planting
1448.04   Additional fee for recreational purposes
1448.05   Additional fee for capital improvements
1448.06   Issuance of building permits prohibited where approval of O.E.P.A.
required
1448.07   Permit fees refund
1448.08   Final inspection required prior to occupancy; occupancy permits;
topographical site plans
1448.09   Time limit for commencing work under building permit
1448.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Building and occupancy permits in Class C-4 District developments, see §
1277.10
   Building Commissioner, see §
1440.06
   Electrical, Plumbing and Heating Inspectors, see §§
1440.04 et seq.
   Fee for establishing building grade level, see §
1316.03
   General Building Code Fee Schedule, see
Chapter 1449
   Issuance of building permits restricted; registration of contractors
required, see §
1446.02
   Permit fee for moving of buildings, see §
1449.08
§ 1448.01  PERMITS REQUIRED; POSTING OF APPLICATIONS.
   (A)   No person shall erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move or
demolish a building or other structure, or install any equipment or other
appurtenance, the installation of which is regulated by this Building Code, or
cause the same to be done, without first making application to the Building
Official and obtaining a permit therefor unless provision is specifically made
in any standard adopted by the city, or in any ordinance of Council, for doing
any such work without a permit.
   (B)   Prior to the issuance of any permit pursuant to division (A) hereof,
an owner or general contractor shall complete and file with the Building
Department a form containing a complete listing of all job classifications that
will be working on the subject job, and shall further include the name, address
and telephone number of the general contractor, or, if there is no general
contractor, the name, address and telephone number of the responsible person or
owner who will be supervising the subject job, as well as the name, address and
telephone number of all subcontractors and subtradesmen who will be working at
the job site.
   (C)   A permit application shall be posted during the construction period.
The application shall be posted immediately inside the property line right-of-
way, in clear view and visible to the public. The application shall remain
posted until the completion of the construction.
(Ord. 40-72, passed 2-5-1973; Ord. 18-84, passed 9-4-1984; Ord. 91-93, passed
9-7-1993)
§ 1448.02  PERMITS FOR NONRESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS.
   (A)   Upon approval by Council of any nonresidential development project,
the Clerk of Council shall immediately notify the applicant of the approval.
Said notice shall direct the applicant to contact the Building Department in
order to schedule a preconstruction meeting with the Service Director, the City
Engineer and/or any other city official whose presence is necessary in order to
facilitate the proper issuance of the building permit for said project. Said
notice shall also contain a provision that no work on said project shall
commence until after the preconstruction meeting and the issuance of the proper
building permit or permits pursuant to law.
   (B)   No building permit shall be issued for any excavation, development
and/or construction of any nonresidential project in the city prior to the
scheduling and conduct of a preconstruction meeting, as provided for herein,
nor shall any such permit be issued without full compliance with all city
ordinances required for issuance of required building permits.
   (C)   No person shall commence and/or continue the construction of a
nonresidential development in the city prior to obtaining all required building
permits therefor.
(Ord. 84-95, passed 6-19-1995)
§ 1448.03  ADDITIONAL FEE FOR TREE PLANTING.
   The Building Department shall charge and collect a fee with each building
permit, from each owner, builder or developer, in the amount of $225 for every
100 feet of frontage, or fraction thereof, which fee shall be used for the
planting of trees within said development and other public lands in the city.
Forty dollars of said fee shall be allocated to the Shade Tree Trust Fund
established by §
1026.12. Seventy-five dollars of said fee shall be allocated to a fund to be
established for the sole use of Shade Tree Commission projects in the city to
beautify public projects. The remainder of said fee shall be placed in a
separate account for the purchase of trees and the planting thereof in the
specific subdivision for which the building permits are issued. The city shall
carry out the planting at a time suitable in season and after the completion of
the construction of the subdivision so as to provide for an orderly program of
street beautification.
(Ord. 103-00, passed 6-19-2000)
§ 1448.04  ADDITIONAL FEE FOR RECREATIONAL PURPOSES.
   No building permit shall be issued for a dwelling unit, including single-
family dwellings, to any owner, subdivider or agent of either, until a fee as
established in Chapter 1449, Fee Schedule, is paid to the city for each
dwelling unit to be constructed, which fee is to be used for city recreational
purposes. Each such fee shall be deposited in a separate City Recreation
Capital Improvement Fund through the Department of Finance and shall be used
for recreational capital improvements as directed by Council.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998; Ord. 61-01, passed 5-7-2001)
§ 1448.05  ADDITIONAL FEE FOR CAPITAL IMPROVEMENTS.
   No building permit shall be issued for a dwelling unit, including single-
family dwellings, to any owner, subdivider or agent of either, until a fee as
established in Chapter 1449, Fee Schedule, is paid to the city for each
dwelling unit, including single-family dwellings, to be constructed, which fee
shall be deposited into a separate City Capital Improvement Fund and shall be
used for improvements to city facilities as directed by Council.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 1448.06  ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMITS PROHIBITED WHERE APPROVAL OF O.E.P.A.
REQUIRED.
   The Building Commissioner is prohibited from issuing any building permit
which requires the subsequent approval of the Ohio Environmental Protection
Agency and he or she is also prohibited from renewing any building permit which
had been previously issued and which had required the subsequent approval of
such Agency.
(Ord. 14-70, passed 4-13-1970)
§ 1448.07  PERMIT FEES REFUND.
   (A)   Whenever a building permit of $200 or greater has been issued, but no
work has started under the same, the city officials have made no inspection or
performed any other work in connection therewith other than the issuing of the
permit and making adjustments to the grade and the holder thereof desires to
surrender the permit to the city for cancellation within six months after
issuance, then upon such cancellation, the Clerk is hereby authorized and
directed to refund to such holder 75% of the permit fees and the remainder
shall be deposited into the General Fund. Permit fees less than $200 will not
be refunded and shall be deposited into the General Fund. There shall be no
refund of fees for the City Architect’s services or contractor license fees.
   (B)   Where no construction has begun and the permit is not surrendered
within six months from the date of the permit, no refund shall be made to the
permit holder.
(Ord. 21-71, passed 3-10-1971; Ord. 18-2017, passed 6-19-2017)
§ 1448.08  FINAL INSPECTION REQUIRED PRIOR TO OCCUPANCY; OCCUPANCY PERMITS;
TOPOGRAPHICAL SITE PLANS.
   (A)   The builder or permit holder shall not assign or transfer his or her
obligations relative to final inspection without the express written consent of
the parties involved and approval by the Building Commissioner and City
Engineer.
   (B)   No builder or permit holder shall transfer property to a homeowner
prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy by the Building
Commissioner and no person shall occupy a new or remodeled structure until the
same has been issued a certificate of occupancy by the Building Commissioner.
   (C)   No person shall use or occupy any nonresidential structure until the
same has been inspected and until the same has been issued a certificate of
occupancy by the Building Commissioner. This section shall apply to all changes
in ownership, tenancy and/or occupancy in all nonresidential buildings, suites
or units or portions thereof.
   (D)   A fee as established in
Chapter 1449, Fee Schedule, shall be paid for the inspection and certificate of
occupancy, when applicable.
   (E)   No building permit shall be issued for any residential or
nonresidential structure for which a landscaping plan or lawn installation,
grading and paving is otherwise required by this Code of Ordinances unless and
until such plan has been approved by the city and unless and until the builder
or developer has deposited a cash bond or secured a performance bond in the
amount calculated by the City Engineer applicable to the development or
building to secure the proper installation of the site grading, landscaping,
lawn and paving.
   (F)   (1)   No occupancy permit shall be issued for any new building,
renovation, alteration and addition of residential or nonresidential structure
pursuant to the ordinances of the city unless and until a site plan delineating
the final topography of the site has been submitted by the builder to the city
and until the City Engineer has certified that the finished grade conforms to
and complies with the topographical site plans submitted. The applicant shall
allow at least five days for the final grade inspection and certification. Once
final grade has been approved by the City Engineer, the final grade bond and
concrete bond will be refunded to the applicant, less a $250 administration
fee. The city will retain the lawn bond or performance bond until the site has
achieved 70% vegetation as determined by the City Engineer. If the work is not
completed within one year, the applicant may, in writing, explain the reasoning
to the Building Commissioner. The Building Commissioner may extend the bond
period until construction is complete or the bond amount shall be forfeited to
the city and the funds used to complete the work. In the event that the cost to
complete the work exceeds the amount of the cash bond or performance bond , the
builder will be billed for the difference and will be required to pay the
entire amount within 30 days.
      (2)   All survey pins set or found, as noted on the approved
topographical site plan submitted, shall be in place, exposed and clearly
marked at the time of the finished grade inspection required herein.
(Ord. 58-92, passed 6-1-1992; Ord. 88-02, passed 6-3-2002; Ord. 20-04, passed
2-17-2004; Ord. 19-2017, passed 6-19-2017; Ord. 28-2017, passed 9-18-2017; Ord.
15-2018, passed 5-7-2018)
§ 1448.09  TIME LIMIT FOR COMMENCING WORK UNDER BUILDING PERMIT.
   (A)   A building permit shall be secured and construction thereunder shall
begin within 12 months from the date of approval of any subdivision and/or
other project by City Council, when City Council approval is required pursuant
to this Code of Ordinances. All work shall be completed within 12 months of
issuance of the building permit. Where City Council approval is not required,
construction shall begin within six months of the issuance of the building
permit. All construction shall be completed within 12 months of the date of
issuance of the permit. In either case, one extension of six months shall be
granted if requested by the owner at least ten days in advance of the
expiration of the permit and upon payment of a fee of $100.
   (B)   If construction is not commenced and completed in conformance
herewith, and upon the expiration of the above time period(s), the building
permit shall expire and become null and void. Thereafter, an applicant must
resubmit the request for approval of the project in the same form as initially
submitted.
   (C)   All construction requiring and authorized by a building permit shall
be fully completed, inspected and certified as being in conformance with all
applicable provisions of the Building and Housing Code and the Planning and
Zoning Code within 12 months of the date of the issuance of the building
permit. One extension of six months shall be granted if requested by the owner
at least ten days in advance of the expiration of the permit and upon payment
of a fee of $100.
   (D)   Before any work can resume on any project that had been issued a
building permit that subsequently became null and void, a new permit shall be
obtained to do so, and the fee therefor shall be one-half the total amount
required for a new permit for such work (regardless of the amount of
construction already completed), provided that no changes have been made in the
original plans and specifications for such work, and provided, further, that
the period of such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded six months from
the date that the permit became null and void.
(Ord. 12-97, passed 2-3-1997; Ord. 65-02, passed 5-20-2002; Ord. 174-06, passed
12-18-2006)
§ 1448.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
1440.99 for general Building and Housing Code penalty if no specific penalty is
provided.
CHAPTER 1449:  FEE SCHEDULE
Section
1449.01   Payment of fees required before issuance of permit
1449.02   Fees for subdivision and development plan approvals
1449.03   Contractor license
1449.04   Plan review fee
1449.05   City Architect’s services
1449.06   City Engineer’s services
1449.07   New construction permit fee
1449.08   Additional and other fees
1449.09   Special events if approved by the Mayor
1449.10   Outside professional services
1449.11   Special assistance/services
1449.12   Reinspection fee
1449.13   Fee waiver
1449.15   Effective date
Cross-reference:
   Building Department generally, see
Chapter 1440
   Fees for subdivision and development plan approval, see §
1220.02
   Licensing of building tradesmen, see
Chapter 1445
   Municipal Architect, see
Chapter 1302
   Permits, inspections and fees, see
Chapter 1448
   Registration of contractors, see
Chapter 1446
   Sewer rates and charges, see
Chapter 1043
§ 1449.01  PAYMENT OF FEES REQUIRED BEFORE ISSUANCE OF PERMIT.
   (A)   A permit shall not be issued to begin work for new construction,
alteration, removal, demolition or any other building-related operation until
the fees prescribed have been paid to the city.
   (B)   The payment of a fee for a permit authorizing construction,
alteration, removal or demolition work, and all work done in connection with or
concurrently with the work contemplated by the permit, shall not relieve the
applicant or holder of the permit from the payment of other fees that may be
prescribed by law. The following fees shall be subject to an assessment that
the Ohio Board of Building Standards may impose for work subject to the Ohio
Building Code (OBC).
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998; Ord. 153-02, passed 10-21-2002)
§ 1449.02  FEES FOR SUBDIVISION AND DEVELOPMENT PLAN APPROVALS.
   (A)   All fees for subdivision and development plan applications required by
the Planning and Zoning Code and/or the Building and Housing Code shall be paid
in full prior to the review of such application and/or the issuance of a
building permit.
   (B)   The following fee schedule is hereby adopted for applications to the
Planning Commission for any action by the Commission required by ordinances of
the city as follows:
 
Function Base Fee Additional Fee
Conditional accessory use                                   $500      *
Conditional use                                             $500      *
Conditional use application                                 $500      *
Major subdivision or lot split - (4 or 5 lots)              $500   $50/lot, plus*
Minor subdivision or lot split - (3 and under)              $500   $50/lot, plus*
                                                                   $50/new unit/
Nonresidential additions/accessory buildings                $2,000 suite or $50/
                                                                   1,000 sq. ft.,
                                                                   plus*
                                                                   $50/unit/suite or
Nonresidential development                                  $3,000 $50/1,000 sq.
                                                                   ft., plus*
Renewal of previous approval                                $500      *
Replatting - lot consolidation - revised site plan -        $500   $50/lot plus*
resubmittal
Request to modify conditions                                $500      *
Residential development - (create 6 or more lots)  (multi- $3,000 $50/lot or per
family)                                                            unit, plus*
Rezoning application                                        $500      *
Similar use determination                                   $500      *
Wireless tower                                              $500      *
Other applications not covered herein                       $500      *
Notes:   “Unit” as used for this schedule shall be considered as one dwelling unit,
one storage rental unit, one motel/hotel unit, one office unit, one store unit, and
other single units as determined by the Building Commissioner.
The greater cost shall apply when there is a choice of unit or square feet. Square
footage shall be rounded up for fee purposes.
Notes:  *In addition to the nonrefundable fee required above, each applicant may be
required to pay other actual city expenses incurred that the Mayor and the Planning
Commission deem appropriate to protect the health, welfare and safety of the public.
Such expenses may include, but are not limited to, reviews, studies, technical data,
advice and inspections by consultants, experts and such other personnel, including
city personnel, deemed necessary for the submitted project. Prior to any city
expenditure of funds for the submitted project, the applicant shall deposit funds
with the city in the amount determined necessary by the Planning Commission to
accomplish such determined work. If at any time the amount of the deposit falls
below $500, the city may require the applicant to provide additional funds in an
amount determined by the Planning Commission to continue with such work.
 
(Ord. 153-02, passed 10-21-2002)
§ 1449.03  CONTRACTOR LICENSE.
   Fee for a general contractor, contractor or subcontractor’s license, as
required per Chapter 1445: $100
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 1449.04  PLAN REVIEW FEE.
   A nonrefundable deposit/fee shall be submitted upon submission of plans for
review when the services of the city’s architect are required. Nonrefundable
deposit towards fee: $200
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998; Ord. 19-04, passed 2-17-2004)
§ 1449.05  CITY ARCHITECT’S SERVICES.
   (A)   The fee for services rendered by the City Architect for projects
subject to the Ohio Building Code and new one-, two- or three-family dwellings
shall be the total plan review fee charged by the City Architect plus a 12%
plan review administrative fee.
   (B)   In any event, the minimum fee for any City Architect’s services shall
be no less than $200.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998; Ord. 19-04, passed 2-17-2004)
§ 1449.06  CITY ENGINEER’S SERVICES.
   The City Engineer’s services for site plan review, grade check and sewer
connection inspection shall be based on the following:
   (A)   New single or two-family dwellings: $700.
   Fifty dollars of this fee shall be attributed to the sewer connection
inspection and deposited into the Sewer Maintenance Fund.
   (B)   New multi-family or multiple single-family dwellings: $700, plus $200
for each unit. Fifty dollars of this fee shall be attributed to the sewer
connection inspection and deposited into the Sewer Maintenance Fund.
   (C)   All new buildings/structures, except one- or two-family dwellings, per
acre or fraction thereof of developed land: $700.
   (D)   Inspect new sewer connection to existing building: $100.
   (E)   Grade checks and/or survey of existing parcels and any additional
services as required by the Building Commissioner or the Director of Public
Service: at cost.
   (F)   Review and approval of revised residential site plans submitted after
initial review and approval of residential site plan: $200 per revised site
plan.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998; Ord. 47-03, passed 4-7-2003; Ord. 16-04, passed
2-2-2004)
§ 1449.07  NEW CONSTRUCTION PERMIT FEE.
   The base fee for new construction shall be based on 1% of the construction
value.
   (A)   Commercial construction permit fee is 1% of the construction value.
   (B)   Residential construction permit fee is 1% of construction value.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998; Ord. 160-98, passed 9-8-1998; Ord. 67-04, passed
5-3-2004; Ord. 31-05, passed 3-21-2005; Ord. 47-06, passed 4-17-2006; Ord. 46-
2018, passed 11-5-2018)
§ 1449.08  ADDITIONAL AND OTHER FEES.
   In addition to any fees required in the foregoing sections, the following
fees shall also be required, where applicable, for new construction as well as
alterations, additions, renovations, repairs and the like.
   (A)   Additions. The fee shall be based upon the higher of the following:
      (1)   Minimum fee: $30;
      (2)   Fee for new construction: See §
1449.07;
      (3)   Fee per $100 value of materials and labor: $1;
      (4)   Concrete patio: $30; and
      (5)   Wood deck: $50.
   (B)   Repairs, Remodeling and Items Not Covered in Fee Schedule.
      (1)   Minimum fee: $30.
      (2)   Fee per $100 value of materials and labor: $1.
   (C)   Certificate of Occupancy, Including Any Inspection Necessary for Same.
Existing nonresidential unit: $50.
   (D)   Culvert Pipe Installation or Replacement. $30.
   (E)   Demolition.
      (1)   Principal structure: $100.
      (2)   Accessory structure: $30.
   (F)   Electrical Permit.
      (1)   Minimum fee: $30.
      (2)   Each new or replacement service installation, temporary or
permanent: $30.
      (3)   Complete system for new construction or addition without electric
heat:
         (a)   Per dwelling or business unit, to 3,000 sq. ft., with one
service panel: $100;
         (b)   Each additional 6,000 sq. ft. or fraction thereof of gross floor
area: $30;
         (c)   Each additional service panel: $30; and
         (d)   Add for electric heating, per dwelling or business unit: $50.
      (4)   Repairs, remodeling or addition, with no service upgrade:
         (a)   Install or replace up to 15 fixtures, outlets or direct wired
appliance: $30;
         (b)   Each additional fixture, outlet or direct wired appliance:
$0.50; and
         (c)   New or replacement service panel: $30.
      (5)   Each new or altered exterior sign: $30.
      (6)   Lamp post light: $30.
      (7)   Security system: $30.
      (8)   Communication or other low voltage system(s): $30.
   (G)   Elevator, Lift Crane or Derrick Permit.
      (1)   Minimum fee: $30.
      (2)   Fee per $100 of labor and materials value: $1.
   (H)   Fence or Dumpster Enclosure With Paved Pad.
      (1)   Minimum fee: $30.
      (2)   Per linear foot of fence: $0.15.
   (I)   Fire Protection, Hood Suppression System, Detection or Alarm System.
$30.
   (J)   Garage. Attached or detached, including demolition of existing garage:
$100.
   (K)   Gas Fired Equipment Permit.
      (1)   Gas piping or repiping: $30.
      (2)   Gas appliance(s) installation or replacement, up to five
connections: $30.
      (3)   Each appliance connection beyond five connections: $10.
   (L)   HVAC System, Solid Fuel Burning Stove or Solar Panels.
      (1)   HVAC system for new construction (including hot water and warm air
heat):
         (a)   One-, two- and three-family - one HVAC system, per unit: $50;
         (b)   Each additional HVAC or AC system: $30;
         (c)   Multi-family - each HVAC system: $30; and
         (d)   Nonresidential - each HVAC system: $50.
      (2)   Heating and/or air conditioning unit - existing dwelling unit (new
or replacement): $30.
      (3)   Solid fuel burning stove: $30.
      (4)   Solar panels: $30.
      (5)   Duct work only: $30.
   (M)   Moving Permit. (See also
Chapter 1318 )
      (1)   On owner’s lot: $60.
      (2)   Off owner’s lot: $500.
      (3)   Police services, when required (actual cost if in excess of
established fee): $360.
   (N)   Paving or Repaving of Driveways and Sidewalks Permit.
      (1)   Residential one-, two- or three-family:
         (a)   Sidewalk(s) - all sizes: $30; and
         (b)   Driveway - all sizes: $40.
      (2)   Multi-family and nonresidential:
         (a)   Minimum fee: $30; and
         (b)   Per square foot of area to be paved or repaved: $0.01.
   (O)   Plumbing Permit.
      (1)   Minimum fee: $30.
      (2)   New construction or addition - complete plumbing system:
         (a)   New residential or business unit - up to ten fixtures for each
unit: $100; and
         (b)   Each additional fixture above ten fixtures: $10.
      (3)   Existing structure or addition - installation or replacement of
fixtures - per fixture: $10.
      (4)   Water service, supply replacement or repiping: $30.
      (5)   Sewer line(s) work: $30.
      (6)   Sprinkler system:
         (a)   Each residential one- or two-family dwelling: no fee;
         (b)   Each residential multi-family dwelling unit: $50; and
         (c)   Each non-residential unit: $200.
      (7)   Medical gas and vacuum systems:
         (a)   Plan review: $200;
         (b)   One medical gas piping system (per system): $153 + (1% x cost);
         (c)   Mechanical fee:
            1.   Processing fee: $200; and
            2.   Room with medical gases: $4.50 per sq. ft.
         (d)   Plumbing fee:
            1.   Processing fee: $200; and
            2.   Room with medical outlets: $20 (per room).
      (8)   Lawn irrigation system:
         (a)   Each residential dwelling: $30; and
         (b)   Each nonresidential unit: $30.
   (P)   Plumbing/Water Heater Permit.
      (1)   Residential water heater: $30; and
      (2)   Commercial water heater: $50.
   (Q)   Roofing Permit.
      (1)   Minimum fee for new or reroof (partial or full): $30.
      (2)   Fee per $100 of labor and materials value: $1.
   (R)   Satellite Signal-Receiving Earth Station.
      (1)   Minimum fee: $30.
      (2)   Fee per $100 of labor and materials value: $1.
   (S)   Sign Permit.
      (1)   Minimum fee per sign: $100.
      (2)   Per square foot of sign area - one side only of two-sided sign: $1.
   (T)   Street and/or Sidewalk Opening Permit. (See also Chapter 1022)
      (1)   Each street and/or sidewalk opening: $50.
      (2)   Annual (calendar year) blanket permit: $1,500.
      (3)   Public utility company licensed by state: exempt.
   (U)   Swimming Pool Permit. (Permanent or portable, above-ground or in-
ground.)
      (1)   For one-, two- or three-family unit: $30.
      (2)   All others: $100.
   (V)   Utility Building Permit.
      (1)   Up to 320 square feet in area: $30.
      (2)   Over 320 square feet in area: use new construction permit fee.
   (W)   Waterproofing or Water Control Work Permit. Interior and/or exterior
work: $130.
   (X)   Waste Water Treatment Plant Inspection. See §
1342.03 .
   (Y)   Wireless Telecommunications Facility. See
Chapter 1344 .
   (Z)   Work Started Prior to Issuance or Posting of Permit. Triple fee.
   (AA)   Wind Turbine System. $500.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998; Ord. 136-04, passed 11-1-2004; Ord. 31-05,
passed 3-21-2005; Ord. 46-05, passed 4-18-2005; Ord. 48-09, passed 4-20-2009;
Ord. 35-2017, passed 12-18-2017)
§ 1449.09  SPECIAL EVENTS IF APPROVED BY THE MAYOR.
   (A)   Tent Permit.
      (1)   Residential or private function use: exempt.
      (2)   Minimum fee for nonresidential use: $50.
      (3)   Fee per day: $10.
      (4)   Registration and license are also required. See Chapters
1445 and
1446.
   (B)   Parade, Carnival, Fireworks, and the like.
      (1)   Per calendar day: $100.
      (2)   Registration and license are also required. See Chapters
1445 and
1446.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 1449.10  OUTSIDE PROFESSIONAL SERVICES.
   The fee for engineering, analysis, consulting, investigation, inspection and
the like shall be the actual cost of such services.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 1449.11  SPECIAL ASSISTANCE/SERVICES.
   (A)   Service Department Assistance or Services.
      (1)   Minimum fee: $185.
      (2)   Hourly rate per employee used: $40.
      (3)   Hourly rate per each vehicle used: $65.
      (4)   Hourly rate for each piece of heavy equipment used: $80.
      (5)   The minimum fee will be billed unless the job entails an
extraordinary amount of labor, additional equipment, excessive cleanup or the
site requires multiple visits. In such cases a rate will be determined using
the employee, vehicle and equipment rates shown.
   (B)   Building Department Assistance Outside of Regular Working Hours.
      (1)   Minimum fee: $100.
      (2)   Hourly rate for special events, witness testing of special
equipment, and the like: $50.
      (3)   Hourly rate for other inspections: $40.
   (C)   Contractor Assistance/Services for Non-compliance Remedies.
      (1)   Minimum fee: $300.
      (2)   Hourly rate for employees and equipment: $100.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998; Ord. 51-10, passed 4-19-2010; Ord. 37-16, passed
6-20-2016; Ord. 48-16, passed 11-21-2016; Ord. 26-2020, passed 7-6-2020)
§ 1449.12  REINSPECTION FEE.
   When an inspection is requested and made under any of the provisions of the
Building Code of the city, and the approved plans are not on the job site at
the time of the inspection, and/or any work is found to be either incomplete,
inaccurate, or not in conformity with the Building Code of the city or at
variance with the information submitted in the application, a charge of $25
shall be made for each Building Code or Zoning Code related reinspection, and
$50 for any engineering related reinspection, found necessary in order to
certify compliance with all applicable codes.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 1449.13  FEE WAIVER.
   (A)   The fee may be waived by the Mayor, in whole or in part, for good
cause.
   (B)   Any demolition fee shall be waived if the demolition is being done at
the request of the Building Commissioner and is not otherwise legally required.
   (C)   The fee for a one-, two- or three-family dwelling ramp for persons
with disabilities shall be waived.
   (D)   The fees for government and state-approved non-profit organizations
shall be waived.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998)
§ 1449.15  EFFECTIVE DATE.
   This chapter shall become effective immediately and the new construction
permit fee shall be adjusted annually on the date following the adoption of the
annual budget.
(Ord. 70-98, passed 4-20-1998)
PART XVI: FIRE PREVENTION CODE
   
CHAP. 1610.   STANDARDS - OHIO FIRE CODE
   
CHAP. 1620.   BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION
   
CHAP. 1630.   YARD HYDRANTS
   
CHAP. 1640.   FIRE LANES
   
CHAP. 1650.   MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1610:  STANDARDS - OHIO FIRE CODE
Section
1610.01   Ohio Fire Code adopted
1610.02   Purpose
1610.03   File and distribution copies
1610.04   Appeal of orders
1610.05   Fire and smoke damper inspections
1610.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Fees for fire prevention inspections, see §
1449.08
   Fire Department, see
Chapter 242
   Fireworks, see §
672.10
   Hazardous spills, see
Chapter 620
   Open burning; burning of hazardous waste, see §§
660.08;
660.085
   Vehicles transporting explosives, see §
440.04
Statutory reference:
   Fireworks, see Ohio R.C. Chapter 3743
   Gasoline, oils and paints, see Ohio R.C. Chapter 3741
   State Fire Marshal, see Ohio R.C. Chapter 3737
§ 1610.01  OHIO FIRE CODE ADOPTED.
   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 731.231, there is hereby adopted by the municipality
Chapter 1301:7-7 of the Ohio Administrative Code, effective July 1, 2007, known
as the Ohio Fire Code: abbreviated “OFC” and may also be referred to as the
“State fire code”, or “this code”, including the referenced standards and
Appendices A through G.
(Ord. 28-06, passed 3-6-2006; Ord. 05-08, passed 1-22-2008)
§ 1610.02  PURPOSE.
   The purpose of the Ohio Fire Code, as adopted in §
1610.01, is to provide uniform standards governing conditions hazardous to life
and property from fire or explosion.
(Ord. 63-84, passed 9-17-1984; Ord. 28-06, passed 3-6-2006)
§ 1610.03  FILE AND DISTRIBUTION COPIES.
   A copy of the Ohio Fire Code, as adopted in §
1610.01, is on file with the Fire Department for inspection by the public.
Copies are also on file in the County Law Library. The Ohio Fire Code is
copyright  protected by the International Code Council. Copies may be purchased
through ICC Publications, Chicago, IL. The State Fire Marshal, through an
agreement with ICC, may also make available a free on-line internet reference
of the Ohio Fire Code from time to time as he or she sees fit.
(Ord. 28-06, passed 3-6-2006)
§ 1610.04  APPEAL OF ORDERS.
   Appeals of orders made by the Fire Code Official relative to the application
of the Code in §
1610.01 shall be in accordance with the provisions of Ohio R.C. Chapters 3737
and 3781.
(Ord. 63-84, passed 9-17-1984; Ord. 28-06, passed 3-6-2006)
§ 1610.05  FIRE AND SMOKE DAMPER INSPECTIONS.
   (A)   Adoption by Reference. Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 731.231, there is hereby
adopted by the municipality, for the purposes of prescribing regulations
governing conditions hazardous to life and property from fire, smoke and
explosion, the requirement for fire and smoke damper inspections conducted in
accordance with NFPA Standards §§ 105.6.5.2 through 105.6.5.12 as well as §§
105.6.3 and 105.6.6, as adopted, published and recommended by the NFPA, save
and except such portions as may be hereinafter deleted or amended. Said NFPA
Standards are incorporated in this chapter by reference as if fully set forth
at length herein as it relates to fire and smoke damper inspections, and such
Code shall be known as part of the Fire Prevention Code of the municipality.
   (B)   Regularity and Monitoring Inspections. All fire and smoke damper units
in buildings that are city- owned or leased shall be inspected every five
years. Compliance with the inspection requirement shall be monitored by the
Building Department and the Safety Director.
   (C)   Regulations Governing Inspections and Requirements for Inspectors. The
inspections shall be conducted in accordance with NFPA Standards §§ 105.6.5.2
through 105.6.5.12 and §§ 105.6.3 through 105.6.6. The inspections shall be
conducted by technicians and contractors who have been certified by the
International Certification Board (hereinafter referred to as “ICB”) and
American National Standards Institute (hereinafter referred to as “ANSI”) to
ensure the quality of the inspection process.
   (D)   Record of Inspection and Repairs. The results of the inspections are
to be given to the Building Department within 30 days of the completion of the
inspection. The Building Department will keep these inspection reports until
the next inspection is completed five years later. If the fire and smoke damper
systems are found to be faulty, repairs must be completed and approved by an
ICB and ANSI certified technician and contractor within 60 days from the date
the system was found to be faulty.
(Ord. 01-14, passed 1-21-2014)
§ 1610.99  PENALTY.
   (A)   Whoever violates any of the provisions of the Ohio Fire Code, herein
adopted, or fails to comply therewith, or violates or fails to comply with any
order made thereunder, or builds in violation of any detailed statement of
specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder or any certificate or
permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or fails to
comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by Council or a court of
competent jurisdiction, shall be punished as provided in §
202.99 of the Administration Code of this Code of Ordinances. The imposition of
one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to
continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such
violations or defects within a reasonable time. When not otherwise specified, a
separate offense shall be deemed committed each ten days that prohibited
conditions are maintained.
   (B)   The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the
enforced removal of prohibited conditions.
(Ord. 63-84, passed 9-17-1984; Ord. 28-06, passed 3-6-2006)
CHAPTER 1620:  BUREAU OF FIRE PREVENTION
Section
1620.01   Establishment; general purpose; supervision
1620.02   Inspectors and technical advisors
1620.03   Annual report
1620.04   Review of plans and specifications
1620.05   Investigation of fires; arrests
1620.06   Inspections prior to occupancy
1620.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Fees for fire prevention inspections, see §
1449.08
   Fire Department, see
Chapter 242
   Fireworks, see §§
672.10,
672.105
   Open burning, see §
660.08
   Sale of explosives to minors, see §
672.10
   Venting of heaters and burners, see §
660.01
§ 1620.01  ESTABLISHMENT; GENERAL PURPOSE; SUPERVISION.
   This Fire Prevention Code shall be enforced by the Bureau of Fire Prevention
in the Fire Department of the city, which Bureau is hereby established and
which Bureau shall be operated under the supervision of the Fire Chief.
(Ord. 4-64, passed 3-16-1964; Ord. 28-06, passed 3-6-2006)
§ 1620.02  INSPECTORS AND TECHNICAL ADVISORS.
   The Fire Chief may detail, as needed, members of the Fire Department who are
state certified Fire Safety Inspectors as Fire Prevention Bureau Inspectors.
The Chief shall recommend to Council the employment of technical advisors.
(Ord. 63-84, passed 9-17-1984; Ord. 28-06, passed 3-6-2006)
§ 1620.03  ANNUAL REPORT.
   A report of the Bureau of Fire Prevention shall be made annually and
transmitted to the Mayor and shall contain all proceedings under this Fire
Prevention Code with such statistics as the Chief of the Fire Department may
wish to include therein. The Chief of the Fire Department shall also recommend
any amendments to this Fire Prevention Code which, in his or her judgment, are
desirable.
(Ord. 4-64, passed 3-16-1964; Ord. 28-06, passed 3-6-2006)
§ 1620.04  REVIEW OF PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   All plans and specifications involving any construction or remodeling of any
facility other than a single- or two-family dwelling shall be submitted to the
Fire Prevention Bureau for the purpose of checking such plans and
specifications for compliance with this Fire Prevention Code.
(Ord. 56-71, passed 7-26-1971; Ord. 28-06, passed 3-6-2006)
§ 1620.05  INVESTIGATION OF FIRES; ARRESTS.
   (A)   Pursuant to Ohio R.C. 737.27, the Fire Marshal is hereby authorized
and directed to be present at all fires, investigate the cause thereof, examine
witnesses, compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of books and
papers, and to do and perform all other acts necessary to the effective
discharge of such duties.
   (B)   The Fire Chief and the Assistant Chief may administer oaths, make
arrests and enter, for the purpose of examination, any building which, in his
or her opinion, is in danger from fire.
   (C)   No person shall fail to comply with any order of the Fire Marshal in
charge of the Fire Prevention Bureau under the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 56-71, passed 7-26-1971; Ord. 28-06, passed 3-6-2006)
§ 1620.06  INSPECTIONS PRIOR TO OCCUPANCY.
   The Building Commissioner shall not issue an occupancy permit or re-
occupancy permit, as otherwise provided in this Code of Ordinances, until the
premises in question have been inspected and certified as to compliance with
this Fire Prevention Code.
(Ord. 46-87, passed 5-4-1987; Ord. 28-06, passed 3-6-2006)
§ 1620.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 1630:  YARD HYDRANTS
Section
1630.01   When required
1630.02   Permit required; plans and specifications
1630.03   Number required
1630.04   Types of hydrants and fittings, and the like
1630.05   Hydrostatic testing of piping
1630.06   Backfilling and covering before inspection prohibited
1630.07   Shut-off valves
1630.08   Fire Department connection
1630.09   Fire mains
1630.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Drawing water from fire hydrants; permit required, see §
1040.01
   Driving over fire hose, see §
432.26
   Parking near fire hydrant, see §
452.03
   Water, see
Chapter 1040
§ 1630.01  WHEN REQUIRED.
   Whenever the ground area of the premises of an industrial plant, tank farm,
lumber yard, storage area, shopping center or other occupancy involving the use
of large ground area exceeds 15,000 square feet, and whenever the area of a
building or lumber shed on any premises exceeds 5,000 square feet aggregate
area, and such premises are so located or arranged that efficient firefighting
cannot be carried on from existing public hydrants, yard hydrants are required.
Yard hydrants are also required if the distance from any portion of a building
to a public hydrant is over 350 feet. The Fire Chief may require the
installation of yard hydrants by the owner of the premises in conformity with
the provisions of this section.
(Ord. 34-74, passed 3-18-1974; Ord. 28-06, passed 3-6-2006)
§ 1630.02  PERMIT REQUIRED; PLANS AND SPECIFICATIONS.
   Plans showing the location, size and connections of the yard system shall be
furnished to the Fire Chief. The plans shall be to scale and shall include the
details necessary to indicate clearly all apparatus and its arrangements. The
plans shall be accompanied by specifications covering the character of the
material and features relating to the installation in detail. Upon the approval
of the Chief, a permit for the installation shall be issued.
(Ord. 34-74, passed 3-18-1974; Ord. 28-06, passed 3-6-2006)
§ 1630.03  NUMBER REQUIRED.
   (A)   On premises of large ground area, one yard hydrant shall be provided
for each 20,000 square feet of ground area, and such hydrants shall be spaced
not more than 300 feet apart.
   (B)   Yard hydrants in lumber yards shall be spaced not more than 250 feet
apart and shall be in such number and so located that streams therefrom, when
used in first-aid or Fire Department firefighting, reach all areas on the
premises, including those within lumber sheds.
   (C)   Every required yard hydrant within a lumber yard shall be equipped
with attached hose kept within a hose house.
(Ord. 34-74, passed 3-18-1974; Ord. 28-06, passed 3-6-2006)
§ 1630.04  TYPES OF HYDRANTS AND FITTINGS, AND THE LIKE.
   (A)   All hydrants, hose connections and nozzles shall conform to Fire
Department standards. Hydrants shall be supplied by a main of not less than six
inches. For average conditions, hydrants shall be placed about 50 feet from the
building protected. Where it is impossible to place them at this distance, they
may be put nearer, provided that they are authorized by the Fire Chief.
   (B)   No smaller than six-inch pipe shall be installed underground in yard
systems for mains or hydrant branches. In moderately large plants, a loop
system, because of its larger carrying capacity, shall be used, unless
otherwise authorized by the Fire Chief. The size of pipe supplying the yard
system shall be determined by the Fire Chief, due consideration being given to
the construction and occupancy of the yard system and to the volume and
pressure of water.
(Ord. 34-74, passed 3-18-1974; Ord. 28-06, passed 3-6-2006)
§ 1630.05  HYDROSTATIC TESTING OF PIPING.
   All new yard piping shall be tested hydrostatically at not less than 75
pounds over static pressure for two hours, or at normal pressure for two hours,
or at normal pressure when the normal pressure is in excess of 150 pounds per
square inch.
(Ord. 34-74, passed 3-18-1974; Ord. 28-06, passed 3-6-2006)
§ 1630.06  BACKFILLING AND COVERING BEFORE INSPECTION PROHIBITED.
   No underground line shall be backfilled or covered until inspection by
members of the Fire Prevention Bureau.
(Ord. 34-74, passed 3-18-1974; Ord. 28-06, passed 3-6-2006)
§ 1630.07  SHUT-OFF VALVES.
   All lines shall have shut-off valves every 800 feet, or where, in the
opinion of the Fire Chief, additional shut-off valves are required.
(Ord. 34-74, passed 3-18-1974; Ord. 28-06, passed 3-6-2006)
§ 1630.08  FIRE DEPARTMENT CONNECTION.
   All fire protection system connection sizes and locations shall be approved
by the city’s Fire Department.
(Ord. 13-2017, passed 5-1-2017)
§ 1630.09  FIRE MAINS.
   All fire main underground water lines, on both public and private property,
shall be installed, flushed, and tested per NFPA 24 and witnessed by the city’s
Fire Department. The city’s Fire Department shall be present to witness all
underground fire line inspections.
(Ord. 13-2017, passed 5-1-2017)
§ 1630.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 1640:  FIRE LANES
Section
1640.01   Establishment; required conditions
1640.02   Width; markings and signs
1640.03   Records
1640.04   Obstructions; removal
1640.05   Emergency removal
1640.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Bureau of Fire Prevention, see
Chapter 1620
   Fire Department, see
Chapter 242
   Off-street parking, see
Chapter 1284
   Parking, see
Chapter 452
§ 1640.01  ESTABLISHMENT; REQUIRED CONDITIONS.
   The Chief of the Fire Department is hereby authorized to establish fire
lanes upon public or private property within the city, with the approval of the
Director of Public Safety, upon finding that the following conditions exist:
   (A)   A fire lane is necessary to safeguard life and property from fire,
explosion and other hazards and to safeguard the use and occupancy of
buildings, structures and adjacent property; and
   (B)   A fire lane is incident to a residential, retail, commercial,
manufacturing or industrial use, or other use, where it can be reasonably
expected that the public will assemble in sufficient numbers that their motor
vehicles, if not controlled, will interfere with the operation of firefighting
equipment and personnel and the egress of occupants of buildings and structures
in the case of fire.
(Ord. 13-73, passed 2-5-1973; Ord. 28-06, passed 3-6-2006)
§ 1640.02  WIDTH; MARKINGS AND SIGNS.
   Fire lanes shall be of such width as is reasonably determined by the Chief
of the Fire Department to be necessary to permit access and operation of
firefighting equipment and personnel and the egress of occupants of buildings
and structures. Fire lanes shall be suitably marked by appropriate markings on
the ground, or by the display of adequate signs, or both. The markings and
signs shall be placed and maintained by the property owner, in the case of
private property, in accordance with the color and design as prescribed by the
Director of Public Safety. The placement and maintenance of such signs shall be
at the sole cost and expense of the owner of the property.
(Ord. 13-73, passed 2-5-1973; Ord. 28-06, passed 3-6-2006)
§ 1640.03  RECORDS.
   The Chief of the Fire Department shall keep a record of the establishment of
fire lanes pursuant to this chapter, which record shall be available for public
inspection at all reasonable times.
(Ord. 13-73, passed 2-5-1973; Ord. 28-06, passed 3-6-2006)
§ 1640.04  OBSTRUCTIONS; REMOVAL.
   (A)   No person shall obstruct a fire lane by constructing or maintaining a
fence or barricade or in any other manner.
   (B)   Obstructions, other than vehicles, found in fire lanes, shall be
removed by the owner, occupant or other person in charge of the premises within
24 hours after the receipt of written notice to do so. In addition to the
penalty provided in §
202.99, upon failure to comply with such notice of removal, the city may cause
the obstruction to be removed and the owner, occupant or other person in charge
of the premises shall pay the cost of such removal.
(Ord. 13-73, passed 2-5-1973; Ord. 28-06, passed 3-6-2006)
§ 1640.05  EMERGENCY REMOVAL.
   If the Chief of the Fire Department, an acting fire officer or a police
officer finds that an obstruction, be it a vehicle or otherwise, within a fire
lane presents an immediate danger to the public safety, he or she may forthwith
cause such obstruction to be removed therefrom and impounded.
(Ord. 13-73, passed 2-5-1973; Ord. 28-06, passed 3-6-2006)
§ 1640.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
CHAPTER 1650:  MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS
Section
1650.01   Smoking prohibited in certain areas
1650.02   Above-ground storage tanks for flammable liquids
1650.03   Use of Fire Department equipment for private purposes prohibited
1650.04   Key boxes on commercial and industrial buildings
1650.05   Smoke detectors in multi-family and apartment buildings
1650.06   Outdoor cooking equipment
1650.07   Control of open flame or burning
1650.08   Permitting and regulation of mobile food trucks
1650.99   Penalty
Cross-reference:
   Bureau of Fire Prevention, see
Chapter 1620
   Burning of hazardous waste, see §
660.085
   Fees for fire prevention inspections, see §
1449.08
   Hazardous spills, see
Chapter 620
   Smoking in places of public assembly, see §
660.14
Statutory reference:
   Smoking prohibited in at least half of health care facility, see Ohio R.C.
3791.031
§ 1650.01  SMOKING PROHIBITED IN CERTAIN AREAS.
   (A)   Where Flammable Finishes are Applied. Smoking is hereby prohibited in
any spray finishing or coating areas and in the vicinity of dip tanks. “No
Smoking” signs with lettering of an approved size shall be conspicuously posted
in such areas and shall read “No Smoking - Broadview Heights Fire Prevention
Bureau.”
   (B)   Other Areas.
      (1)   Where conditions are such as to make smoking a hazard in any areas
of piers, wharves, warehouses, stores, industrial plants, institutions, places
of assembly, and in open spaces where combustible materials are stored or
handled, the Chief of the Bureau of Fire Prevention is authorized to order the
owner or occupant in writing to post “No Smoking” signs in each building,
structure, room or place in which smoking shall be prohibited. The Chief of the
Bureau of Fire Prevention shall designate specific safe locations, if
necessary, in any building, structure or place in which smoking may be
permitted.
      (2)   “No Smoking” signs of approved sized lettering and location
required in accordance with division (B)(1) hereof shall read “No Smoking -
Broadview Heights Fire Prevention Bureau.”
      (3)   No person shall remove any legally required “No Smoking” sign or
smoke in any place where such signs are posted.
   (C)   Smoking Defined. As used in this section “smoking” means and includes
the carrying of a lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette or tobacco in any form.
(Ord. 56-71, passed 7-26-1971; Ord. 28-06, passed 3-6-2006)
§ 1650.02  ABOVE-GROUND STORAGE TANKS FOR FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS.
   (A)   The storage of flammable and combustible liquids in outside above-
ground tanks is hereby prohibited within the city, except as provided for in
division (B) hereof.
   (B)   The Mayor, the Fire Chief and the Building Commissioner shall act as a
committee to determine if any above-ground storage tank can be installed in
private service stations, in conformity with the Ohio Fire Code. No
installation shall be allowed unless all of the following requirements are met.
      (1)   The installation shall be located within 500 feet of a fire
hydrant. The hydrant shall be capable of producing a minimum flow of 500
gallons per minute.
      (2)   Collision protection (stanchions) shall be spaced a maximum of four
feet, six inches apart. Stanchions shall have a minimum diameter of four inches
and shall be filled with concrete. Stanchions shall extend from the ground a
minimum distance of three feet.
      (3)   There shall be an emergency shut-off switch located within 50 feet
of the tank. A 60BC fire extinguisher shall be mounted within five feet of this
switch.
      (4)   The electrical system of the installation shall comply with NFPA
70, the National Electrical Code. The tank shall have a red light above the
installation which shall be wired to indicate that electric power is being
supplied to the dispensing pump.
      (5)   The installation shall comply with NFPA 30, (version in the current
adopted code), Flammable and Combustible Liquids Code, including protection for
areas subject to flooding.
      (6)   A tank shall be marked on all four sides with the product name,
i.e., “Gasoline” or “Diesel Fuel”. The contrasting lettering shall be at least
four inches high.
      (7)   A tank that will be used to store and dispense gasoline shall bear
an Underwriters Laboratory (UL) listing for two-hour fire resistance.
      (8)   The tank shall bear an Underwriters Laboratory (UL) listing for
secondary containment. (Exception: tanks that do not have this listing may be
allowed if an architect or engineer, registered in the state, certifies that
the installation meets all recognized codes and standards.)
(Ord. 56-96, passed 5-20-1996; Ord. 28-06, passed 3-6-2006)
§ 1650.03  USE OF FIRE DEPARTMENT EQUIPMENT FOR PRIVATE PURPOSES PROHIBITED.
   No person shall use any fire apparatus or equipment of the Fire Department
for any private purpose, nor shall any person, without first being authorized
by the Fire Chief or the Mayor, remove, take away, keep or conceal any tool,
appliance or other article used in any way by the Fire Department.
(Ord. 207, passed 1-8-1945; Ord. 28-06, passed 3-6-2006)
§ 1650.04  KEY BOXES ON COMMERCIAL AND INDUSTRIAL BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Any building located in a commercial or industrial zone, when
protected by an automatic alarm system or when otherwise required by the Fire
Chief when access to or within such building or an area on the property is
unduly difficult because of secured openings and where immediate access may be
necessary for life saving or firefighting purposes, shall be equipped with a
key box to be installed in an approved location. The key box shall be of a type
approved by the Fire Chief. The Fire Chief shall maintain at all times a list
of acceptable key boxes and the suppliers thereof.
   (B)   The key box shall contain keys as directed by the Fire Chief.
   (C)   An approved key box shall be of such a type as to limit access thereto
to the Fire Department.
(Ord. 89-6, passed 1-23-1989; Ord. 28-06, passed 3-6-2006)
§ 1650.05  SMOKE DETECTORS IN MULTI-FAMILY AND APARTMENT BUILDINGS.
   (A)   Smoke detectors shall be installed in all existing multi-family and
apartment buildings. All such existing multi-family and apartment buildings
shall, within one year of the effective date of this section (Ordinance 20-97,
passed February 18, 1997), comply with the requirements of this section.
   (B)   All persons affected by the requirements of this section shall produce
evidence of compliance, either by affidavit or by inspection, in January of
each year, or at other such reasonable times as the Fire Chief or Fire
Prevention Officer determines.
(Ord. 20-97, passed 2-18-1997; Ord. 28-06, passed 3-6-2006)
§ 1650.06  OUTDOOR COOKING EQUIPMENT.
   (A)   No person shall install, construct or use, for the purpose for which
such is designed, any chiminea, fire basket, patio heater, hibachi, outdoor
barbecue grill or other grill, broiler or oven of the domestic variety commonly
used for outdoor cooking, or other similar utensil, in a multi-family dwelling
of greater than three units other than upon the ground flood level of a
premises and then only if such utensil is located 15 feet or more from any
dwelling, garage or other structure or part thereof.
   (B)   No person shall fail to extinguish any fire or burning embers, with
water or other suitable means, in any hibachi, outdoor barbecue grill or other
grill, broiler or oven of the domestic variety commonly used for outdoor
cooking, or other similar utensil, after the use of such utensil for cooking
has terminated.
   (C)   No person shall fail to take whatever measures are necessary to
prevent the spread to the surrounding area of hot sparks or burning embers or
coals from the pit of any chiminea, fire basket, patio heater, hibachi, outdoor
barbecue grill or other grill, broiler or oven of the domestic variety commonly
used for outdoor cooking, or other similar utensil. Any fire or other damage or
injury which, in the judgment of the Fire Chief, is occasioned by the spread of
hot sparks or burning embers or coals, shall constitute prima facie evidence of
an intent, on the part of the owner of the premises upon which the utensil is
located, to violate this division.
   (D)   No person shall place or store any chiminea, fire basket, patio
heater, hibachi, outdoor barbecue grill or other grill, broiler or oven of the
domestic or commercial variety commonly used for outdoor cooking, or other
similar utensil, on any porch, balcony, mezzanine or other similar type area
that is not itself on the ground floor.
(Ord. 120-00, passed 7-24-2000; Ord. 28-06, passed 3-6-2006)
§ 1650.07  CONTROL OF OPEN FLAME OR BURNING.
   (A)   Definitions. The following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them herein.
      “Person.” Any individual, partnership, organization, association, agency
firm, estate, or corporation and any other legal or commercial entity.
      “Responsible adult.” An individual 18 years or older who is not under the
influence of drugs or alcohol or suffering from any other disability which
would impair his or her ability to properly supervise a fire.
      “Unattended.” As used under this section, shall mean the neglect of any
outdoor fire by a lack of supervision, abandonment by a responsible party, or
failure to use reasonable and proper fire management precautions. Any failure
to completely and fully extinguish all flames, embers, coals, sparks, or hot
spots such that they cannot reignite shall be considered neglect and be
unattended as defined herein.
      “Uncontrolled.” As used under this section, shall mean any outdoor fire
that is out of control, which is not burning within the confines of cleared
firebreaks, or that cannot be suppressed or extinguished with the resources or
ordinary tools commonly available to the responsible adult. The uncontrolled
status of an outdoor fire may result from any intentional, negligent or
accidental circumstance.
   (B)   Compliance with Ohio Fire Code. No person shall ignite, cause to be
ignited, permit to be ignited or maintain any open fires except as permitted by
regulations promulgated by the Ohio Fire Code, or any other sections of this
Code.
      (1)   No fire shall be allowed to burn unattended without a responsible
adult being present at all times and without readily-available fire-
extinguishing apparatus.
      (2)   No person shall ignite, cause to be ignited, permit to be ignited
or maintain any open fire, nor shall any person authorize others to do so on
land owned or controlled by him or her, in such a manner as to allow such fire
to burn out of control so as to require response of fire apparatus and/or
personnel.
      (3)   No person shall release to the atmosphere any object that is on
fire and not in the control of any responsible adult. This ban is specifically
to include novelty “hot air devices” commonly known as “Wish Lanterns”,
“Chinese Lanterns”, “Kong Ming Lanterns”, “Sky Lanterns”, or any other similar
devise which is set on fire and released to the atmosphere, allowing the
burning object to drift uncontrollably.
(Ord. 108-11, passed 9-6-2011)
§ 1650.08  PERMITTING AND REGULATION OF MOBILE FOOD TRUCKS.
   (A)   Definitions. When used in this section, unless the context otherwise
requires, the following terms shall have the following meanings.
      “Food establishment.” A business operation that stores, prepares,
packages, serves, vends or otherwise provides food for human consumption.
      “Mobile food truck.” A mobile food vehicle.
      “Mobile food vehicle.” A food establishment that is located upon a
vehicle, or which is pulled by a vehicle, where food or beverage is cooked,
prepared and served for individual portion service, such as a mobile food
kitchen.
   (B)   Scope. The provisions of this section shall apply to mobile food
operations engaged in the business of cooking, preparing and distributing food
or beverage with or without charge from mobile food trucks on or in public,
private or restricted spaces. This section shall not apply to canteen, coffee
or ice cream trucks that move from place to place and are stationary in the
same location for no more than 30 minutes at a time or food vending push carts
and stands.
   (C)   Mobile Food Truck Permit Required.
      (1)   No person or business entity, including a religious or charitable
organization, shall operate a mobile food truck in any public, private or
restricted space without a permit issued by the Fire Department.
      (2)   A mobile food truck permit is required for each and every mobile
food truck.
   (D)   Rules and Regulations.
      (1)   No operator of a mobile food truck shall park, stand, or move a
vehicle and conduct business within areas of the city where the permit holder
has not been authorized to operate.
      (2)   The issuance of a permit does not grant or entitle the exclusive
use of a service route, in whole or in part, to the mobile food truck permit
holder, other than the time and place as approved for the term of the permit.
      (3)   A mobile food truck may not operate on city-owned property unless
the Building Department has otherwise granted approval for its operation at the
particular location during specific times. This requirement is in addition to
the Fire Department permit.
      (4)   For mobile food trucks on public property, the Fire Department
reserves the right to temporarily move a mobile food truck to a nearby location
if the approved location needs to be used for emergency purposes, snow removal,
construction, or other public benefit.
(Ord. 14-2017, passed 5-1-2017)
§ 1650.99  PENALTY.
Editor’s note:
   See §
202.99 for general Code penalty if no specific penalty is provided.
TABLE OF SPECIAL ORDINANCES
   Table
      
I.   FRANCHISES
      
II.   EASEMENTS
      
III.   VACATING OF STREETS AND ALLEYS
      
IV.   DEDICATION AND PLAT APPROVAL
      
V.   ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL OF REAL PROPERTY
      
VI.   LEASE OF REAL PROPERTY
      
VII.   STREET GRADE LEVELS AND CHANGE OF STREET NAME
      
VIII.   ZONING MAP CHANGES
      
IX.   TAP-IN FEES AND SEWER CHARGES
      
X.   AGREEMENTS
Editor’s note:
   The Code of Ordinances of Broadview Heights comprises all ordinances and
resolutions of a general and permanent nature. The provisions of such general
and permanent ordinances and resolutions are set forth in full in the Code of
Ordinances.
   References must be made frequently to many special ordinances and
resolutions, particularly those relating to property, such as easements,
vacations, dedications, acquisitions and disposals, leases, etc.
     In the following Tables I through X, all such ordinances and resolutions
are listed. These tables list ordinances and resolutions chronologically by
subject, and include both a citation to and a brief description of each
ordinance and resolution.
TABLE I:  FRANCHISES
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Description
Ord. 83     7-8-1930   Fixing the rate of electricity.
Ord. 84     7-8-1930   Granting C.E.I. the right to construct and maintain
                       necessary equipment to furnish electric service.
Ord. 107    5-9-1933   Fixing the rates for electricity.
Ord. 155    5-26-1938  Contract with C.E.I. for certain traffic control signal
                       construction and electricity therefor.
Ord. 171    6-24-1940  Fixing the rate of electricity.
Ord. 203    6-26-1944  Fixing the rates for electricity from C.E.I.
Ord. 205    1-8-1945   Contract with Harry Loder to operate a bus line for 1
                       year.
Ord. 244    5-1-1946   Contract with Harry Loder to operate a bus line for 2
                       years.
Ord. 245    6-19-1946  Fixing the rates for electricity from C.E.I.
Ord. 254    6-19-1947  Contract with C.E.I. for street lighting service.
Ord. 307    3-26-1951  Contract with C.E.I. for street lighting service.
Ord. 324    4-14-1952  Contract with City of Cleveland for furnishing water.
                       Granting East Ohio Gas Co. the right to lay pipe and
Ord. 332    9-8-1952   other equipment and perform necessary operations to
                       furnish natural gas.
Ord. 333    9-8-1952   Fixing the price of natural gas from the East Ohio Gas
                       Co.
Ord. 25-55  7-25-1955  Contract with C.E.I. for street lighting service.
Ord. 28-56  6-25-1956  Fixing the price of natural gas from the East Ohio Gas
                       Co.
Ord. 44-56  10-8-1956  Contract with C.E.I. for street lighting service.
Ord. 5-60   1-11-1960  Fixing the price of natural gas from the East Ohio Gas
                       Co.
Ord. 44-61  8-14-1961  Contract with C.E.I. for street lighting service.
Ord. 22-63  4-15-1963  Amends contract with C.E.I. for street lighting service.
Ord. 18-66  5-16-1966  Contract with C.E.I. for street lighting service for
                       five years.
Ord. 29-70  9-14-1970  C.A.T.V. franchise to Ohio Telecable Co.
Ord. 69-71  9-13-1971  Contract with C.E.I. for electric street lighting
                       service.
Ord. 24-72  3-20-1972  Fixing rates for electricity from Ohio Edison Co.
Ord. 31-72  3-20-1972  Contract with Cleveland Maintenance Co. for residential
                       rubbish collection and disposal.
Ord. 48-73  6-18-1973  Repeals Ord. 29-70.
Ord. 68-73  10-15-1973 Contract with Ohio Edison Co. for lighting streets, ways
                       and public places.
Ord. 92-74  1-20-1974  Fixing rates for electricity from Ohio Edison Co.
Ord. 38-76  4-19-1976  Contract with C.E.I. for street lighting service. Amends
                       Ord. 69-71.
Ord. 56-77  6-6-1977   Contract with C.E.I. for street lighting service. Amends
                       Ord. 69-71.
Ord. 74-78  9-5-1978   Contract with C.E.I. for electric street lighting
                       service.
Ord. 59-79  6-4-1979   Contract with Ohio Edison Co. for street lighting.
Ord. 47-80  5-5-1980   To C.A.T.V., Inc., for cable T.V.
Ord. 62-81  12-7-1981  Contract with Ohio Edison Co. for lighting streets, ways
                       and public places. Repeals Ord. 59-79.
Ord. 36-92  5-4-1992   To Cox Cable Cleveland Area, Inc., for cable T.V.
                       Granting Columbia Gas of Ohio, Inc., the right to lay
Ord. 21-93  3-1-1993   pipe and other equipment and perform necessary
                       operations to furnish natural gas for 25 years.
                       Granting to ICG Access Services a nonexclusive franchise
Ord. 155-94 1-17-1995  to provide dedicated private line point to point
                       telecommunications within the city for three years.
Ord. 194-98 10-19-1998 Repeals Ord. 155-94.
                       To ICG Telecom, a nonexclusive franchise to provide
Ord. 23-99  3-15-1999  dedicated private line point to point telecommunications
                       services within the city for three years.
Ord. 126-99 7-26-1999  Amends Ord. 36-92.
                       Entering into an agreement with North Coast Energy, Inc.
Ord. 24-02  2-19-2002  for the provision of natural gas for a period of 18
                       months, ending August 31, 2003.
                       Entering into a renewal agreement with First Energy
Ord. 168-02 10-21-2002 Solutions Corporation for the provision of electrical
                       service for a period of 24 months.
                       Entering into an agreement with Norton Construction
Ord. 85-04  6-21-2004  Company for the provision of collection and disposal of
                       rubbish for five successive one-year terms.
                       Entering into an agreement with First Energy for the
Ord. 123-04 10-4-2004  provision of electric service for all municipal
                       properties for a period of 12 months.
                       Entering into an agreement with Mango Bay for the
Ord. 15-08  2-4-2008   provision of wireless internet service for a term of 24
                       months.
                       Authorizing a gas sales agreement with Enervest Energy
Ord. 122-09 11-2-2009  for the provision of natural gas to municipal
                       facilities.
                      
 
TABLE II:  EASEMENTS
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.  7-8- To C.E.I., the right to construct poles, wires, and the like, over and under
84    1930 municipal land.
Ord.  9-8- To the East Ohio Gas Co., the right to lay pipes, and the like, under public
332   1952 ways for natural gas service.
Ord.  2-8- Accepting an easement from Ridgewood Lakes Improvement Co. for water pipes.
3-54  1954
Ord.  1-   Accepting an easement from Ridgewood Lakes Improvement Co. for a water main in
2-55  10-  Marianna Blvd.
      1955
Ord.  1-   Accepting an easement from Crasi Builders, Inc., for a water main in Wright and
3-55  10-  Lenwood Roads.
      1955
Ord.  1-   Accepting an easement from Ridgewood Lakes Improvement Co. for a water main in
4-55  24-  Louis Road.
      1955
Ord.  4-   Accepting an easement from Ridgewood Lakes Improvement Co. for a water main in
16-55 25-  Louis Road.
      1955
Ord.  10-
43-56 8-   Accepting an easement from John and Elizabeth Gaspar for sewer purposes.
      1956
Ord.  4-   Accepting an easement from Zane and Virjean Tollis for a water main in proposed
19-58 28-  Falls Lane and Amelia Drive.
      1958
Ord.  4-   Accepting an easement from Zane and Virjean Tollis for a water main in proposed
20-58 28-  Falls Lane and Amelia Drive.
      1958
Ord.  5-
25-58 12-  Repeals Ord. 20-58.
      1958
Ord.  5-   Accepting easements from the alloters of Steve Sperli Subdivisions No. 2 and No.
17-59 25-  3 and Oriole Parkway Subdivision for water mains in Patricia Drive, Victoria
      1959 Drive, Valley Park, Woodlawn Drive and Canterberry Drive
Ord.  2-8- Accepting an easement from Kenneth E. and Fred N. Parkington for sewer purposes.
14-60 1960
Ord.  2-8- Accepting easements from the alloters of Meadow Ridge Subdivision for water main
15-60 1960 and sewer purposes in Russett Drive, Ryland Drive, Meadow Gateway and Pumpkin
           Lane.
Ord.  3-   Accepting easements from Stratford Land Co. in land under proposed streets in
21-60 28-  Meadow Ridge Estates Allotment.
      1960
Ord.  6-   Accepting easements for water mains and sewers in a certain proposed street in
37-60 27-  Falls Lane Estate Subdivision No. 3.
      1960
Ord.  7-   Accepting easement from Craig Bldg. Co. for maintenance of utilities over part
39-60 11-  of Sublot 147.
      1960
Ord.  9-   Accepting easements for water mains and sewers in Woodlawn, Paisley, Bramblewood
48-60 26-  and Eastwood Drives and Canterbury Lane.
      1960
Ord.  3-   Accepting an easement from Leo E. Rattay, Trustee, in Millwood Hts. Subdivision
11-61 13-  (proposed) for water mains in Millwood and Broadmill Drives and Breckswood Oval.
      1961
Ord.  11-  Accepting an easement from Zane R. Tollis for a water main in proposed Tollis
56-61 30-  Parkway.
      1961
Ord.  4-
16-62 16-  Repeals Ord. 11-61.
      1962
Ord.  4-   Accepting easement from Leo E. Rattay, Trustee, and the Millwood Hts.
18-62 16-  Development Co., in Millwood Hts. Subdivision (proposed) in proposed Millwood
      1962 Drive North and South and Breckswood Oval.
Ord.  10-  Accepting an easement from Brookpark Factory Sites, Inc., for water mains and
38-62 1-   sewers in proposed Vera Drive.
      1962
Ord.  10-  Accepting an easement from Seneca Club Apts., Inc., Herbert Luxenberg and
39-62 1-   Zaremba & Sons for water mains in Seneca Blvd.
      1962
Ord.  1-   Accepting an easement from the J. Falls Bldg. Co., Inc., in the J. Falls Bldg.
6-63  21-  Co., Inc., Subdivision No. 5 (proposed) for water mains in proposed Elsa, Lydia
      1963 and Belle Drives.
Ord.  9-3- Accepting an easement from Seneca Club Apts., Inc., and Herbert Luxenberg and
49-63 1963 Zaremba & Sons, Seneca Blvd. Dedication Plat, Sec. 2, for water mains in Seneca
           Blvd.
Ord.  11-  Accepting an easement from Avery Road Development Co., Inc., for water mains in
56-63 18-  proposed Wolf Road, Bear’s Den Lane, Hunter’s Trail and Fox Hollow Drive.
      1963
Ord.  6-   Accepting an easement from Leo E. Rattay, Trustee, and the Millwood Hts.
28-64 15-  Development Co. in Millwood Hts. Subdivision No. 3 (proposed) for water mains in
      1964 proposed Breckswood Oval.
Ord.  7-   Accepting an easement from Millwood Hts. Development Co., Inc., in Millwood Hts.
38-64 24-  Subdivision No. 4 (proposed) for water mains in proposed Millwood Drive North
      1964 and Broadmill Drive.
Ord.  8-7- Accepting an easement from Williamsburg Homes, Inc., in Meadow Ridge Subdivision
34-64 1964 No. 4A (proposed) for water mains and sewers in proposed Meadow Gateway, Laurel
           Glen and Grenadier Drive.
Ord.  9-   Accepting an easement from the Avery Road Development Co., Inc., in Avery
37-64 21-  Meadows Subdivision No. 2 (proposed) for water mains in proposed Beaver Ridge
      1964 Drive and Fox Hollow Drive.
Ord.  10-  Accepting an easement from Zane R. Tollis for water mains in proposed Tollis
40-65 18-  Parkway.
      1965
Ord.  10-  Accepting an easement in proposed Meadow Gateway, Green Acres Drive and
42-65 23-  Grenadier Drive, for water mains and sanitary sewers, and a 20-ft. utility
      1965 easement.
Res.  9-   Accepting a perpetual right-of-way and easement in Tollis Parkway from Zane R.
71-25 13-  and Virjean Tollis.
      1971
Res.  11-  Accepting a perpetual right-of-way and easement in Tollis Parkway from Zane R.
71-34 22-  and Virjean Tollis and Tollis Bldg. Co., Inc.
      1971
Ord.  10-  Accepting an easement from Vineyard Ltd. for water mains in proposed Vineyard
70-72 30-  Drive.
      1972
Ord.  2-5- Accepting an easement from Vineyard Ltd. for water mains in proposed Vineyard
17-73 1973 Drive Repeals Ord. 70-72.
Ord.  5-5- Accepting an easement from Spade Builders and Planners, Inc., for water mains in
32-75 1975 proposed Rockledge Circle.
Ord.  7-7- Accepting an easement from Zane Construction Co. for sewer purposes.
50-75 1975
Ord.  7-7- Accepting an easement from Zane Construction Co. for sewer purposes.
51-75 1975
Ord.  7-7- Accepting an easement from Andrew and Luba Sheparovich for sewer purposes.
52-75 1975
Ord.  7-7- Accepting an easement from. Chester R. Swiatek for sewer purposes.
53-75 1975
Ord.  7-7- Accepting an easement from Robert and Irene Walters for sewer purposes.
54-75 1975
Ord.  7-7- Accepting an easement from Anthony M. and Sarah M. Lucas for sewer purposes.
55-75 1975
Ord.  3-1- Accepting an easement from Joseph and Marie O. Yonkof for utility purposes.
21-76 1976
Ord.  8-1- Accepting an easement from Ryan Homes, Inc., for sewer purposes.
66-77 1977
Ord.  9-   Accepting an easement from Hub Valley Realty for water mains in proposed Myron
75-77 12-  Drive between street nos. 3201 and 3401 E. Royalton Road.
      1977
Ord.  12-
104-  5-   Accepting an easement from Michael J. and Anna Rogers for sewer purposes.
77    1977
Ord.  12-
105-  5-   Accepting an easement from John J. and Rosemarie Lakner for sewer purposes.
77    1977
Ord.  12-  Accepting an easement from Hub Valley Realty for sewer purposes in proposed
106-  5-   Myron Drive between street nos. 3201 and 3401 E. Royalton Road.
77    1977
Ord.  12-
107-  19-  Accepting an easement from Anne and Milo Povolny for sewer purposes.
77    1977
Ord.  12-  Accepting an easement from Broad-Breck Development Corp. for a water main in
109-  19-  Wyatt Road Subdivision No. 3.
77    1977
Ord.  7-   Accepting an easement from George J. and Madeline R. Paryzek for utility
71-76 12-  purposes.
      1978
Ord.  7-
72-76 12-  Accepting an easement from Faulhaber Funeral Home, Inc., for utility purposes.
      1978
Ord.  7-   Accepting an easement from Donald A. and Lenore L. Faulhaber for utility
73-76 12-  purposes.
      1978
Ord.  11-  Accepting easements from Flair Corp. for sewer and water purposes in Quail Run
70-78 6-   Subdivision.
      1978
Ord.  2-   Accepting an easement from Broad-Breck Development Corp. for a water main in
18-79 20-  Wyatt Road Subdivision No. 4.
      1979
Res.  9-2- Authorizing use of a city storm and sewer easement by the Ohio Bell Tel. Co.
80-49 1980
Res.  9-8- Accepting an easement from Luckey Acres, Inc., for Mill View Subdivision, for
81-48 1981 the installation and maintenance of a water main for circulation purposes only.
Res.  9-8- Accepting an easement from Luckey Acres, Inc., for Mill View Subdivision, for
81-49 1981 the installation and maintenance of sewers.
Res.  9-8- Accepting an easement from Luckey Acres, Inc., for Mill View Subdivision, for
81-50 1981 the installation and maintenance of a water main.
Ord.  2-   Accepting an easement from the state for access to the Simco property at S.R. 77
16-82 15-  and Old Route 82.
      1982
Ord.  9-   Accepting an easement from J. R. and J. T. Mitchell and F. and M. Salvatore for
68-85 16-  the installation of a water main.
      1985
Ord.  11-
80-85 4-   Vacating part of easement granted by Ord. 70-78.
      1985
Ord.  11-
81-85 4-   Accepting storm and sanitary sewer easements for Quail Run Subdivision.
      1985
Ord.  1-   Accepting an easement from Headwaters Development Co. for a water main in
11-86 21-  MacIntosh Farms Subdivision.
      1986
Ord.  5-5- Accepting an easement from Headwaters Development Co.
40-86 1986
Ord.  5-   Accepting an easement from Lucky Acres, Inc. for Mill View Subdivision, for
47-86 19-  storm drainage.
      1986
Ord.  7-
76-86 21-  Accepting an easement for a water main for Stoney Run.
      1986
Ord.  3-9- Accepting an easement from J.C. Development Co. for a water main.
20-87 1987
Ord.  4-   Accepting an easement from Zaremba Macintosh Co. for a water main for Macintosh
38-87 20-  Farms Subdivision.
      1987
Ord.  5-   Accepting an easement from Stoney Run Limited Partnership for a water main for
50-87 18-  Stoney Run Apartments.
      1987
Ord.  6-1- Accepting an easement from Zaremba Macintosh Co. for a water main for Macintosh
61-87 1987 Farms Subdivision.
Ord.  6-1- Accepting an easement from Sahley Land Development Co. for a water main for
62-87 1987 Misty Oakes Subdivision.
Ord.  9-2-
107-  1987 Accepting an easement for a water main for Stoney Run.
87
Ord.  10-  Accepting an easement from Valley Park Estates, Inc., for a water main for
123-  19-  Valley Park Estates, Inc.
87    1987
Ord.  11-
137-  16-  Accepting an easement for a water main for Valley Park Estates, Inc.
87    1987
Ord.  3-7- Accepting an easement for a water main for Briarwood Subdivision No. 6.
88-31 1988
Ord.  3-
88-35 21-  Accepting an easement for a water main for J.C. Development Co., Inc.
      1988
Ord.  4-
88-46 11-  Accepting an easement for a water main for J.C. Development Co., Inc.
      1988
Ord.  5-2- Accepting an easement for a water main for Valley Park Estate, Inc.
88-71 1988
Ord.  7-   Accepting an easement for a water main for Zaremba Macintosh Co. with respect to
88-   18-  Macintosh Farms Condominiums E-1, E-2 and F-1.
107   1988
Ord.  7-
88-   18-  Accepting an easement for a water main for J.C. Development Co., Inc.
126   1988
Ord.  8-
88-   15-  Accepting an easement for a water main for U.S. Wallcovering property.
131   1988
Ord.  11-  Authorizing agreement with the Ohio Turnpike Comm. to accept easement relative
88-   21-  to the Towpath Turnpike Plaza access road.
179   1988
Ord.  12-  Accepting an easement from Boston Road northwest in the Macintosh Farm
88-   19-  Subdivision No. 1 for water main purposes.
197   1988
Ord.  12-  Accepting an easement in Macintosh Farm Subdivision No. 1 for water main
88-   19-  purposes.
198   1988
Ord.  1-9- Accepting an easement for a water main for Macintosh Farms Subdivision Two.
89-2  1989
Ord.  2-6- Authorizing agreement with Ohio Bell Telephone Co. to grant easement at the
89-5  1989 Wallings Road Fire Station.
Ord.  5-1- Authorizing agreement with the Ohio Turnpike Comm. consenting to easement for
89-51 1989 Towpath Service Plaza access road.
Ord.  7-   Accepting an easement for a water main for property on Ken-Mar Industrial
89-84 17-  Parkway.
      1989
Ord.  7-
89-99 17-  Accepting an easement for a water main for Creekside Reserve Subdivision.
      1989
Ord.  8-
89-   14-  Accepting an easement for a water main for Bittersweet Homes Subdivision.
101   1989
Ord.  8-
89-   21-  Accepting an easement from Friend’s Church for storm sewer purposes.
103   1989
Ord.  8-
89-   21-  Accepting an easement for a water main for Whispering Winds Subdivision.
105   1989
           Accepting an easement from George Zane over Sublot 231 in Briarwood Subdivision
           No. 6 (Permanent Parcel 581-7-17); from Zane Const. Co. over St. Sava Serbian
           Church, 2151 W. Wallings Road (Permanent Parcel 581-13-9); from St. Sava’s
           Church over St. Sava Serbian Church, 2151 W. Wallings Road (Permanent Parcels
           581-13-10, 581-13-15); from Anna Trusz over vacant 17.5 acres on Broadview Road
           (Permanent Parcel 581-18-12); from Robert Farrar over 8536 Broadview Road
           (Permanent Parcel 581-21-8); from Joseph Yonkof over 8542 Broadview Rd
           (Permanent Parcel 581-21-10); from Wm. Schultz over 8546 Broadview Road
           (Permanent Parcel 581-21-7); from James Stecklow over 3558 Broadview Road
           (Permanent Parcel 581- 21-6); from Neff & Assocs. over Countryside Drive
           (Permanent Parcel 581-21-4); from Andrew Glagola over 8576 Broadview Road
           (Permanent Parcel 581-21-3); from James Mixan over 8586 Broadview Road
           (Permanent Parcel 581-21-11); from Joseph G . Glyman over vacant 2.905 acre
           parcel on Broadview Road (Permanent Parcel 581-21-2); from Zanco Inc. over 8626
           Broadview Road (Permanent Parcel 581-21-12); from Vineyards Inc. over 1200
           Vineyard Drive (Permanent Parcel 581-21-14); from Andrew Alaj over 8374
           Broadview Road (Permanent Parcels 581-18-3, 581-18-4); from Joseph Marusek over
           8384 Broadview Road (Permanent Parcel 581-18-28); from E. Lampe over 8400
           Broadview Road (Permanent Parcel 581-18-13); from Flair Corp. over Sublots 13,
           14, 36, 37, 38, 40, 41, 43, 44 and 45 in Quail Run Subdivision (Permanent
           Parcels 581-18-10, 581-18-30); from Norman Gutauckas over 8621 Broadview Road
           (Permanent Parcel 581-31-9); from Raymond Pinchak over 8663 Broadview Road
           (Permanent Parcel 581-31-5); from E. M. Weber over 8665 Broadview Road
           (Permanent Parcel 581-31-10); from Richard Weber over 8667 Broadview Road
           (Permanent Parcel 581-31-6); from R.J. Edwards over 8675 Broadview Road
           (Permanent Parcel 581-31-4); from George Sedlack over 8693 Broadview Road
           (Permanent Parcel 581-31-33); from Mary Sedlack over 8709 Broadview Road
           (Permanent Parcel 581-31-1); from Tolco Utilities Inc. over vacant 4.5 acre
           parcel on Broadview Road (Permanent Parcel 581-30-5); from Arthur Paulovcin over
           vacant 9.93 acre parcel on Harris Road (Permanent Parcel 581-30-7); from Anna
           Host over 8655 Avery Road (Permanent Parcel 581-33-1); from Norbert Gartman over
           vacant 95.0 acre parcel on Avery Road (Permanent Parcel 583-5-9); from Everett
           Keister over 8900 Avery Road (Permanent Parcel 583-7-3); from Marian Huefner
           over 8800 Avery Road (Permanent Parcel 583-7-1); from Jos. Leisman over 2760 E.
           Sprague Road (Permanent Parcel 582-2-1); from Frank Vajda over 2920 E. Sprague
Ord.  11-  Road (Permanent 582-2-2); from Richard Rollins over 2751 E. Wallings Road
89-   20-  (Permanent Parcel 582-2-18); from Ruth Rickmers over 2915 E. Wallings Road
145   1989 (Permanent Parcel 582-215); from Ann Svoboda over 2823 E. Wallings Road,
           (Permanent Parcels 582-2-16, 582-2-17); from Thomas Craft over 2963 E. Wallings
           Road (Permanent Parcel 582-2-14); from Brecksville School over 1551 E. Wallings
           Road (Permanent Parcel 582-25-35); from John Bielanski over 3150 E. Wallings
           Road (Permanent Parcel 582-9-2); from Joseph Nejdl over 3230 E. Wallings Road
           (Permanent Parcel 582-9-61); from Steve Zajac over 3300 E. Wallings Road
           Permanent Parcel 582-9-3); from Robert Tober over Sublots 11, 12, 13, 14, 15 and
           24 in Creekside Reserve Subdivision (Permanent Parcel 582-9-46); from Richard
           Ashmus over 8337 Eastwood Drive (Permanent Parcel 582-9-53); from Bea Rodriguez
           over Sublot 18 in Bramblewood Subdivision (Permanent Parcel 582-18-13); from
           Harold Mahoney over 4008 Diana Drive (Permanent Parcel 582-19-2); from M. E.
           Herman over 4036 Diana Drive (Permanent Parcel 582-19-3); from Andrew Plascak
           over 2022 Akins Road (Permanent Parcel 584-13-6); from Eye Medical & Surgical
           over vacant 10.0 acre parcel on Royalton Road (Permanent Parcel 584-14-4); from
           Marion Zaccardelli over 1780 Royalton Road (Permanent Parcels 584-8-4, 584-8-
           18); from Joseph Sliva over 1807 Royalwood Road (Permanent Parcel 584-9-2); from
           Gildo Zaccardelli over 1780 Royalwood Road (Permanent Parcels 584-8-5, 584-8-6);
           from Pete Vodan over 1710 Royalton Road (Permanent Parcel 584-8-7); from Seneca
           Hills Service over vacant 2.0 acre (font.) parcel near Seneca Blvd. (Permanent
           Parcel 584-8-9); from Ray Likowski over vacant 14.1 acre parcel on Broadview
           Road (Permanent Parcel 583-2-16); from Alfred Caiata over 1485 Royalwood
           (Permanent Parcel 584-10-2); from Jos. Karely over 1463 Royalwood (Permanent
           Parcel 584-107); from Otto Miller Jr. over 1425 Royalwood (Permanent Parcel 584-
           10-3); from Paul Motylinski over 1383 Royalwood (Permanent Parcel 584-10-5);
           from Ralph Menard over 1331 Royalwood (Permanent Parcel 584-10-69 from Mary
           Cheska over 1299 Royalwood (Permanent Parcel 584-104); from Albert Fink over
           vacant 4.1 acre parcel on Broadview Road (Permanent Parcel 583-5-10); from
           Albert Fink over vacant 5.269 acre parcel on Broadview Road (Permanent Parcel
           583-12-1); from James Ungrady over 8033 Elmhurst Drive (Permanent Parcel 581-23-
           71); from Mirko Petkovic over 8010 Longview (Permanent Parcel 58123-36); from
           Lillian Lucas over 8020 Longview (Permanent Parcel 581-23-35); from John Golmitz
           over 8251 Overlook (Permanent Parcel 581-28-22); from Radovan Mattic over 8257
           Overlook (Permanent Parcel 581-28-23); from Harry Weselch over 8222 Wyatt Road
           (Permanent Parcel 581-29-19); from Lynial Wells over 8230 Wyatt Road (Permanent
           Parcel 581-29-20; and in Permanent Parcels 581-30-14, 58130-11, 581-30-12, 581-
           30-10, 581-30-10).
Ord.  2-
16-90 19-  Accepting an easement for a water main for C & L Limited Partnership.
      1990
Ord.  3-
32-90 19-  Accepting an easement from E. Modzelewskig for a water main.
      1990
Ord.  5-7- Accepting an easement from JRC Development Co., Inc., for a water main.
49-90 1990
Ord.  5-   Accepting an easement for a water main for property of Souch Hills Limited
61-90 21-  Partnership.
      1990
Ord.  6-4- Accepting a water easement for Hidden Meadow Estates.
70-90 1990
Ord.  6-   Accepting an easement for a water main from Zaremba-MacIntosh Co. for MacIntosh
82-90 18-  Farms Group G.
      1990
Ord.  6-   Accepting an easement for a sanitary sewer from Zaremba-MacIntosh Co. for
85-90 18-  MacIntosh Farms Group G.
      1990
Ord.  8-
126-  20-  Accepting an easement for a water main for Chippewa Pointe Subdivision.
90    1990
Ord.  10-
143-  15-  Accepting an easement for a water main for Corporate Center property.
90    1990
Ord.  12-  Accepting an easement for a water main to S.M.S. II Development Co., Inc., for
89-91 9-   the Homestead-Water Circulation Easement No. 1.
      1991
Ord.  12-  Accepting an easement for a water main to S.M.S. II Development Co., Inc., for
90-91 9-   the Homestead-Water Circulation Easement No. 2.
      1991
Ord.  12-  Accepting an easement for a water main to S.M.S. II Development Co., Inc., for
91-91 9-   the Homestead-Water Circulation Easement No. 3.
      1991
Ord.  6-1- Accepting an easement for a water main for Country Lakes Estates, Phase 7.
59-92 1992
Ord.  10-
110-  5-   Accepting an easement for a water main on W. Boston Road.
92    1992
Ord.  11-  Accepting an easement for a water main from Bianco Ferguson Enterprises, Inc.,
121-  16-  for Michael’s Landing Subdivision.
92    1992
Ord.  4-   Accepting an easement for a water main from Perrico Property Systems, Inc., for
42-93 19-  the Broadview Glen Subdivision.
      1993
Ord.  6-   Accepting an easement for a water main from Bianco-Ferguson Enterprises, Inc.,
65-93 21-  for Michael’s Landing Subdivision.
      1993
Ord.  7-   Appropriating easements for construction of a storm sewer in the Falls Lane/
75-93 19-  Lydia Drive area.
      1993
Ord.  7-
76-93 19-  Accepting an easement for a water main for Cherry Hill Estates.
      1993
Ord.  11-  Accepting an easement for a water main from R.E.M. Partnership, Dennis R. Rossi,
116-  15-  General Partner, for Canterbury Estates Subdivision.
93    1993
Res.  4-4- Accepting multiple easements from MacIntosh Land Co. in connection with the
94-59 1994 construction of sanitary sewers south of the Ohio Turnpike.
Ord.  6-   Providing compensation for purchase of easements in connection with property
74-94 20-  located on Jenna Drive.
      1994
Ord.  8-   Accepting an easement from MacIntosh Development Corp. for installation and
104-  15-  maintenance of a water main for supplying water to MacIntosh Farms Hampton’s Run
94    1994 Group F-2.
Ord.  8-   Accepting an easement from MacIntosh Development Corp. for installation and
116-  22-  maintenance of a water main for supplying water to MacIntosh Farms Group G.
94    1994
Res.  8-   Accepting easements in connection with subdivision and consolidation of parcels
94-68 22-  on Falls Lane.
      1994
Ord.  9-6- Accepting easements for installation and maintenance of a water main from
120-  1994 Innovative Contractors for Creekside Trace Subdivision.
94
Ord.  5-   Accepting an easement from Perrico Properties, Inc., for the installation and
69-95 15-  maintenance of a water main for supplying water to Windsor Woods Subdivision
      1995 Phase I.
Ord.  1-6- Accepting an easement from Oakwood Development Co., for the installation and
2-97  1997 maintenance of a water main for circulation purposes only in Oakwood Subdivision
           No. 1.
Ord.  1-6- Accepting an easement from Oakwood Development Co., for the installation and
3-97  1997 maintenance of a water main for supplying water to Oakwood Subdivision No. 1.
Ord.  4-7- Accepting an easement from Tollis Construction Co., Inc., for the installation
43-97 1997 and maintenance of a water main for circulation purposes only to Pin Oaks II
           Condominiums.
Ord.  4-7- Accepting an easement from Tollis Construction Co., Inc., for the installation
44-97 1997 and maintenance of a water main for supplying water service to Pin Oaks II
           Condominiums.
Ord.  6-2- Authorizing an agreement of easement with W.H. Harris, Jr. and J.A. Harris for
78-97 1997 the provision of easements on Twin Oaks Drive for utility and sewer purposes.
Res.  12-
97-   15-  Accepting various utility easements for Lemoreland, Ltd.
114   1997
Ord.  12-  Accepting an easement from Oakwood Development Co. for the installation and
190-  15-  maintenance of a water main for supplying water service to Oakwood Subdivision
97    1997 No. 2.
Ord.  12-  Granting an easement to Perry Homes, Inc., for the installation, maintenance,
191-  15-  replacement and removal of landscaping, lighting appliances and signs.
97    1997
Ord.  6-1- Granting an easement to Ohio Bell Telephone Co., a.k.a. Ameritech Ohio, to
97-98 1998 provide enhanced telephone service in the vicinity of 9543 Broadview Road.
Ord.  7-   Accepting an easement from SMS Development Co. for a sanitary sewer in
138-  27-  connection with “The Woods of Broadview Heights” Development.
98    1998
Ord.  7-   Accepting an easement from SMS Development Co. for supplying storm water
139-  27-  detention in connection with “The Woods of Broadview Heights” Development.
98    1998
Ord.  7-   Accepting an easement from SMS Development Co. for storm sewer purposes in
140-  27-  connection with “The Woods of Broadview Heights” Development.
98    1998
Ord.  7-   Accepting an easement from the Board of Park Commissioners of the Cleveland
141-  27-  Metroparks Districts for the installation, operation, maintenance and repair of
98    1998 a sanitary sewer line on Metroparks property in the Brecksville Reservation.
Ord.  8-
147-  24-  Repeals Ord. 141-98.
98    1998
Ord.  9-8- Accepting a drainage easement from Petros Development Corp. for storm sewer
164-  1998 purposes in connection with the MacIntosh Reserve Development.
98
Ord.  11-
203-  2-   Accepting an easement from I. Handy for sanitary sewer purposes. (Avery Road)
98    1998
Ord.  6-   Authorizing an agreement with T. Scrima for a right-of-entry to a city easement
120-  21-  in connection with Michael’s Landing Subdivision.
99    1999
Ord.  6-   Authorizing an agreement with D.R. Bell for right-of-entry to a city easement in
121-  21-  connection with Creekview Village Subdivision.
99    1999
Ord.  8-   Accepting an easement from Forestbrook Development Co., L.L.C., for the
157-  23-  installation and maintenance of a water main for circulation purposes only in
99    1999 the Forestbrook Estate Subdivision.
Ord.  11-  Accepting an easement from Lupica Enterprises, Inc., for the installation and
201-  15-  maintenance of a water main for water service in connection with Lazzaro Blvd.
99    1999
Ord.  11-  Accepting an easement from Petros Development Corp. for the installation and
202-  15-  maintenance of a water main for circulation purposes only in connection with the
99    1999 Villas at MacIntosh Farms Group “L-3” Subdivision.
Ord.  11-  Accepting an easement from the MacIntosh Land Co. Limited Partnership for the
203-  15-  installation and maintenance of a water main for circulation purposes only in
99    1999 connection with the Villas at MacIntosh Farms Group “L-4” Subdivision.
Ord.  8-   Authorizing an agreement with various landowners with respect to obtaining
128-  21-  permanent and temporary easements in connection with the improvement of a
00    2000 culvert at 8844 Broadview Road.
Ord.  7-   Authorizing an agreement with various landowners for the purchase of temporary
91-01 16-  and permanent easements in connection with the Royalton Road-State Route 82
      2001 widening project.
Ord.  10-  Authorizing an agreement with various for the purchase of temporary and
130-  1-   permanent easements in connection with the Royalton Road-State Route 82 widening
01    2001 project.
Ord.  2-4- Accepting an easement from Briarwood Golf Course for the installation and
17-02 2002 maintenance of sanitary services, pump station and force main in connection with
           the Glen Abbey Subdivision.
Ord.  2-4- Accepting an easement from Briarwood Golf Course for the installation and
18-02 2002 maintenance of sanitary sewers Area 1 in connection with the Glen Abbey
           Subdivision.
Ord.  2-4- Accepting an easement from Briarwood Golf Course for the installation and
19-02 2002 maintenance of sanitary sewers Area 3 in connection with the Glen Abbey
           Subdivision.
Ord.  2-4- Accepting an easement from Briarwood Golf Course for the installation and
20-02 2002 maintenance of sanitary sewers Area 5 in connection with the Glen Abbey
           Subdivision.
Ord.  2-4- Accepting an easement from Briarwood Golf Course for the installation and
21-02 2002 maintenance of sanitary sewers Area 6 in connection with the Glen Abbey
           Subdivision.
Ord.  3-4- Accepting an easement from MacIntosh Farms Community Association, Inc. for the
22-02 2002 installation and maintenance of sanitary sewers Area 7 in connection with the
           Glen Abbey Subdivision.
Ord.  6-   Vacating and abandoning a 20-foot sanitary sewer easement relative to Macintosh
104-  17-  Farms Condominium No. 3, Phase 12.
02    2002
Ord.  6-   Accepting a sanitary sewer easement relative to Macintosh Farms Condominium No.
105-  17-  3, Phase 12.
02    2002
Ord.  10-  Accepting an easement from Robert W. Rogalski for the installation and
166-  21-  maintenance of a storm sewer at Russett/Harris Roads.
02    2002
Ord.  12-  Accepting an easement from Pulte Homes of Ohio Corp. for the installation and
196-  16-  maintenance of a water main for the purpose of providing water service in
02    2002 connection with Linton Lane (Block K-4) in the New Hampton Subdivision - Phase
           5.
Ord.  2-3- Accepting an easement from Mill Woods Estates, LLC for the installation and
14-03 2003 maintenance of a water main for circulation purposes only in connection with the
           Sutton Woods Subdivision.
Ord.  2-   Accepting an easement from Robert W. Rogalski for the installation and
13-03 18-  maintenance of a storm sewer at Russett/Harris Roads and repealing Ordinance
      2003 166-02.
Ord.  5-5- Accepting an easement from Pulte Homes of Ohio Corp. for the installation and
61-03 2003 maintenance of a water main for circulation purposes only in connection with the
           New Hampton Subdivision, Phase 10.
Ord.  8-   Accepting an easement from the Zaremba Corporation for the installation and
124-  18-  maintenance of a water main for circulation purposes only in connection with the
03    2003 Barnsley Way at MacIntosh Farms, Phase 2 Subdivision.
Ord.  8-   Accepting an easement from the Royalton 6001 Limited Partnership for the
125-  18-  installation and maintenance of a water main for circulation purposes only in
03    2003 connection with the Heritage Corporate Center.
Ord.  1-5- Accepting an easement from Pulte Homes of Ohio, LLC, for the installation and
3-04  2004 maintenance of a water main for the purpose of supplying water service in
           connection with the New Hampton Phase 11 Subdivision.
Ord.  7-   Granting an easement to the access road for the Ohio Turnpike’s Towpath’s
91-05 18-  Service Plaza.
      2005
Ord.  7-
92-05 18-  Granting a permanent easement to the parcel at 2940 Amelia Drive.
      2005
Ord.  6-
91-06 19-  Approving the grant of easement from Shimrak, LLC to the city.
      2006
Ord.  8-
117-  21-  Accepting an easement from Colleen M. Simovic to the city.
06    2006
Ord.  2-4- Accepting the grant of a storm drainage easement from Joseph J. and Kathleen M.
18-08 2008 Corso.
Ord.  2-4- Accepting the grant of a storm drainage easement from Jon C. and Linda M.
19-08 2008 Leyden.
Ord.  2-4- Accepting the grant of a storm drainage easement from Richard R. and Laura J.
20-08 2008 Maher.
Ord.  4-
54-08 21-  Accepting the grant of an easement from Ronald and Deirdre Miller.
      2008
Ord.  5-5- Accepting the grant of an easement from Georgia Gigliotti.
56-08 2008
Res.  6-   Requesting that the Ohio Turnpike Commission vacate the easement located on
08-30 16-  Parcel Number 139F-4.
      2008
Ord.  8-   Accepting the grant of a temporary construction easement from Allan and Judith
114-  18-  Brillinger.
08    2008
Ord.  8-   Accepting the grant of a temporary construction easement from Michael and Becky
115-  18-  Seredick.
08    2008
Ord.  8-   Accepting the grant of a temporary construction easement from Frank and Mildred
116-  18-  Savena.
08    2008
Ord.  8-   Accepting the grant of a temporary construction easement from Thomas and Arlene
117-  18-  Saad.
08    2008
Ord.  8-   Accepting the grant of a temporary construction easement from Anthony and Marcia
118-  18-  Stanzeski.
08    2008
Ord.  8-   Accepting the grant of a storm sewer drainage easement from Anthony and Marcia
119-  18-  Stanzeski.
08    2008
Ord.  10-  Authorizing an agreement with Global Signal Acquisitions, IV, LLC, for the grant
142-  13-  of a perpetual easement.
08    2008
Ord.  7-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into an agreement granting an easement to the
73-09 13-  Cutter Oil Company.
      2009
Ord.  9-8- Accepting the grant of a storm sewer easement from Aaron M. and Cheryl A.
97-09 2009 Suvetor.
Ord.  9-8- Accepting the grant of a retention basin easement from Aaron M. and Cheryl A.
98-09 2009 Suvetor.
Ord.  12-  Authorizing an agreement with Ed Walsh for the purchase of an easement located
161-  29-  at 8151 Broadview Road.
10    2010
Ord.  12-  Authorizing an agreement with Chatlos Properties, LLC, for the purchase of an
164-  29-  easement located at 8181 Avery Road.
10    2010
Ord.  12-  Authorizing an agreement with 8193 Avery Road Properties, LLC, for the purchase
165-  29-  of an easement located at 8193 Avery Road.
10    2010
Ord.  12-  Authorizing an agreement with Teresa A. Vince for the purchase of an easement
166-  29-  located at 8203 Avery Road.
10    2010
Ord.  12-  Authorizing an agreement with George P. Jadad for the purchase of an easement
167-  29-  located at 8211 Avery Road.
10    2010
Ord.  12-  Authorizing an agreement with Dean Tibbs for the purchase of an easement located
168-  29-  at 8219 Avery Road.
10    2010
Ord.  6-
75-11 20-  Accepting a right-of-way easement from ODOT.
      2011
Ord.  9-
119-  19-  Authorizing the transfer of a right-of-way easement.
11    2011
Ord.  10-  Granting a conservation easement to the Cuyahoga Soil and Water Conservation
154-  15-  District.
12    2012
Res.  3-   Utility easement from property located at 2861 Royalton Road (Parcel 040 WD & T)
2018- 26-  for the Route 82 Widening Project.
43    2018
Res.  11-  Utility easement of property located at 1600 East Royalton Road (Parcel 19 WD &
2018- 5-   T) for the Route 82 Widening Project.
181   2018
Res.  11-  Utility easement of property located at 2876 East Royalton Road (Parcel 041 WDV
2018- 5-   & T) for the Route 82 Widening Project.
182   2018
Res.  11-  Utility easement of property located at 4100 East Royalton Road (Parcel 073 WD,
2018- 5-   WDV & T) for the Route 82 Widening Project.
183   2018
Res.  11-  Utility easement of property located at 1210 East Royalton Road (Parcel 015 WD &
2018- 5-   T) for the Route 82 Widening Project.
186   2018
Res.  11-  Utility easement of property located at 1345 East Royalton Road (Parcel 016 WD &
2018- 5-   T) for the Route 82 Widening Project.
187   2018
Res.  11-  Utility easement of property located at 2525 East Royalton Road (Parcel 031 WD &
2018- 5-   T1, T2 & T3) for the Route 82 Widening Project.
188   2018
Res.  11-  Utility easement of property located at 3201 East Royalton Road (Parcel 050 WD1,
2018- 5-   WD2, T1 & T2) for the Route 82 Widening Project.
189   2018
Res.  11-  Utility easement of property located at 3301 East Royalton Road (Parcel 054 WD &
2018- 5-   T1 & T2) for the Route 82 Widening Project.
190   2018
Res.  11-  Utility easement of vacant land on East Royalton Road (Parcel 057 WD & T) for
2018- 5-   the Route 82 Widening Project.
194   2018
Res.  1-
2019- 22-  Agreement regarding the Broadview Road/Valley Parkway traffic signal easement.
03    2019
Res.  3-4- Authorizing an agreement between the city and the Board of Park Commissioners of
2019- 2019 the Cleveland Metropolitan Park District for a traffic signal easement.
32
26-   9-9- Temporary easement for the purpose of performing the work necessary to perform
2019  2019 grading and drive construction for 18 months from the date of entry by the State
           of Ohio, Department of Transportation. (Case No. 2018ADV239582)
27-   9-9- Temporary easement for the purpose of performing the work necessary to perform
2019  2019 grading and drive construction for 18 months from the date of entry by the State
           of Ohio, Department of Transportation. (Case No. 2018ADV239579)
28-   9-9- Temporary easement for the purpose of performing the work necessary to perform
2019  2019 grading and drive construction for 18 months from the date of entry by the State
           of Ohio, Department of Transportation. (Case No. 2018ADV239591)
29-   9-9- Temporary easement for the purpose of performing the work necessary to perform
2019  2019 grading and drive construction for 18 months from the date of entry by the State
           of Ohio, Department of Transportation. (Case No. 2018ADV239588)
30-   9-9- Temporary easement for the purpose of performing the work necessary to perform
2019  2019 grading and drive construction for 18 months from the date of entry by the State
           of Ohio, Department of Transportation. (Case No. 2018ADV238288)
31-   9-9- Temporary easement for the purpose of performing the work necessary to perform
2019  2019 grading and drive construction for 18 months from the date of entry by the State
           of Ohio, Department of Transportation. (Case No. 2019ADV233391)
          
 
TABLE III:  VACATING OF STREETS AND ALLEYS
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Res. 10-
414  13-  Part of Belmere Drive.
     1952
Ord. 7-   Part of Crossview Avenue at the northwest corner of Crossview Avenue and
35-  29-  Sprague Road.
65   1965
Ord. 11-
44-  1-   Repeals Ord. 35-65 vacating part of Crossview Avenue.
65   1965
Ord. 12-  Part of Crossview Avenue at the southwest corner of Crossview Avenue and
45-  6-   Sprague Road.
65   1965
Ord. 6-
39-  25-  Part of Hoertz Road.
69   1969
Ord. 11-
67-  19-  Part of Hoertz Road.
73   1973
Res. 1-2-
81-  1981 Part of Tollis Parkway.
63
Res. 8-
83-  15-  Part of Diana Drive.
20   1983
Ord. 10-  The “paper” street extension of Lenwood Road at the intersection of Joyce
110- 6-   Road.
86   1986
Ord. 6-5-
89-  1989 Part of Seneca Boulevard.
71
Ord. 6-
89-  19-  Part of Elsa Drive.
78   1989
Ord. 7-
89-  17-  Part of Harris Road.
94   1989
Ord. 1-
6-92 20-  Part of Harris Road.
     1992
Ord. 3-
25-  15-  Part of the right-of- way of Rusnak Trail.
93   1993
         
 
TABLE IV:  DEDICATION AND PLAT APPROVAL
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.  12-
338   22-  Accepting Wright Road.
      1952
Res.  12-  Plat of Ridgewood Lakes Improvement Co.’s Wallings Meadows Subdivision No. 1 for
29-53 28-  record purposes only.
      1953
Ord.  10-  Accepting Avery Road, Woodmere Drive, Belmere Drive, Chestnut Blvd., Overlook
27-54 25-  Avenue, a strip 20 ft. wide along the east side of Broadview Road and a strip 10
      1954 ft. wide along the south side of Wallings Road.
Res.  12-  Plat of Ridgewood Lakes Improvement Co.’s Wallings Meadows Subdivision No. 2 for
21-54 13-  record purposes only.
      1954
Res.  12-  Plat of Ridgewood Lakes Improvement Co.’s Wallings Meadows Subdivision No. 3 for
22-54 13-  record purposes only.
      1954
Res.  12-
23-54 13-  Plat of D.A. and R.L. Branch Subdivision for record purposes only.
      1954
Res.  - -  Plat of Hilliard Square Investment Co’s re-subdivision for record purposes only.
4-55
Res.  4-
6-55  11-  Plat of the George B. Zanes Briarwood Subdivision for record purposes only.
      1955
Res.  7-
12-55 25-  Plat of Ridgewood Lakes Improvement Co.’s Wallings Meadows Subdivision No. 4.
      1955
Ord.  9-   Accepting Joyce Road in the Ridgewood Lakes Improvement Co.’s Wallings Meadows
30-55 26-  Subdivision No. 1.
      1955
Ord.  10-  Accepting Woodview Drive and Eastwood Drive in the D.A. and R.L. Branch
33-55 24-  Subdivision.
      1955
Ord.  12-
41-55 27-  Accepting Longview Road.
      1955
Ord.  12-
51-55 27-  Accepting Longview Road.
      1955
Ord.  2-   Plat entitled “Amelia M. Falzaranas Subdivision No. 1 of part of original Royalton
3-56  13-  Township Lot No. 22,” for record purposes only.
      1956
Ord.  1-   Accepting Marianna Boulevard from Wallings to Louis Roads and Lenwood Road in
9-57  28-  Wallings Meadows Subdivision No. 2.
      1957
Ord.  6-
30-57 24-  Accepting Louis Road in Wallings Meadows Subdivision No. 2.
      1957
Ord.  7-
31-57 16-  Repeals Ord. 30-57.
      1957
Ord.  7-
35-57 16-  Accepting Louis Road in Wallings Meadows Subdivision No. 2.
      1957
Ord.  10-
44-57 28-  Accepting Hollylane, Heatherlane and Briarwood Drives.
      1957
Ord.  8-7- Plats of Falls Lane Estates Subdivision Nos. 1 and 2 for record purposes only.
30-58 1958
Ord.  9-   Plat of Sperli Built Homes Inc. Valley Park Subdivision No. 2, for record purposes
25-59 14-  only.
      1959
Ord.  10-
30-59 12-  Accepting Craig Lane and Lenwood Road.
      1959
Ord.  10-
31-59 12-  Accepting Louis Road in Wallings Meadows Subdivision No. 4.
      1959
Ord.  10-
33-59 26-  Accepting Valley Park Drive and Shady Lane in Valley Park
      1959
Ord.  10-  Accepting Wright Road, Lenwood Road and northerly half of Louis Road in Wallings
34-59 26-  Meadows Subdivision No. 3.
      1959
Ord.  1-   Accepting Diana Drive in the Ridgewood Lakes Improvement Co.’s Wallings Meadows
5-61  23-  Subdivision No. 4, as a public thoroughfare.
      1961
Ord.  3-7- Approves Millwood Hts. Subdivision Nos. 1 and 2 for street location.
22-61 1961
Res.  3-7- Plat of Leo E. Rattay, Trustee’s, Millwood Hts. Subdivision No. 1 for record
5-61A 1961 purposes only.
Ord.  5-   Plat of Leo E. Rattay, Trustee’s, and the Millwood Hts. Development Co.’s Millwood
22-62 15-  Hts. Subdivision No. 2 for record purposes only.
      1962
Res.  7-   Plat of Basilio Imbrigiotta’s Avery Road Subdivision No. 1 for record purposes
14-62 30-  only.
      1962
Res.  9-4- Plat of Zane R. Tollis Parkway Subdivision No. 1 for record purposes only.
17-62 1962
Ord.  9-4- Accepting Tollis Parkway as a public thoroughfare.
32-62 1962
Ord.  10-
40-62 1-   Plat of Eddie Homes, Tnc., for record purposes only.
      1962
Ord.  10-
42-62 1-   Plat of Charles M. Prell’s Subdivision for record purposes only.
      1962
Ord.  10-
43-62 1-   Accepting Prell Drive in Charles M. Prell’s Subdivision as a public thoroughfare.
      1962
Ord.  11-  Accepting Valley Park Drive and Glenn Oak Dr, in Sperli Built Homes, Inc.’s Valley
56-62 5-   Park Subdivision No. 2.
      1962
Ord.  3-
19-63 18-  Accepting Breckswood Oval and Millwood Drive South.
      1963
Ord.  5-6- Approving the plat of Brookpark Factory Sites, Inc., Sunnydale Estates Subdivision
26-63 1963 No. 2.
Ord.  9-3- Accepting Vera Drive
45-63 1963
Res.  9-3- Plat of the Stratford Land Co.’s Meadow Ridge Subdivision No. 3 for record
63-23 1963 purposes only.
Ord.  4-6- Plat of Avery Road Development Co., Inc.’s Avery Meadows Subdivision No. 1 and
12-64 1964 parts of Wolf Road and Avery Road.
Ord.  4-
7-64  20-  Plat of Mike Henko’s Bramblewood Subdivision for record purposes only.
      1964
Ord.  4-
14-64 20-  Accepting Russett Drive, Meadow Gateway and Ryeland Drive.
      1964
Res.  5-
64-7  18-  Preliminary plan of Williamsburg Homes, Inc. Meadow Ridge Subdivision No. 4.
      1964
Ord.  7-6- Plat of the Millwood Hts. Development Co.’s Millwood Hts. Subdivision No. 3 for
33-64 1964 record purposes only.
Ord.  10-  Plat of the Millwood Hts. Development Co.’s Millwood Hts. Subdivision No. 4 for
41-64 19-  record purposes only.
      1964
Ord.  1-4- Plat of R.G.R. Corp., Meadow Ridge Subdivision No. 4, for record purposes only.
50-64 1965
Ord.  8-
39-65 12-  Plat of Avery Meadows Subdivision No. 2 for record purposes only.
      1965
Ord.  11-
47-65 15-  Accepting Cranberry Ridge and Canterbury Lane.
      1965
Ord.  4-   Plat of the J. Falls Bldg. Co., Inc. Subdivision No. 5 (proposed) for record
10-66 18-  purposes only.
      1966
Ord.  6-6- Plat of Tollis Parkway Subdivision No. 2 for record purposes only.
19-66 1966
Ord.  3-   Plat of Zane Construction Co.’s Briarwood Subdivision No. 2 (proposed), for record
11-67 27-  purposes only.
      1967
Ord.  9-   Plat of Zane Construction Co.’s Briarwood Subdivision No. 3 and No. 4 (proposed),
52-67 18-  for record purposes only.
      1967
Res.  5-
68-20 27-  Briarwood Subdivision No. 3A, for record purposes only.
      1968
Ord.  6-   Plat of George Zane’s Briarwood Subdivision Nos. 4 and 4A for record purposes
40-69 25-  only.
      1969
Ord.  8-4- Plat of OMCO Bldg. Corp.’s Royal Industrial Park Subdivision for record purposes
44-69 1969 only.
Ord.  9-
57-69 22-  Plat of Durante and Abrams, Rustic Villa Estates, for record purposes only.
      1969
Ord.  5-
42-71 10-  Accepting Karen Lynne Drive, Jeffrey Allan Drive and part of Diana Drive.
      1971
Ord.  12-
86-71 16-  Plats of Subdivisions Nos. 3 and 4 on Tollis Parkway for record purposes only.
      1971
Ord.  9-
67-72 18-  Accepting Millwood Drive North and Broadmill Drive.
      1972
Ord.  1-2- Accepting Fox Hollow Drive, Wolf Road, Avery Road, Hunter’s Trail and Bear’s Den
98-72 1973 Lane.
Ord.  1-2-
100-  1973 Accepting Beaver Ridge Trail and Fox Hollow Drive.
72
Ord.  2-
6-73  20-  Accepting Boxberry Lane, North Hills Dr., Echo Lane and Briarwood Drive.
      1973
Ord.  2-
8-73  20-  Accepting Oaks Drive, Echo Lane and Boxberry Lane.
      1973
Ord.  2-
10-73 20-  Accepting Twin Oaks Drive.
      1973
Ord.  6-4- Accepting Falls Lane, Amelia Drive and Elsa Drive.
41-73 1973
Ord.  6-4- Accepting Falls Lane, Lydia Drive and Belle Drive.
43-73 1973
Ord.  6-4- Accepting Brecks-Wood Oval and Mill Road.
45-73 1973
Ord.  3-4- Accepting Ken-Mar Industrial Parkway.
22-74 1974
Ord.  6-   Plat of Briarwood Subdivision No. 2, Echo Lane Extension No. 1, for record
38-75 16-  purposes only.
      1975
Ord.  6-   Plat of Briarwood Subdivision No. 2, Boxberry Lane Extension No. 1, for record
39-75 16-  purposes only.
      1975
Ord.  6-
40-75 16-  Plat of Silvestro’s Subdivision for record purposes only.
      1975
Ord.  5-   Plat of Broad-Breck Development Corp.’s Wyatt Road Subdivision No. 2A, for record
53-77 23-  purposes only.
      1977
Ord.  10-
88-77 31-  Accepting the cul-de-sac on Shady Lane in Silvestro’s Subdivision.
      1977
Ord.  11-  Accepting West Ridge Drive in the Zane Construction Co.’s Briarwood Subdivision
86-77 21-  No. 4.
      1977
Ord.  2-6- Plat of Hub Valley Realty, Market Place Road, for record purposes only.
7-78  1978
Ord.  2-
10-78 21-  Accepting the Charles M. Prell, Jr. Subdivision for record purposes only.
      1978
Ord.  4-
15-78 17-  Accepting Briarwood Subdivision No. 5 for record purposes only.
      1978
Ord.  5-   Plat of Broad-Breck Development Corp.’s Wyatt Road Subdivision No. 3, for record
24-78 15-  purposes only.
      1978
Ord.  7-3- Accepting the Romito and Enoch Subdivision No. 1 for record purposes only.
18-78 1978
Ord.  8-   Plat of Hub Valley Realty, Market Place, for record purposes only. Repeals Ord. 7-
67-78 18-  78.
      1978
Ord.  10-  Plat of Broad-Breck Development Corp.’s proposed Wyatt Road Subdivision No. 4, for
71-78 2-   record purposes only.
      1978
Ord.  11-  Plat of Flair Corp.’s Quail Run Subdivision, Broadview Road, for record purposes
70-78 6-   only.
      1978
Ord.  2-
20-79 20-  Accepting Market Place Road.
      1979
Ord.  10-  Plat of Millview Major Subdivision submitted by Charles Novak for Permanent Parcel
90-79 1-   582-221-1 for record purposes only.
      1979
Ord.  8-1- Accepting Ashley Drive and Kenwood Drive in the Mill View Subdivision for record
39-83 1983 purposes only.
Ord.  8-
25-83 15-  Plat of Market Place West for record purposes only.
      1983
Ord.  8-
42-83 15-  Plat of Market Place West for record purposes only.
      1983
Ord.  11-
60-83 7-   Accepting Maclntosh Lane for record purposes only.
      1983
Ord.  5-7- Accepting Treeworth Park Blvd.
11-84 1984
Ord.  12-
93-84 17-  Accepting Phase I of Millview Subdivision for record purposes only.
      1984
Res.  5-
86-46 19-  Accepting Phase II of Mill View Subdivision for record purposes only.
      1986
Ord.  8-
85-86 18-  Accepting Eagle Valley Ct. for record purposes only.
      1986
Res.  3-9- Accepting Misty Oakes Subdivision for record purposes only.
87-23 1987
Res.  3-9- Accepting J.C. Development Co. Subdivision for record purposes only.
87-24 1987
Ord.  10-
130-  26-  Accepting Valley Park Estates Subdivision for record purposes only.
87    1987
Ord.  11-
127-  2-   Accepting Eagle Valley Court Subdivision.
87    1987
Ord.  2-
88-23 29-  Accepting Country Lakes Estates No. 1 Subdivision for record purposes only.
      1988
Ord.  3-7- Accepting Briarwood Subdivision No. 6 for record purposes only.
88-30 1988
Res.  1-
1-89  23-  Plat of MacIntosh Farms Subdivision One for record purposes only.
      1989
Res.  3-
30-89 27-  Plat of Phases III and IV of Country Lakes Subdivision for record purposes only.
      1989
Ord.  6-5- Accepting Seneca Blvd.
89-72 1989
Ord.  6-
89-80 19-  Accepting Tollis Parkway.
      1989
Ord.  7-
89-88 17-  Accepting part of Rich Hills Drive.
      1989
Res.  7-
52-89 17-  Plat of Whispering Winds Subdivision for record purposes only.
      1989
Ord.  7-
89-89 17-  Accepting Mark Drive.
      1989
Ord.  7-
89-91 17-  Accepting Antony Drive.
      1989
Res.  9-
64-89 11-  Accepting Creekside Reserve Subdivision for record purposes only.
      1989
Res.  2-
90-21 19-  Accepting Country Lakes Subdivision Phase VI for record purposes only.
      1990
Res.  3-5- Accepting Country Lakes Subdivision Phase V for record purposes only.
90-27 1990
Res.  5-
90-35 14-  Accepting Country Lake Estates Subdivision Phase VIA for record purposes only.
      1990
Res.  6-4- Accepting S. Hills Blvd.
90-41 1990
Res.  6-4- Accepting plat of the Homestead Development.
90-42 1990
Res.  6-4- Accepting plat of Hidden Meadow Estates.
90-43 1990
Res.  8-
90-55 20-  Accepting plat of Chippewa Pointe Subdivision.
      1990
Res.  2-
91-9  18-  Accepting plat of Postal Drive for record purposes only.
      1991
Res.  10-
91-76 21-  Accepting plat of Homestead Phase II for record purposes only.
      1991
Ord.  12-
101-  16-  Accepting Ashley Drive in the Millview Subdivision.
97    1991
Ord.  12-
102-  16-  Accepting a portion of Chestnut Blvd. in the Autumn Woods Subdivision.
91    1991
Ord.  12-
103-  16-  Accepting Kenwood Drive in the Millview Subdivision.
91    1991
Ord.  12-
104-  16-  Accepting a portion of Overlook Avenue in the Autumn Woods Subdivision.
91    1991
Ord.  12-
105-  16-  Accepting Rusnak Tr. in the Autumn Woods Subdivision.
91    1991
Res.  3-2- Accepting a revised plat of Michael’s Landing for record purposes only.
92-9  1992
Res.  3-2- Accepting a revised plat of Creekview Subdivision for record purposes only.
92-10 1992
Res.  3-
92-13 16-  Accepting a revised plat of Country Lakes Phase VII for record purposes only.
      1992
Res.  6-   Accepting revised plat for record purposes only with respect to the subdivision of
92-14 15-  property on the northwest corner of I-77 and S.R.82.
      1992
Res.  10-
92-66 5-   Accepting plat of Broadview Glens for record purposes only.
      1992
Res.  1-
93-7  18-  Accepting plat of Cherry Hill Estates for record purposes only.
      1993
Res.  3-
93-25 15-  Accepting plat of Creekview Village Subdivision for record purposes only.
      1993
Ord.  5-3- Accepting all streets in Phases I, II and IV of Country Lakes Subdivision.
49-93 1993
Res.  7-
93-   19-  Accepting plat of Canterbury Estates for record purposes only.
103   1993
Ord.  10-
105-  18-  Accepting all streets in the Whispering Winds Subdivision.
93    1993
Res.  1-
94-13 31-  Accepting plat of Canterbury Estates for record purposes only.
      1994
Res.  6-6- Accepting final plat of Creekside Subdivision Phases I, II and III for record
94-67 1994 purposes only.
Res.  8-
94-68 22-  Accepting a plat for subdivision and consolidation of parcels on Falls Lane.
      1994
Res.  11-  Accepting final plat of The Reserve at MacIntosh Farms, Phase I, for record
94-   21-  purposes only.
163   1994
Res.  11-
94-   21-  Accepting a plat of a portion of MacIntosh Lane North for record purposes only.
164   1994
Res.  12-
94-   19-  Accepting final plat of Windsor Woods, Phase I, for record purposes only.
171   1994
Res.  12-
94-   19-  Accepting final plat of Windsor Woods, Phase II, for record purposes only.
172   1994
Res.  1-8- Accepting final plat of the Villas at MacIntosh Farms, Group H, for record
96-3  1996 purposes only.
Res.  1-8- Accepting final plat of the Villas at MacIntosh Farms, Group K, for record
96-4  1996 purposes only.
Res.  1-8- Accepting final plat of the Reserve at MacIntosh Farms, Phase III, for record
96-5  1996 purposes only.
Res.  2-5- Accepting final plat of Windsor Woods, Phase I, for record purposes only.
96-20 1996
Res.  2-5- Accepting final plat of Windsor Woods, Phase II, for record purposes only.
96-21 1996
Ord.  8-
8-96  19-  Accepting all streets in the Homestead Subdivision, Phase II.
      1996
Ord.  2-
9-96  20-  Accepting all streets in the Michael Landing Subdivision.
      1996
Res.  9-
96-98 16-  Accepting final plat of Oakwood Subdivision for record purposes only.
      1996
Res.  11-  Accepting final plan of MacIntosh Farms, Phases IV and V, for record purposes
96-   4-   only.
106   1996
Res.  12-
96-   9-   Accepting final plat of MacIntosh Farms, Group J-1, for record purposes only.
113   1996
Res.  3-3- Accepting final plat of Town Centre Drive for record purposes only.
97-21 1997
Res.  4-7- Accepting final plat of the Villas at MacIntosh Farms, Group J-3, for record
97-27 1997 purposes only.
Res.  5-5- Accepting final plat of Whispering Winds II Subdivision for record purposes only.
97-34 1997
Res.  5-   Accepting revised final plat of Broadmoore Landings Subdivision, Phase II, for
97-43 19-  record purposes only.
      1997
Res.  6-
97-49 23-  Accepting final plat of Oakwood Subdivision, Phase II, for record purposes only.
      1997
Res.  6-
97-50 23-  Accepting final plat of MacIntosh Farms, Group I, for record purposes only.
      1997
Res.  7-   Accepting final plats of The Reserve Subdivision of MacIntosh Farms, Phases VI and
97-59 28-  VII, for record purposes only.
      1997
Res.  11-  Accepting final plat of the Villas of MacIntosh, Group J-2, for record purposes
97-   3-   only.
102   1997
Res.  12-
97-   15-  Accepting vacation plat of portion of Boulder Wood Drive for record purposes only.
114   1997
Res.  2-2- Accepting final plat of MacIntosh Farms, Group M, Phase I, for record purposes
98-19 1998 only.
Res.  3-
98-30 16-  Accepting final plat of Woodchip Drive Subdivision for record purposes only.
      1998
Res.  4-
98-37 20-  Amends Res.98-30.
      1998
Res.  4-
98-45 20-  Accepting final plat of Lazzaro Drive for record purposes only.
      1998
Res.  5-
98-53 18-  Accepting final plat of Town Centre for record purposes only.
      1998
Res.  5-   Accepting final plat of the Villas at MacIntosh Farms, Group L-1, for record
98-54 18-  purposes only.
      1998
Res.  7-   Accepting final plat of Petros Homes Subdivision of MacIntosh Farms, Section L-2,
98-79 27-  for record purposes only.
      1998
Res.  8-   Accepting final plat of The Reserve at MacIntosh Farms, Phase VIII, for record
98-89 24-  purposes only.
      1998
Res.  9-8- Accepting revised plat for the Reserve at MacIntosh Development, Phase VI, for
98-   1998 record purposes only.
121
Ord.  11-  Accepting Hampton’s Run, Fieldstone Court-Phase “K”, Winesap Drive-Phase “H-1”,
204-  2-   Creekside Trace/Thackery Court, and Cherry Hill Lane in the city.
98    1998
Res.  12-
98-   7-   Accepting final plat of Amberwood Court Subdivision for record purposes only.
142   1998
Res.  12-
98-   14-  Accepting final plat of Parkside Court Development for record purposes only.
144   1998
Res.  4-5- Accepting final plat for Group L-3 and L-4 of the MacIntosh Farms Subdivision for
99-26 1999 record purposes only.
Res.  6-7- Accepting final plat of P.P. Nos. 582-02-008 and 582-02-021, located at 3200 and
99-48 1999 3232 E. Sprague Road, for record purposes only.
Res.  6-7- Accepting final plat of P.P. No. 585-16-002, located at 10446 Broadview Road, for
99-49 1999 record purposes only.
Res.  6-7- Accepting final plat of P.P. No. 584-19-004 for record purposes only.
99-50 1999
Res.  8-
99-60 23-  Accepting final plat of Pelican Post/Scottsdale Drive for record purposes only.
      1999
Res.  9-7- Accepting final plat of Forestbrook Estates for record purposes only.
99-65 1999
Res.  9-   Accepting final plat of property located at the northeast corner of the
99-67 20-  intersection of Broadview Road and E. Royalton Road for record purposes only.
      1999
Res.  12-  Accepting final plat of P.P. No. 581-33-007, located on Harris Road, for record
99-82 20-  purposes only.
      1999
Res.  12-  Accepting final plat of Forestbrook Estates Subdivision, Phase II, for record
99-83 20-  purposes only.
      1999
Res.  12-
99-84 20-  Accepting final plat of South Hills III Development for record purposes only.
      1999
Res.  2-7- Accepting final plat of a shopping plaza at the intersection of Broadview Road and
00-14 2000 Royalton Road for record purposes only.
Res.  2-7- Accepting final plat of Scottsdale Subdivision, Phase I, for record purposes only.
00-15 2000
Res.  2-7- Accepting final plat of Summerwood Subdivision for record purposes only.
00-16 2000
Res.  2-5- Accepting the final plat for Scottsdale Subdivision, Phase II.
01-10 2001
Res.  2-5- Accepting the final plat for a lot split/consolidation with respect to permanent
01-11 2001 parcel numbers 584-03-054 and 584-03-055.
Ord.  3-5- Dedicating portions of land owned by the city at or near the intersection of
37-01 2001 Royalton Road and Broadview Road for public highway, street and avenue purposes.
Res.  3-
01-14 19-  Accepting the final plat for Timber Brook Estates Subdivision.
      2001
Res.  3-   Accepting the final plat for a lot split/consolidation with respect to permanent
01-15 19-  parcel numbers 585-17-001 and 585-17-004.
      2001
Ord.  4-
49-01 16-  Accepting all streets in the Oakwood Subdivisions Nos. 1 and 2.
      2001
Res.  6-   Accepting the final plat for a lot split/consolidation with respect to permanent
01-29 18-  parcel numbers 582-21-005, 582-21-006, 582-21-007, 582-21-008 and 582-21-017.
      2001
Res.  7-
01-45 16-  Accepting the final plat for New Hampton Subdivision, Phase I.
      2001
Res.  7-
01-46 16-  Accepting the final plat for Glen Abbey Subdivision, Phase I.
      2001
Res.  10-
01-86 15-  Accepting the final plat for Hawks Cove Subdivision.
      2001
Res.  10-
01-87 15-  Accepting the final plat for Sutton Woods Subdivision, Phase I.
      2001
Res.  3-
02-23 18-  Accepting the final plat for Silver Ridge Subdivision.
      2002
Res.  4-
02-31 15-  Accepting the revised final plat for Glen Abbey Subdivision, Phase IB.
      2002
Res.  5-6- Accepting the final plat for Parkview Meadows Subdivision.
02-36 2002
Res.  7-
02-55 22-  Accepting the final plat for New Hampton Subdivision, Phase II.
      2002
Res.  8-   Accepting the final plat for a lot split with respect to Permanent Parcel Numbers
02-59 19-  583-26-016 and 283-26-021.
      2002
Res.  8-
02-60 19-  Accepting the final plat for Sutton Woods Subdivision, Phase II.
      2002
Res.  9-3- Accepting the final plat for New Hampton Subdivision, Phase III.
02-68 2002
Res.  9-3- Accepting the final plat for a lot split with respect to Permanent Parcel Number
02-69 2002 583-24-005.
Res.  10-
02-78 7-   Accepting the final plat for New Hampton Subdivision, Phase IV.
      2002
Res.  1-6- Accepting the final plat for New Hampton Subdivision, Phase V.
03-04 2003
Res.  1-
03-02 21-  Accepting the final plat for the Wilshire Subdivision, Phase IIA.
      2003
Res.  1-
03-03 21-  Accepting the final plat for the Wilshire Subdivision, Phase IIB.
      2003
Res.  2-3- Accepting the final plat for New Hampton Subdivision, Phase VI.
03-05 2003
Ord.  3-1- Accepting all streets in the New Hampton Subdivision Phase I.
29-04 2003
Res.  6-
03-29 16-  Accepting the final plat for New Hampton Subdivision, Phase VII.
      2003
Res.  6-
03-30 16-  Accepting the final plat for Barnsley Way Subdivision, Phase II.
      2003
Res.  7-
03-38 21-  Accepting the final plat for New Hampton Subdivision, Phase VIII.
      2003
Res.  7-
03-39 21-  Accepting the final plat for Wedgewood Estates Subdivision.
      2003
Res.  7-   Accepting the final plat for a lot split and consolidation of Wedgewood Estates
03-40 21-  Subdivision Permanent Parcel Nos. 584-20-001 and 584-20-002 submitted by Woodhill
      2003 Properties, Inc.
Res.  9-
03-55 15-  Accepting the final plat for New Hampton Subdivision, Phase IX.
      2003
Res.  9-
03-56 15-  Accepting the final plat for New Hampton Subdivision, Phase X.
      2003
Res.  10-
03-60 6-   Accepting the final plat for Sutton Woods Subdivision, Phase III.
      2003
Res.  10-
03-61 6-   Accepting the final plat for Sutton Woods Subdivision, Phase IV.
      2003
Res.  10-  Approving a plat vacating 4,971 sq. ft. of Permanent Parcel No. 585-12-001 located
03-62 6-   at Barnsley Way in MacIntosh Farms.
      2003
Res.  2-2- Accepting the final plat for Barnsley Way at Macintosh Farms, Phase III
04-07 2004 Subdivision.
Res.  3-
04-19 15-  Accepting the final plat for New Hampton Phase XI Subdivision.
      2004
Res.  4-5- Accepting the final plat for Harris Road and Jenna Drive.
04-26 2004
Res.  7-   Accepting the final plat for Wiltshire Phase IIIA and IIIB, submitted by Golf
04-51 19-  Course Properties, LLC.
      2004
Res.  12-
04-85 6-   Approving the dedication plat for Heritage Corporate Drive.
      2004
Res.  2-   Accepting the final plat for the Brookside Crossings Subdivision, submitted by
05-11 22-  Howard E. Seeley & Associates.
      2005
Res.  3-7- Accepting the final plat for the Highland Development Subdivision, submitted by
05-12 2005 Elewski and Associates.
Res.  3-   Accepting the final plat for Avery Road, submitted by William and Kathleen
05-16 21-  Koteles.
      2005
Res.  6-6- Accepting the final plat for Wallings Road, submitted by Mike Mural.
05-34 2005
Res.  10-  Accepting the final plat for the Karen Lynne Subdivision, submitted by Dalia
05-45 3-   Consultants.
      2005
Res.  8-   Accepting the final plat for Wiltshire Phase IVA and VA, submitted by Golf Course
06-34 21-  Properties, LLC.
      2006
Res.  7-
06-35 17-  Accepting the final plat for Edgerton Road submitted by Theodore Bober.
      2006
Res.  9-5- Accepting the final plat for Town Central Drive submitted by Neff and Associates.
06-41 2006
Res.  10-  Accepting the vacation/dedication plat for Market Place submitted by Donald J.
06-55 16-  Bohning and Associates.
      2006
Ord.  12-
177-  18-  Accepting all streets in the New Hampton Subdivision Phase II for public use.
06    2006
Ord.  12-
178-  18-  Accepting all streets in the New Hampton Subdivision Phase III for public use.
06    2006
Ord.  12-
179-  18-  Accepting all streets in the New Hampton Subdivision Phase IV for public use.
06    2006
Ord.  12-
180-  18-  Accepting all streets in the New Hampton Subdivision Phase V for public use.
06    2006
Res.  1-2- Accepting the final plat for 8621 Avery Road submitted by Greg Macasek.
07-01 2007
Res.  1-
07-02 16-  Repealing Res. 07-01.
      2007
Res.  1-   Accepting the final plat for Permanent Parcel No. 581-32-002, submitted by Jeffrey
07-03 16-  Macasek.
      2007
Res.  2-5- Accepting the final plat for Permanent Parcel No. 584-18-008 submitted by Andrew
07-09 2007 and Kathryn Kayjack.
Res.  4-   Accepting the final plat for Permanent Parcel Nos. 582-07-13, 582-07-14, 582-07-15
07-17 16-  and 582-07-29 on East Wallings Road submitted by David Hamilton.
      2007
Ord.  6-4- Accepting all streets in Summerwood Development for public use.
74-07 2007
Res.  7-   Accepting the final plat for Permanent Parcel Nos. 585-06-009 and 585-06-012
07-37 16-  submitted by Katherine Burlij.
      2007
Res.  11-  Accepting the final plat for Permanent Parcel Nos. 583-04-024, 583-04-003 and 583-
07-54 5-   04-011 submitted by Sam Petros.
      2007
Ord.  1-5- Accepting all streets in the Creekview Village Subdivision for public use.
01-09 2009
Ord.  3-2- Accepting all streets in the New Hampton Subdivision Phase VI for public use.
02-09 2009
Ord.  3-2- Accepting all streets in the New Hampton Subdivision Phase VII for public use.
03-09 2009
Ord.  3-2- Accepting all streets in the New Hampton Subdivision Phase VIII for public use.
04-09 2009
Ord.  3-2- Accepting all streets in the New Hampton Subdivision Phase IX for public use.
05-09 2009
Ord.  3-2- Accepting all streets in the New Hampton Subdivision Phase X for public use.
06-09 2009
Ord.  3-2- Accepting all streets in the New Hampton Subdivision Phase XI for public use.
07-09 2009
Res.  6-1- Accepting the final plat for Wiltshire Phase IV, submitted by Donald G. Bohning &
09-38 2009 Associates.
Ord.  2-1- Accepting all streets in the Scottsdale Subdivision Phase I.
01-10 2010
Ord.  2-1- Accepting all streets in the Scottsdale Subdivision Phase II.
02-10 2010
Ord.  3-
37-10 15-  Accepting all streets in the Woods of Broadview Heights Subdivision.
      2010
Ord.  6-
89-10 21-  Accepting all streets in the Sutton Woods Subdivision Phase I.
      2010
Ord.  6-
90-10 21-  Accepting all streets in the Sutton Woods Subdivision Phase II.
      2010
Ord.  6-
91-10 21-  Accepting all streets in the Sutton Woods Subdivision Phase III.
      2010
Ord.  6-
92-10 21-  Accepting all streets in the Sutton Woods Subdivision Phase IV.
      2010
Ord.  8-   Accepting all streets in the Glenn Abbey Golf Course Community Subdivision Phase
83-10 23-  IA.
      2010
Ord.  8-   Accepting all streets in the Glenn Abbey Golf Course Community Subdivision Phase
84-10 23-  IB.
      2010
Ord.  8-   Accepting all streets in the Wiltshire Golf Course Community Subdivision Phase
85-10 23-  IIA.
      2010
Ord.  8-   Accepting all streets in the Wiltshire Golf Course Community Subdivision Phase
86-10 23-  IIB.
      2010
Ord.  8-   Accepting all streets in the Wiltshire Golf Course Community Subdivision Phase
87-10 23-  IIIA.
      2010
Ord.  8-   Accepting all streets in the Wiltshire Golf Course Community Subdivision Phase
88-10 23-  IIIB.
      2010
Ord.  9-7-
111-  2010 Accepting all streets in the Brookside Crossing Subdivision.
10
Ord.  9-7-
112-  2010 Accepting all streets in the Hawk’s Cove Subdivision.
10
Ord.  9-7-
113-  2010 Accepting all streets in the Hidden Hollow Subdivision.
10
Ord.  11-
144-  7-   Accepting all streets in the Parkview Meadow Subdivision.
11    2011
Ord.  12-
161-  19-  Accepting all streets in the Barnsley Way Subdivision, Phase II.
11    2011
Ord.  12-
162-  19-  Accepting all streets in the Barnsley Way Subdivision, Phase III.
11    2011
Ord.  2-
04-12 21-  Accepting all streets in the Barnsley Way Subdivision, Phase I.
      2012
Res.  5-7- Accepting the final plat for the Avery Meadows Subdivision.
12-31 2012
Res.  9-   Accepting the final plat of Permanent Parcel No. 581-04-032, submitted by the
13-39 16-  Briarwood Development Corp.
      2013
Res.  11-  Accepting the final plat for Wiltshire Phase V-B, submitted by Golf Course
13-49 4-   Properties, LLC.
      2013
Ord.  12-  Accepting Tanhallow Trail, Foxglove Lane, Hickory Lane, Deerhaven Lane and
48-14 1-   Weatherwood Lane for public use.
      2014
Res.  12-  Accepting the of the vacation and consolidation of certain parcels on Oakbrooke
14-   15-  Drive.
194   2014
Res.  2-   Accepting the final plat for Wiltshire Golf Course Community Phases IVA and VA,
15-14 16-  submitted by Petros Homes.
      2015
Ord.  9-
33-   23-  Accepting all streets in the Braemar Farms Subdivision.
2019  2019
Ord.  9-
34-   23-  Accepting all streets in the Town Centre Village.
2019  2019
Res.  9-   Accepting the final plat for the Edgerton Commons Subdivision for record purposes
2019- 23-  only.
143   2019
41-   11-
2019  4-   Accepting all streets in the Wiltshire Golf Course Community Subdivision Phase 4A.
      2019
42-   11-
2019  4-   Accepting all streets in the Wiltshire Golf Course Community Subdivision Phase 4B.
      2019
43-   11-
2019  4-   Accepting all streets in the Wiltshire Golf Course Community Subdivision Phase 5B.
      2019
          
 
TABLE V:  ACQUISITION AND DISPOSAL OF REAL PROPERTY
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Description
Ord.  10-
314   8-   Authorizing sale of 2 wooden frame buildings belonging to the city.
      1951
Ord.  9-   Authorizing the purchase of a parcel of land on Royalwood Road from Manfred
31-55 26-  A. and Edith V. Hughes.
      1955
Ord.  11-  Authorizing the purchase of a parcel of land on Broadview Road from Garrett
40-55 28-  and Mary Hansen.
      1955
Ord.  12-  Authorizing the purchase of a parcel of land on Broadview Road from John W.
43-55 27-  and Viola A. Smith.
      1955
Ord.  2-   Authorizing the purchase of a site for a service garage and a site for
14-57 11-  recreational purposes from Edward T. and Katherine M. Saxer.
      1957
Ord.  8-   Authorizes purchase of land owned by Anne and Frank Vitt and Audrey and
33-66 10-  Robert Vitt, adjacent to city-owned property.
      1966
Ord.  1-   Authorizes purchase of land owned by Anne and Frank Vitt adjacent to city-
3-67  16-  owned land.
      1967
Ord.  12-  Accepting transfer of the Avery Road Development Company’s Avery Meadows
81-72 4-   Sewage Treatment Plant to the city.
      1972
Ord.  1-2- Accepting transfer of the Zane Construction Company’s Briarwood Subdivision
87-72 1973 Sewage Treatment Plant to the city.
Ord.  4-2- Accepting an easement from Broad-Breck Development Corp. for sewers in Wyatt
19-79 1979 Road Subdivision No. 4.
Res.  6-1- Accepting the Broadview Heights Soccer Field Concession and Restroom
81-28 1981 Facilities.
Ord.  4-
19-83 18-  Authorizes the conveyance of part of Skyline Drive to Minor H. George.
      1983
Ord.  12-  Appropriating property for the installation of sanitary sewers under the
87-83 19-  U.S.E.P.A. Grant.
      1983
Ord.  12-  Appropriating property for the installation of sanitary sewers under the
88-83 19-  U.S.E.P.A. Grant.
      1983
Ord.  12-  Appropriating property for the installation of sanitary sewers under the
89-83 19-  U.S.E.P.A. Grant.
      1983
Ord.  12-  Appropriating property for the installation of sanitary sewers under the
90-83 19-  U.S.E.P.A. Grant.
      1983
Ord.  12-  Appropriating property for the installation of sanitary sewers under the
91-83 19-  U.S.E.P.A. Grant.
      1983
Ord.  12-  Appropriating property for the installation of sanitary sewers under the
92-83 19-  U.S.E.P.A. Grant.
      1983
Ord.  12-  Appropriating property for the installation of sanitary sewers under the
93-83 19-  U.S.E.P.A. Grant.
      1983
Ord.  12-  Appropriating property for the installation of sanitary sewers under the
94-83 19-  U.S.E.P.A. Grant.
      1983
Ord.  12-  Appropriating property for the installation of sanitary sewers under the
95-83 19-  U.S.E.P.A. Grant.
      1983
Ord.  12-  Appropriating property for the installation of sanitary sewers under the
96-83 19-  U.S.E.P.A. Grant.
      1983
Ord.  12-  Appropriating property for the installation of sanitary sewers under the
97-83 19-  U.S.E.P.A. Grant.
      1983
Ord.  12-  Appropriating property for the installation of sanitary sewers under the
98-83 19-  U.S.E.P.A. Grant.
      1983
Ord.  12-  Appropriating property for the installation of sanitary sewers under the
100-  19-  U.S.E.P.A. Grant.
83    1983
Ord.  12-  Appropriating property for the installation of sanitary sewers under the
99-83 28-  U.S.E.P.A. Grant.
      1983
Ord.  12-  Appropriating property for the installation of sanitary sewers under the
103-  19-  U.S.E.P.A. Grant.
83    1983
Ord.  12-  Appropriating property for the installation of sanitary sewers under the
104-  19-  U.S.E.P.A. Grant.
83    1983
Ord.  12-  Appropriating property for the installation of sanitary sewers under the
118-  28-  U.S.E.P.A. Grant.
83    1983
Ord.  12-  Appropriating property for the installation of sanitary sewers under the
119-  28-  U.S.E.P.A. Grant.
83    1983
Ord.  1-4- Appropriating property for the installation of sanitary sewers under the
101-  1984 U.S.E.P.A. Grant.
83
Ord.  1-4- Appropriating property for the installation of sanitary sewers under the
102-  1984 U.S.E.P.A. Grant.
83
Ord.  10-  Appropriating fee simple interest in and to property owned by Charles E. and
108-  6-   Veronica Grealis for recreational facilities.
86    1986
Ord.  12-  Authorizing purchase of property on Broadview Road owned by Charles E. and
1-12- 1-   Veronica Grealis.
86    1986
Ord.  10-  Authorizing agreement with Park View Federal Savings and Loan Association for
89-   16-  purchase of property on Elsa Drive.
129   1989
Ord.  5-   Authorizing agreement with Broadview Living, Inc., for purchase of property
55-93 10-  on the southeast corner of Broadview and Oakes Roads.
      1993
Ord.  9-7- Authorizing addendum to agreement with Broadview Living, Inc., for
88-93 1993 acquisition of lands at the intersection of Oakes and Broadview Roads.
Ord.  2-7- Appropriating property owned by Ronald and Shirley Dimmock for improvement of
12-94 1994 Royalwood Road.
Ord.  2-7- Appropriating property owned by Kenneth Simon and Barbara Pawlik for
13-94 1994 improvement of Royalwood Road.
Ord.  2-7- Appropriating property owned by Brian and Helen Dunlap for improvement of
14-94 1994 Royalwood Road.
Ord.  2-7- Appropriating property owned by Chanine Tannous for improvement of Royalwood
15-94 1994 Road.
Ord.  7-   Authorizing agreement with Jim Roth for sale and purchase of 1160 Royalwood
88-94 18-  Road.
      1994
Ord.  8-   Authorizing agreement with Greg Macasek for purchase of property behind 8621
123-  21-  Broadview Road.
95    1995
Ord.  3-4- Authorizing agreement with Greg Macasek for purchase of property behind 8621
12-96 1996 Broadview Road. Repeals Ord. 123-95.
Ord.  4-   Authorizing agreement with Jerry Mitchell for purchase of Eagle Valley Health
42-96 29-  Club.
      1996
Ord.  5-
59-96 20-  Amends Ord. 42-96.
      1996
Ord.  9-9- Authorizing agreement with the state for the purchase of property known as
95-96 1996 the Broadview Developmental Center Property. Repeals Ords. 55-93 and 88-93.
Ord.  1-5- Amends Ord. 95-96.
4-98  1998
Ord.  6-   Authorizes option agreement and PCS site agreement with Sprint Com, Inc., for
59-98 15-  lease of city property at the Broadview Center, for the installation of a
      1998 telecommunications tower, for five years.
Ord.  12-  Authorizes agreement with R. Kasarcik for the purchase of real property
243-  21-  located at 9259 Broadview Road (former BP Oil Service Station).
98    1998
Ord.  4-3- Authorizes agreement with Innovative Contractors & Building Services, Inc.,
58-00 2000 for purchase of real property located on Amelia Drive, being P.P. No. 584-01-
           022.
Res.  5-1- Authorizes request for proposals for land acquisition for a right-of-way in
00-45 2000 connection with the widening of E. and W. Royalton Road.
Ord.  6-   Authorizes agreement with GPD Associates for the acquisition of land
113-  26-  necessary for the widening of Royalton Road.
00    2000
Ord.  10-  Appropriating real property owned by Dominic Del Corpo, a.k.a. Domenic Del
137-  29-  Corpo, for the improvement of Royalton Road (S.R. 82) and Broadview Road.
01    2001
Ord.  10-  Appropriating real property owned by Dominic Del Corpo, a.k.a. Domenic Del
138-  29-  Corpo, Angela M. Bellucci, Loretta Bellucci and Joanne Milia for the
01    2001 improvement of Royalton Road (S.R. 82) and Broadview Road.
Ord.  10-  Appropriating real property owned by Antonio Denigris for the improvement of
139-  29-  Royalton Road (S.R. 82) and Broadview Road.
01    2001
Ord.  10-  Appropriating real property owned by Landspan Corporation, c/o Domonic Perry,
140-  29-  Statutory Agent, for the improvement of Royalton Road (S.R. 82) and Broadview
01    2001 Road.
Ord.  10-  Appropriating real property owned by C.C. Mitchell Retail, Limited, an Ohio
141-  29-  Limited Liability Company, c/o Jerome Mitchell and James M. Mitchell, for the
01    2001 improvement of Royalton Road (S.R. 82) and Broadview Road.
Ord.  10-  Appropriating real property owned by Carl and Arline Orlecki for the
142-  29-  improvement of Royalton Road (S.R. 82) and Broadview Road.
01    2001
Ord.  10-  Appropriating real property owned by Stoney Run, an Ohio limited partnership,
143-  29-  Willis B. Boyer Jr., general partner, for the improvement of Royalton Road
01    2001 (S.R. 82) and Broadview Road.
Ord.  11-  Purchasing a parcel of land, known as being part of Original Brecksville
143-  15-  Township Lot 30, for the Old Royalton Road Improvement Project.
04    2004
Res.  1-7- Accepting the donation of a structure to the Fire Department.
08-01 2008
Ord.  8-
120-  18-  Accepting the grant of land from Georgia Gigliotti.
08    2008
Ord.  4-   Purchasing land at the northeast corner of the Wallings Road and Richard Road
52-10 19-  intersection.
      2010
Ord.  9-   Accepting Parcel 582-05-019, purchased at tax sale held by the Cuyahoga
122-  20-  County Treasurer.
10    2010
Ord.  12-
162-  29-  Authorizing the purchase of real estate located at 8161 Broadview Road.
10    2010
Ord.  12-
163-  29-  Authorizing the purchase of real estate located at 8181 Avery Road.
10    2010
Ord.  7-   Authorizing the purchase of real estate located at 1803 West Royalton Road,
38-14 14-  and otherwise known as Permanent Parcel Nos. 584-14-008 and 584-14-009.
      2014
Ord.  8-
19-15 31-  Accepting the donation of land from the Briarwood Development Corporation.
      2015
Res.  12-  Authorizing the purchase of real estate from Victoria Milano for the Route 82
2017- 11-  Widening Project.
107   2017
Res.  12-  Authorizing the purchase of real estate from Daniel Lesczynski et al. for the
2017- 11-  Route 82 Widening Project.
108   2017
Res.  12-  Authorizing the purchase of real estate from Dusan Vodopivec for the Route 82
2017- 11-  Widening Project.
109   2017
Res.  1-   Authorizing the purchase of real estate from Margaret Werner for the Route 82
2018- 16-  Widening Project.
09    2018
Res.  3-5- Authorizing purchase of real property from HCRI Broadview, Inc. for the Route
2018- 2018 82 Widening Project.
33
Res.  3-5- Authorizing purchase of real property from Pines Real Estate Investment,
2018- 2018 L.L.C. for the Route 82 Widening Project.
34
Res.  3-   Appropriating property located at 2861 Royalton Road (Parcel 040 WD & T) for
2018- 26-  the Route 82 Widening Project.
43    2018
Ord.  4-2- Appropriating property located at 2861 Royalton Road (Parcel 040 WD & T) for
09-   2018 the Route 82 Widening Project.
2018
Res.  4-2- Purchase of real property from OMCO Building Corporation for the Route 82
2018- 2018 Widening Project.
49
Res.  4-2- Purchase of real property from Wayne A. Grumney and Karen Grumney for the
2018- 2018 Route 82 Widening Project.
50
Res.  4-2- Purchase of real property from Daniel Stanzeski and Jamie Stanzeski for the
2018- 2018 Route 82 Widening Project.
51
Res.  4-2- Purchase of real property from Frank L. Boulton, Mardell J. Boulton and Megan
2018- 2018 Persuric for the Route 82 Widening Project.
52
Res.  4-2- Authorizing purchase of real property from Donna M. Cancilliere for the Route
2018- 2018 82 Widening Project.
53
Res.  4-   Authorizing purchase of real property from Julius J. and Gertrude M. Kozma
2018- 23-  for the Route 82 Widening Project.
59    2018
Res.  5-7- Authorizing purchase of real property from Rumpke & Rumpke, LLC for the Route
2018- 2018 82 Widening Project.
72
Res.  5-7- Authorizing purchase of real property from Dennis Insurance for the Route 82
2018- 2018 Widening Project.
73
Res.  6-4- Authorizing purchase of real property from Justin J. Abraham and Danielle M.
2018- 2018 Abraham for the Route 82 Widening Project.
90
Res.  6-4- Authorizing purchase of real property from Marymount Hospital, Inc. for the
2018- 2018 Route 82 Widening Project.
91
Res.  6-   Authorizing purchase of real property from Donald C. Lastoria and Kathleen A.
2018- 18-  Lastoria for the Route 82 Widening Project.
98    2018
Res.  8-   Authorizing purchase of wetlands mitigation from Stream + Wetlands Foundation
2018- 27-  for the CUY-82-10.17 for the Route 82 Widening Project.
114   2018
Res.  8-   Authorizing purchase of real property from Andrew M. Busher for the Route 82
2018- 27-  Widening Project.
127   2018
Res.  8-   Authorizing purchase of real property from Daniel W. Gembus for the Route 82
2018- 27-  Widening Project.
128   2018
Res.  8-   Authorizing purchase of real property from Joseph Higgins for the Route 82
2018- 27-  Widening Project.
129   2018
Res.  8-   Authorizing purchase of real property from John M. Klipfell and Monica O.
2018- 27-  Parrish for the Route 82 Widening Project.
130   2018
Res.  8-   Authorizing purchase of real property from Mark McGroarty and Terese
2018- 27-  McGroarty for the Route 82 Widening Project.
131   2018
Res.  8-   Authorizing purchase of real property from Walter S. Pavluk, Sr. and Savina
2018- 27-  Pavluk for the Route 82 Widening Project.
132   2018
Res.  8-   Authorizing purchase of real property from Michael Sandy for the Route 82
2018- 27-  Widening Project.
133   2018
Res.  8-   Authorizing purchase of real property from John M. Virzi, Trustee of the
2018- 27-  Virzi Family Keystone Trust for the Route 82 Widening Project.
134   2018
Res.  8-   Authorizing purchase of real property from All-Hellers Realty Co., Ltd. for
2018- 27-  the Route 82 Widening Project.
135   2018
Res.  9-4- Appropriating property located at 1712 East Royalton Road (Parcel 20 WD & T)
2018- 2018 for the Route 82 Widening Project.
138
Res.  9-4- Appropriating property located at 3505 East Royalton Road (Parcel 063 WD, A 
2018- 2018 & T) for the Route 82 Widening Project.
139
Res.  9-4- Appropriating property located at 2730 East Royalton Road (Parcel 35 WDV & T)
2018- 2018 for the Route 82 Widening Project.
141
Res.  9-
2018- 17-  Accepting donation of land from Isomer Broadview Heights, LLC.
142   2018
Res.  9-   Authorizing purchase of real property from Ali Kanawati for the Route 82
2018- 17-  Widening Project.
144   2018
Res.  9-   Authorizing purchase of real property from James M. Muha and Leslie A. Muha
2018- 17-  for the Route 82 Widening Project.
145   2018
Res.  9-   Authorizing purchase of real property from Shirley Paulovcin for the Route 82
2018- 17-  Widening Project.
146   2018
Res.  9-   Authorizing purchase of real property from Richard C. Seminsky for the Route
2018- 17-  82 Widening Project.
147   2018
Res.  9-   Authorizing purchase of real property from Anthony Slyman for the Route 82
2018- 17-  Widening Project.
148   2018
Res.  9-   Authorizing purchase of real property from Kent A. Stephens for the Route 82
2018- 17-  Widening Project.
149   2018
Res.  9-   Authorizing purchase of real property from Douglas J. Trent for the Route 82
2018- 17-  Widening Project.
150   2018
Res.  9-   Authorizing purchase of real property from Jose Figueroa, Orlando Figueroa,
2018- 17-  Karen Beth Papotta and Brittany Figueroa for the Route 82 Widening Project.
153   2018
Res.  9-   Authorizing purchase of real property from Analiza Hatcher and Eric Hatcher
2018- 17-  for the Route 82 Widening Project.
154   2018
Ord.  9-   Appropriating property located at 1712 Royalton Road (Parcel 20 WD & T) owned
29-   17-  by Sandra and James Cipriani for the Route 82 Widening Project.
2018  2018
Ord.  9-   Appropriating property located at 2730 East Royalton Road (Parcel 35 WD, V &
30-   17-  T) owned by Andrew Pace for the Route 82 Widening Project.
2018  2018
Ord.  9-   Appropriating property located at 3505 East Royalton Road (Parcel 60 WD, A &
31-   17-  T) owned by the Atrium 3505, LLC for the Route 82 Widening Project.
2018  2018
Res.  10-  Authorizing purchase of real property from Jose Figueroa, Orlando Figueroa,
2018- 1-   Karen Beth Papotta and Brittany Figueroa for the Route 82 Widening Project.
158   2018
Res.  10-  Authorizing purchase of real property from Kimberly Londrico for the Route 82
2018- 1-   Widening Project.
161   2018
Res.  10-  Authorizing purchase of real property from Mandeline L. Strzalka for the
2018- 1-   Route 82 Widening Project.
162   2018
Res.  10-  Authorizing purchase of real property from Daniel S. Albrigo for the Route 82
2018- 15-  Widening Project.
169   2018
Res.  10-  Authorizing purchase of real property from Vito Colonna Trust for the Route
2018- 15-  82 Widening Project.
170   2018
Res.  11-  Appropriating property located at 1600 East Royalton Road (Parcel 19 WD & T)
2018- 5-   for the Route 82 Widening Project.
181   2018
Res.  11-  Appropriating property located at 2876 East Royalton Road (Parcel 041 WDV &
2018- 5-   T) for the Route 82 Widening Project.
182   2018
Res.  11-  Appropriating property located at 4100 East Royalton Road (Parcel 073 WD, WDV
2018- 5-   & T) for the Route 82 Widening Project.
183   2018
Res.  11-  Appropriating property located at 1210 East Royalton Road (Parcel 015 WD & T)
2018- 5-   for the Route 82 Widening Project.
186   2018
Res.  11-  Appropriating property located at 1345 East Royalton Road (Parcel 016 WD & T)
2018- 5-   for the Route 82 Widening Project.
187   2018
Res.  11-  Appropriating property located at 2525 East Royalton Road (Parcel 031 WD &
2018- 5-   T1, T2 & T3) for the Route 82 Widening Project.
188   2018
Res.  11-  Appropriating property located at 3201 East Royalton Road (Parcel 050 WD1,
2018- 5-   WD2, T1 & T2) for the Route 82 Widening Project.
189   2018
Res.  11-  Appropriating property located at 3301 East Royalton Road (Parcel 054 WD & T1
2018- 5-   & T2) for the Route 82 Widening Project.
190   2018
Res.  11-  Appropriating vacant land on East Royalton Road (Parcel 057 WD & T) for the
2018- 5-   Route 82 Widening Project.
194   2018
Ord.  11-  Appropriating property located at 1345 East Royalton Road (Parcel 061 WD & T)
50-   19-  owned by 82A, LLC for the Route 82 Widening Project.
2018  2018
Ord.  11-  Appropriating property located at 1600 East Royalton Road (Parcel 19 WD & T)
51-   19-  owned by Patacca Properties, LLC for the Route 82 Widening Project.
2018  2018
Ord.  11-  Appropriating property located at 2525 East Royalton Road (Parcel 031 WD &
52-   19-  T1, T2 & T3) owned by Roytlton 2525 Ltd. for the Route 82 Widening Project.
2018  2018
Ord.  11-  Appropriating property located at 2876 East Royalton Road (Parcel 041 WDT &
53-   19-  T) owned by Danielle and Benjamin Taylor for the Route 82 Widening Project.
2018  2018
Ord.  11-  Appropriating property located at 3201 East Royalton Road (Parcel 50 WD1,
54-   19-  WD2, T1 & T2) owned by Route 82, Ltd. for the Route 82 Widening Project.
2018  2018
Ord.  11-  Appropriating property located at 3301 East Royalton Road (Parcel 054 WD & T1
55-   19-  & T2) owned by All Realty, II, Ltd., for the Route 82 Widening Project.
2018  2018
Ord.  11-  Appropriating property located at 3748 East Royalton Road (Parcel 062 T)
56-   19-  owned by William and Sylvia Tayfel, as trustees of the Tayfel Trust for the
2018  2018 Route 82 Widening Project.
Ord.  11-  Appropriating property located at 3810 East Royalton Road (Parcel 065 T)
57-   19-  owned by Judith Rydel for the Route 82 Widening Project.
2018  2018
Ord.  11-  Appropriating property located at 3872 East Royalton Road (Parcel 066 T)
58-   19-  owned by Michael Chalmers and Lesley Tayfel for the Route 82 Widening
2018  2018 Project.
Ord.  11-  Appropriating property located at 4100 East Royalton Road (Parcel 073 WD, WDV
59-   19-  & T) owned by Diane Derfance for the Route 82 Widening Project.
2018  2018
Ord.  11-  Appropriating property located at 4144 East Royalton Road (Parcel 075 T)
60-   19-  owned by Paul Merrill for the Route 82 Widening Project.
2018  2018
Ord.  11-  Appropriating property located at 9193 Windswept Drive (Parcel 068 T) owned
61-   19-  by Joseph Valaitis for the Route 82 Widening Project.
2018  2018
Ord.  11-  Appropriating a parcel of property located at East Royalton Road (Parcel 057
63-   19-  WD & T) owned by Tri Square Corporation for the Route 82 Widening Project.
2018  2018
Res.  11-  Authorizing purchase of property from Colby and Michelle Hatcher for the
2018- 19-  Route 82 Widening Project.
202   2018
Res.  11-  Authorizing purchase of real property from Wissam Khoury for the Route 82
2018- 19-  Widening Project.
203   2018
65-   12-
2018  3-   Authorizing real estate purchase agreement.
      2018
Res.  12-  Authorizing purchase of real property from FB Royalton, LLC for the Route 82
2018- 3-   Widening Project.
209   2018
Res.  12-  Authorizing the purchase of real property from FB Royalton, LLC for the Route
2018- 3-   82 Widening Project.
210   2018
Res.  12-  Authorizing the purchase of real property from FB Royalton II, LLC for the
2018- 3-   Route 82 Widening Project.
211   2018
Res.  12-  Authorizing the purchase of real property from Yevhen and Iryna Hapyak for
2018- 3-   the Route 82 Widening Project.
212   2018
Res.  12-  Authorizing the purchase of real property from 785 Royalton Road, LLC for the
2018- 3-   Route 82 Widening Project.
213   2018
Res.  12-  Authorizing the purchase of real property from All Realty, II, Ltd. for the
2018- 3-   Route 82 Widening Project.
214   2018
Res.  12-  Authorizing the purchase of real property from Royalton 2525, Ltd. for the
2018- 3-   Route 82 Widening Project.
215   2018
Res.  12-  Authorizing the purchase of real property from Tri-square Corporation for the
2018- 3-   Route 82 Widening Project.
216   2018
Res.  12-  Authorizing the purchase of real property from Route 82, Ltd. for the Route
2018- 3-   82 Widening Project.
217   2018
Res.  12-  Authorizing the purchase of real property from All Realty II, Ltd. for the
2018- 17-  Route 82 Widening Project.
227   2018
Res.  12-  Authorizing the purchase of real property from Jerome T. Mitchell for the
2018- 17-  Route 82 Widening Project.
228   2018
Res.  12-  Authorizing the purchase of real property from Royalton 2525, Ltd. for the
2018- 17-  Route 82 Widening Project.
229   2018
Res.  12-  Authorizing the purchase of real property from Tri-square Corporation for the
2018- 17-  Route 82 Widening Project.
230   2018
Res.  12-  Authorizing the transfer of real property from Route 82, Ltd. for the Route
2018- 17-  82 Widening Project.
231   2018
Res.  8-   Authorizing the purchase of real property from All Realty II, Ltd. for the
2019- 26-  Route 82 Widening Project.
124   2019
Res.  10-
2019- 21-  Accepting the land donation from 20300 Chagrin, Ltd.
163   2019
Res.  4-   Authorizing agreement with Michael Lanigan for the sale of property located
2020- 20-  at 1803 West Royalton Road.
77    2020
          
 
TABLE VI:  LEASE OF REAL PROPERTY
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord.  12-10- Lease with Fred Clogg for any land owned by him to be used by the
51-56 1956   city as skating rinks.
Ord.  5-7-   Lease agreement with Tri-Square Corp. for solid waste disposal
49-79 1979   purposes, for three years.
Ord.  4-5-   Authorizes extension of land lease agreement with Tri-Square Corp.
18-82 1982
Ord.  8-2-   Extension of lease agreement authorized by Ord. 49-79.
42-82 1982
Ord.  12-15-
125-  1986   Lease agreement with Tri-Square Corp. for landfill purposes.
86
Ord.  2-2-   Lease agreement with Broadview Hts. Lions Club for city land
9-87  1987   adjacent to Soccer Field No.2.
Ord.  9-9-   Rescinds lease with Broadview Hts. Lions Club authorized by Ord.
80-87 1987   9-87.
Ord.  10-19- Authorizes amended lease agreement with Tri-Square Corp. for
99-87 1987   landfill purposes.
Ord.  5-15-  Authorizes amended lease agreement with Tri-Square Corp. for
89-42 1989   landfill purposes.
Ord.  5-10-  Authorizes lease agreement with Broadview Living, Inc., for
55-93 1993   property located on the southeast corner of Broadview and Oakes
             Roads.
Ord.  5-10-  Authorizes lease agreement with Broadview Living, Inc., for the
56-93 1993   Thorin Building.
Ord.  8-29-  Authorizes agreement with T & A Land Development, Inc., for lease
111-  1994   of 10135 Broadview Road to be used as staging area for recycling
94           program.
Ord.  9-9-   Repeals Ords.55-93 and 56-93.
95-96 1996
Ord.  3-15-  Authorizes two agreements with SprintCom, Inc., for the sublease
43-99 1999   of space on the city’s cellular tower.
Ord.  9-7-   Authorizes agreement with the Salvation Army for the lease of
86-99 1999   premises at the Broadview Center for the purpose of operating an
             alternative child care enrichment program.
Ord.  11-1-
192-  1999   Amends Ord. 86-99.
99
Ord.  4-21-  Authorizes lease agreement with the Board of Education of the
56-03 2003   North Royalton School District for the leasing of premises located
             at the Broadview Center.
Ord.  10-20- Authorizes agreement with the Board of Education of the North
155-  2003   Royalton School District for the leasing of buildings 15, 16 and
03           17, located at the Broadview Center.
Ord.  3-1-   Amends Ord. 155-03.
28-04 2004
Ord.  2-7-   Authorizes lease agreement with Marymount Hospital.
11-05 2005
Ord.  6-20-  Authorizes an agreement with Cleveland Photographic Society with
82-05 2005   respect to leasing a portion of Building 21 at the Broadview
             Center.
Ord.  8-22-  Authorizes a lease agreement with Ohio Physical Therapy and Sports
102-  2005   Medicine, Inc.
05
Ord.  2-5-   Authorizes an agreement with the Chamber of Commerce to lease a
11-07 2007   portion of building 21 at the Broadview Center.
Ord.  2-5-   Authorizes an agreement with the Southern Hills Youth Football
12-07 2007   League to lease a portion of building 23 at the Broadview Center.
Ord.  2-19-  Amends Ord. 11-05.
30-08 2008
Ord.  8-18-  Authorizing an agreement with the Brecksville-Broadvie w Heights
104-  2008   Preschool Mother’s Club with respect to leasing a portion of the
08           Broadview Heights Community Center.
Ord.  9-15-  Authorizing an agreement with the North Royalton City School
129-  2008   District with respect to leasing space in buildings 15, 16, 17 and
08           18.
Ord.  9-17-  Authorizing a lease agreement with the Broadview Heights Chamber
138-  2012   of Commerce.
12
Ord.  1-17-  Amending Ordinance 129-08 with the North Royalton City School
84-13 2013   District with respect to leasing space in buildings 15, 16, 17 and
             18.
Res.  3-16-  Authorizing an amended lease agreement with T-Mobile USA Tower LLC
15-32 2015   by CCTMO, LLC.
Res.  5-4-   Authorizing a facility rental agreement with Royalton Field House.
15-51 2015
Res.  3-19-  Authorizing lease agreement with the City of Seven Hills for
2018- 2018   provision of dispatching services and jail facilities to the City
40           of Seven Hills.
Res.  3-19-
2018- 2018   Authorizing lease agreement with Steps Academy.
42
Res.  5-7-   Authorizing lease agreement with Bank Capital Services, LLC for
2018- 2018   financing a salt truck.
69
Res.  10-1-
2018- 2018   Authorizing lease agreement with Steps Academy.
164
Res.  11-4-  Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a lease agreement with the
2019- 2019   Cleveland Photographic Society.
164
Res.  12-16- Authorizing the Mayor to enter into a lease agreement with the
2019- 2019   Chippewa Garden Club.
177
            
 
TABLE VII:  STREET GRADE LEVELS AND CHANGE OF STREET NAME
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Description
Ord. 297     10-23-1950 Grade of Royalwood Road.
Ord. 19-53   9-14-1953  Changing the name of part of Brookside Road to Skyline
                        Drive.
Ord. 46-57   11-12-1957 Changing the name of part of Luxenberg Blvd. to Craig
                        Lane.
Res. 53-67   12-26-1967 Changing the name of New Mill Road to W. Mill Road.
Res. 68-2    5-6-1968   Changing the name of part of Mill Road to E. Mill Road.
Res. 69-59   10-27-1969 Renaming Pin Oak Drive.
Res. 69-60   10-27-1969 Renaming Maple Lane.
Ord. 62-70   11-9-1970  Repeals Res. 68-2.
Ord. 72-78   9-5-1978   Hoertz Road to Perl Court Drive, and Metropolitan
                        Parkway Drive to Valley Parkway Drive.
Res. 86-40   5-19-1986  Changing the name of Memorial Drive to Luempert
                        Memorial Drive.
Ord. 155-90  11-5-1990  Changing the name of George Drive to Jenna Drive.
                        Changing the name of Woodside Drive to Timberwood
Ord. 60-92   6-1-1992   Drive, and the name of Circlewood Drive to Crystalwood
                        Drive.
Ord. 245-98  1-4-1999   Renaming part of Karen Lynne Drive as Lacey Lane.
                        Naming the street leading to the main entrance of the
Res. 04-29   4-19-2004  Broadview Heights City Hall as Faulhaber Memorial
                        Drive.
Ord. 02-2018 2-19-2018  Changing the name of Skyline Drive to Duke Court.
                       
 
TABLE VIII:  ZONING MAP CHANGES
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Passed Description
Ord. 4-3-
20-  1967 Placing on the ballot an initiated ordinance repealing Ord. 11-66.
67
Ord. 7-3-
37-  1967 Placing on the ballot an initiated ordinance repealing Ord. 11-66.
67
Ord. 12-
53-  2-   Permanent Parcel 584-19-3, from its present use to Class C-1.
68   1968
Ord. 12-
50-  11-  Permanent Parcel 583-20-1, from its present use to Class C-6.
68   1968
Ord. 4-
22-  14-  Permanent Parcel 582-19-21, from its present use (A-1) to Class D-1.
69   1969
Ord. 4-
5-69 21-  407 East Royalton Road, from its present classification to Class C-1.
     1969
Ord. 4-2-
85-  1973 Permanent Parcels 585-20-1 through 585-20-13, from Class A-2 to Class E-1.
72
Ord. 4-9-
20-  1973 Northwest corner of I-77 and S.R. 82, from Class C-3 to Class C-6.
73
Ord. 4-
56-  16-  Permanent Parcel 583-15-1 and 2, from Class A-2 to Class E-1.
72   1973
Ord. 7-2- Permanent Parcels 581-16-5, 6, 8, 9, 11 through 16, 19, 20 and 51, from
12-  1973 Class B-2 to Class A-1.
73
Ord. 7-2-
31-  1973 7958 Broadview Road, from Class A-1 to Class C-1.
73
Ord. 7-
38-  16-  Southwest corner of Broadview and Akins Roads, from Class C-1 to Class C-3.
73   1973
Ord. 2-
80-  11-  Property near 3593 E. Wallings Road, from Class A-1 to Class D.
73   1974
Ord. 2-   Southwest corner of Broadview and Sprague Roads, from Class C-6 to Class C-
81-  11-  1.
73   1974
Ord. 3-
27-  18-  Certifying the official zoning map of the city.
74   1974
Ord. 6-
31-  16-  Land on W. Wallings Road, from Class A-1 to Class D-1.
75   1975
Ord. 6-   Land on east side of E. Mill Road and south of E. Wallings Road, from Class
35-  16-  A-1 to Class D-1.
75   1975
Ord. 4-
4-76 19-  1929 Royalton Road, from Class A-1 to Class B-4.
     1976
Ord. 5-
23-  17-  407 E. Royalton Road, from Class C-1 to Class C-5.
76   1976
Ord. 5-
25-  17-  407 E. Royalton Road, from its present classification to Class C-1.
76   1976
Ord. 2-7- North side of Akins Road, approximately 1,500 ft. west of Broadview Road,
80-  1977 from Class A-1 to Class D-1.
76
Ord. 2-7-
88-  1977 7984-8000 and 8014 Broadview Road, from Class A-1 to Class C-1.
76
Ord. 11-
59-  20-  7976 Broadview Road, from Class A-1 to Class C-1.
78   1978
Ord. 11-
60-  20-  7968 Broadview Road, from Class A-1 to Class C-1.
78   1978
Ord. 12-
61-  18-  7927, 7947 and 7955 Broadview Road, from Class A-1 to Class C-1.
78   1978
Ord. 2-   Northwest corner of Royalton Road and Ken-Mar Drive, in the Royal Industrial
112- 20-  Park, from Class C-3 to Class C-5.
78   1979
Ord. 8-
46-  27-  Northwest corner of Royalton Road at I-77, from Class C-3 to Class C-1.
79   1979
Ord. 8-
51-  27-  Northeast corner of Broadview and Boston Roads, from Class A-1 to Class C-2.
79   1979
Ord. 8-   Land south of the Turnpike on Boston and Broadview Roads, from Class E-1 and
52-  27-  A-1 to Class B-3.
79   1979
Ord. 2-
3-80 19-  8645 Avery Road (P.P. 581-33-16), from Class A-1 to Class D-1.
     1980
Ord. 3-
10-  17-  10474 Broadview Road (P.P. 585-16-4), from Class A-1 to Class C-1.
80   1980
Ord. 7-7-
49-  1980 Permanent Parcel 581-27-4, from Class C-1 to Class B-4.
80
Ord. 9-2-
55-  1980 8645 Avery Road (P.P. 581-33-16), from Class A-1 to Class D-1.
80
Ord. 9-2-
56-  1980 Permanent Parcel 585-17-1, from Class E-1 to Class C-1.
80
Ord. 3-
4-81 16-  Permanent Parcel 583-20-9 on Royalton Road, from Class C-6 to Class C-3.
     1981
Ord. 4-1- 8130 Broadview Road (Permanent Parcel 581-16-8), from Class A-1 to Class C-
6-81 1981 1.
Ord. 3-1- Permanent Parcel 583-14-007 on E. Royalton Road, from Class B-4 to Class E-
11-  1982 2.
82
Ord. 4-5- Permanent Parcel 583-25-1 at Harris and Old Royalton Roads, from Class E-
21-  1982 2 to Class A-2.
82
Ord. 4-5-
22-  1982 Permanent Parcel 583-24-1 on Old Royalton Road, from Class C-3 to Class A-2.
82
Ord. 3-   Land at E. Royalton Road (Permanent Parcel 583-18-8), from Class C-3 to
9-84 19-  Class E-2.
     1984
Ord. 9-4- Land at Broadview Road (Permanent Parcel 581-23-084), from Class A-1 to
48-  1984 Class C-1.
84
Ord. 5-   Land on Broadview Road, south of Piper’s III Restaurant (Permanent Parcels
5-85 20-  581-16-12 and 581-16-13), from Class A-1 to Class D-1.
     1985
Ord. 9-3- 7944 Broadview Road (Permanent Parcels 581-6-28 and 581-6-29), from Class A-
6-85 1985 1 to Class C-1.
Ord. 11-  1711 E. Royalton Road (Permanent Parcels 583-14-004 and 583-14-005), from
76-  18-  Class A-1 to Class B-4.
85   1985
Ord. 1-5- 7936 Broadview Road (Permanent Parcel 581-6-27), from Class A-1 to Class C-
121- 1986 1.
86
Ord. 3-3- 1261 Royalton Road W. (Permanent Parcel 583-04-014), from Class A-1 to Class
67-  1986 B-4.
85
Ord. 3-3- 1305 Royalton Road W. (Permanent Parcel 583-04-015), from Class A-1 to Class
8-86 1986 B-4.
Ord. 3-3- 1357 W. Royalton Road (Permanent Parcel 583-04-016), from Class A-1 to Class
22-  1986 B-4.
86
Ord. 10-  8025 Broadview Road (Permanent Parcels 581-23-08 and 581-23-09), from Class
99-  6-   A-1 to Class C-1.
86   1986
Ord. 12-  8001 Broadview Road (Permanent Parcel 581-23-83), from Class A-1 to Class C-
107- 1-   1.
86   1986
Ord. 1-   8626 Broadview Road (Permanent Parcel 581-21-12), from Class C-4 and D-1 to
151- 19-  Class B-2, A-1 and C-5.
87   1987
Ord. 2-2- 9176 Broadview Road (Permanent Parcel 583-03-004), from Class A-1 to Class
2-87 1987 C-2.
Ord. 2-2- 9198 Broadview Road (Permanent Parcel 583-03-001), from Class A-1 to Class
3-87 1987 C-2.
Ord. 8-3- 1600 E. Royalton Road (Permanent Parcel 583-27-021), from Class A-1 to Class
56-  1987 B-4.
87
Ord. 8-3- 1712 E. Royalton Road (Permanent Parcel 583-28-15), from Class A-1 to Class
57-  1987 B-4.
87
Ord. 8-
89-  31-  1435 Royalton Road (Permanent Parcel 583-4-17), from Class A-1 to Class B-4.
87   1987
Ord. 9-2-
90-  1987 Amends Ord. 52-79.
87
Ord. 2-
88-  16-  229 Wallings Road (Permanent Parcel 581-23-20), from Class A-1 to Class C-2.
11   1988
Ord. 2-   7977 Broadview Road (Permanent Parcel 581-23-6), from Class A-1 to Class C-
88-  16-  2.
13   1988
Ord. 8-   9036 Broadview Road (Permanent Parcel 583-2-16), from Class A-1 to Class B-
88-  15-  5.
87   1988
          407 East Royalton Road (Permanent Parcel 583-12-16), from Class C-5 to Class
          C-2; 9215 Broadview Road (Permanent Parcel 583-12-25); from Class C-1 to
          Class C-4; 9203 Broadview Road (Permanent Parcel 583-12-9); in the vicinity
          of 9198 Broadview Road (Permanent Parcel 583-3-1, 4 and 5), from Class C-
          2 to Class C-4; 9243 Broadview Road (Permanent Parcel 583-12-10), from Class
          C-1 to Class C-4; 291 E. Royaltion Road (Permanent Parcel 583-12-11 and 12),
          from C-2 to Class C-4; 9260 Broadview Road (Permanent Parcel 583-4-1 and 3),
          from Class C-2 to Class C-4; 9260 Broadview Road (Permanent Parcel 583-4-24)
Ord.      from Class C-2 to Class C-4; 9318 Broadview Road (Permanent Parcel 583-4-5)
88-  9-6- from Class C-2 to Class C-4; 9360 Broadview Road (Permanent Parcel 583-4-8)
137  1988 from Class C-2 to Class C-4; 9380 Broadview Road (Permanent Parcel 583-4-9)
          from Class C-2 to Class C-4; Parcel 581-27-13), from Class B-4 to Class C-1;
          200 Broadview Road (Permanent Parcel 581-27-12) from Class B-4 to Class C-1;
          1929 E. Royalton Road (Permanent Parcels 583-14-6 and 12), from Class B-4 to
          Class C-3; Broadview Road and Royalton Road (Permanent Parcels 583-3-2 and
          3), from Class C-2 to Class C-4; 291 E. Royalton Road (Permanent Parcel 583-
          12-23), from Class C-1 to Class C-4; Northeast corner of I-77 and Rt. 82
          (Permanent Parcel 583-24-5), from Class C-3 to Class E-1; and Northwest
          corner of I-77 and Rt. 82 Permanent Parcel 583-20-12), from Class C-1 to
          Class E-1.
          1601 Royalton Road (Permanent Parcels 584-14-13 and 583-4-21) from A-1 to C-
          3; 1445 Royalton Road (Permanent Parcel 583-4-18) from A-1 to C-4; 1497
          Royalton Road (Permanent Parcel 583-4-19) from A-1 to C-4 ; 9396 Broadview
          Road (Permanent Parcel 583-4-26) from C-4 to C-3; 9397 Broadview Road
Ord. 2-   (Permanent Parcel 583-26-12) from C-4 to C-1; 9314 Broadview Road (Permanent
89-9 27-  Parcel 583-4-4) from C-2 to C-4; northwest corner of Rte. 82 and I-77
     1989 (Permanent Parcel 583-20-12) from C-1 to E-1; 8116 Broadview Road (Permanent
          Parcel 581-16-7) from C-6 to C-1; 1435 Royalton Road (Permanent Parcel 583-
          4-17) from 13-4 to C-4; 1055 Royalton Road (Permanent Parcel 583-4-22) from
          C-2 to C-4; 9349 Broadview Road (Permanent Parcel 583-26-23) from C-1 to C-
          4; 9341 Broadview Road (Permanent Parcel 583-2640) from C-1 to C-4.
          Rockledge Terrance Condos (Permanent Parcels 581-16-016 and 581-16-019)
          zoned B-2; 8610 Broadview Road (Permanent Parcel 581-21-013), from C-4 to A-
          1, 8628 Broadview Road (Permanent Parcels 581-21-015, 581-21-016 and 581-
          121-017), from C-4, C-4, and C-5 to C-2, C-2 and B-2, respectively; 2737 W.
          Edgerton Road (Permanent Parcels 585-01-001, 585-01-002 and 585-01-003),
          from C-4 to D-1; 2487 W. Edgerton Road (Permanent Parcel 585-03-001), from
Ord. 3-5- C-4 to A-1; 2737 W. Edgerton Road (Permanent Parcels 585-03-002, 585-03-003
2-90 1990 and 585-03-004), from C-4 to D-1; Permanent Parcels 581-23-008, 581-23-009
          and 581-23-083, from C-1 to C-2; Avery Road (Permanent Parcel 581-27-004),
          from B-4 to C-3; 8109 Broadview Road (Permanent Parcel 581-27-010), from C-
          6 to C-1; 1711 Royalton Road (Permanent Parcels 583-14-004 and 583-14-005),
          from B-4 to C-3; 2001 E. Royalton Road (Permanent Parcel 583-14-011), from
          B-4 to C-3; 4740 E. Royalton Road (Permanent Parcel 583-20-001), from E-1 to
          C-1; 1712 E. Royalton Road (Permanent Parcels 583-27-021 and 583-28-015),
          from B-4 to C-3.
          1687 Royalton Road (Permanent Parcel 584-14-011), from A-1 to C-3; 1603
          Royalton Road (Permanent Parcel 584-14-012), from A-1 to C-3; 9446 Broadview
          Road (Permanent Parcel 584-15-001), from A-1 to C-3; 9255 Broadview Road
          (Permanent Parcel 583-04-002), from C-2 to C-4; 9342 Broadview Road
          (Permanent Parcel 583-04-006), from C-2 to C-4; Permanent Parcel 583-04-007,
          from C-2 to C-4; Permanent Parcel 583-04-009, from C-4 to C-3; Permanent
          Parcels 583-04-012 and 583-04-013, from C-2 to C-4; 1261 Royalton Road
          (Permanent Parcel 583-04-014), from C-4 to C-3; 2001 E. Royalton Road
          (Permanent Parcels 583-04-015 and 583-04-016), from C-4 to C-3; Permanent
          Parcel 583-04-017, from C-4 to C-3; Permanent Parcel 583-04-018, from C-4 to
          C-3; 1497 Royalton Road (Permanent Parcel 583-04-019), from C-4 to C-3; 1521
          Royalton Road. (Permanent Parcel 583-04-020), from A-1 to C-3; Permanent
          Parcel 583-04-025, from C-2 to C-4; Permanent Parcel 583-12-018, from C-1 to
Ord. 3-5- C-4; 9213 Broadview Road (Permanent Parcel 583-12-024), from C-1 to C-4; 924
3-90 1990 Royalton Road (Permanent Parcel 583-27-001), from A-1 to C-3; 1638 Akins
          Road (Permanent Parcel 584-13-007), from A-1 to C-3; 1700 Akins Road
          (Permanent Parcel 584-13-011), from A-1 to C-3; 9259 Broadview Road
          (Permanent Parcel 583-26-001), from C-1 to C-4, Permanent Parcel 583-26-002,
          from C-1 to C-4; 1713 Akins Road (Permanent Parcel 583-26-004, from C-1 to
          C-4; 286 Royalton Road (Permanent Parcel 583-26-005), from C-1 to C-4;
          Permanent Parcel 583-26-009, from C-1 to C-3; Permanent Parcel 583-26-010,
          from C-1 to C-4; 9357 Broadview Road (Permanent Parcel 583-26-022), from C-
          1 to C-4; Permanent Parcels 583-26-024 and 583-26-027, from C-1 to C-3;
          Permanent Parcel 583-26-028, from C-1 to C-3; Permanent Parcel 583-26-029,
          from C-1 to C-3; 229 Oakes Road (Permanent Parcel 583-26-033), from B-4 to
          C-1; 9331 Broadview Road (Permanent Parcel 583-26-036), from C-1 to C-4;
          Permanent Parcel 583-26-037, from B-4 to C-3; 1713 Akins Road (Permanent
          Parcel 583-26-041), from C-1 to C-4; 672 Royalton Road (Permanent Parcel
          583-26-042), from B-4 to C-3.
          Permanent Parcels 581-26-012 and 581-26-013, from B-3 to C-3; Permanent
          Parcel 583-04-027, from C-2 to C-4; Permanent Parcels 581-13-010 and 581-13-
Ord. 8-   013, from A-1 to D-1; Permanent Parcel 582-03-012, from A-1 to D-1;
71-  17-  Permanent Parcel 585-10-002, from B-3 to A-1; Permanent Parcel 585-20-006,
92   1992 from A-1 to B-3; Permanent Parcel 583-01-027, from A-1 to D-1; Permanent
          Parcel 582-07-024, from A-1 to D-1; and Permanent Parcel 585-17-001, from C-
          1 to E-2.
Ord. 8-
81-  30-  9543 Broadview Road, from A-1 to D-1 and B-5.
93   1993
Res. 7-
94-  18-  Adopts a revised Zone Map for the city.
87   1994
Ord. 1-   Permanent Parcels 583-26-9, 583-26-24 and 583-26-27, located at 500 to 550
154- 16-  E. Royalton Road, from C-3 to C-4.
95   1996
Ord. 7-   Permanent Parcels 584-14-01 to 584-14-05, located at 2139, 2193 and 2253
89-  27-  Royalton Road, from A-1 to B-1 and B-2.
98   1998
Ord. 2-   Permanent Parcel 583-18-008, located at 4343 East Royalton Road, from E-1 to
15-  25-  C-2 (approved by voters 5-7-2002). Property reverted back to E-
02   2002 1 classification on 5-7-2003.
Ord. 9-
144- 15-  Permanent Parcels 582-03-012 and 582-03-043 from D-1 to A-1.
03   2003
Ord. 7-   Permanent Parcels 581-16-11 and 581-16-12(13), located immediately south of
73-  18-  8158 Broadview Road, from A-1 and D-1 to C-2.
05   2005
Ord. 6-4- Establishing an Interstate Highway Shopping Center use classification and
70-  2007 rezoning Permanent Parcel 583-20-002 at the northwest quadrant of Interstate
07        77 and Route 82 from E-1 to C-5. (Approved by voters on 11-6-07.)
Ord. 11-  Part of Permanent Parcels 583-27-045, 583-27-046 and 583-27-047, located
109- 5-   immediately west of Cherry Hill Lane from C-3 to A-1. (Approved by voters on
07   2007 3-4-2008.)
Ord. 5-5- Permanent Parcel 583-18-008, at the corner of Kenmar and Route 82 from E-
47-  2008 1 to C-2. (Approved by voters on 11-4-2008.)
08
Ord. 5-5- Permanent Parcel 583-20-011, located at 301 Treeworth Boulevard from E-2 to
48-  2008 C-2. (Approved by voters on 11-4-2008.)
08
Ord. 7-   Permanent Parcel 583-20-009, located at 4501 East Royalton Road from C-3 to
79-  14-  C-2. (Approved by voters on 11-4-2008.)
08   2008
Ord. 7-   Permanent Parcel 583-20-013, located at 4601 East Royalton Road from C-3 to
80-  14-  C-2. (Approved by voters on 11-4-2008.)
08   2008
Ord. 7-   Permanent Parcel 583-20-017, vacant land located behind Treeworth Plaza from
81-  14-  E-1 to C-2. (Approved by voters on 11-4-2008.)
08   2008
Ord. 7-   Permanent Parcel 583-27-007, located at 1550 East Royalton Road from A-1 to
91-  14-  C-3. (Approved by voters on 11-4-2008.)
08   2008
Ord. 8-   Permanent Parcel 583-14-016, located at the corner of Avery Road and Route
102- 18-  82 from A-1 to C-3. (Approved by voters on 11-4-2008.)
08   2008
Ord. 8-   Permanent Parcels 583-20-003, 583-20-005, 583-20-006, 583-20-007 and 583-20-
103- 18-  008, located on East Royalton Road from E-1 to C-2. (Approved by voters on
08   2008 11-4-2008.)
Ord. 8-   Permanent Parcels 583-18-009 and 583-18-010, located at East Royalton and
70-  10-  Kenmar Industrial Parkway from C-3 to C-2. (Approved by voters on 11-3-
09   2009 2009.)
Ord. 7-   Permanent Parcels 583-18-008, 583-20-009 and 583-20-013, located on East
78-  19-  Royalton Road between Kenmar Industrial Parkway and Treeworth Blvd.
10   2010 (Approved by voters on 11-2-2010.)
Ord. 2-   Permanent Parcels 584-08-004, 584-08-005, 584-08-006, and 584-08-007,
01-  18-  located on the north side of Route 82 between Seneca Boulevard and Oakwood
2019 2019 Trail. (Approved by voters on 5-8-2019.)
         
 
TABLE IX:  TAP-IN FEES AND SEWER CHARGES
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Description
Ord.  3-
18-60 14-  Fixing tap-in charges for Harris Road sanitary sewer.
      1960
Ord.  7-
35-61 10-  Amends Ord. 18-60.
      1961
Ord.  7-   Fixing tap-in charges for Broadview Road water line from Oakes Road to Edgerton
36-61 10-  Road.
      1961
Ord.  5-4- Fixing tap-in charges for Avery Road water main.
19-64 1964
Ord.  5-4- Fixing tap-in charges for Avery Road sanitary sewer.
20-64 1964
Ord.  6-
23-64 15-  Fixing tap-in charges for Mill Road sewer.
      1964
Ord.  10-
40-64 19-  Fixing tap-in charges for Mill Road sewer extension.
      1964
Ord.  4-   Fixing tap-in charges for Broadview Road water line from Edgerton Road to
14-67 17-  Boston Road.
      1967
Ord.  12-
56-68 2-   Requiring use of available sewers. (C.O. § 1042.02)
      1968
Ord.  9-6- Providing for inspection of all new sanitary sewer connections and establishing
15-77 1977 a charge therefor.
Ord.  9-6- Providing for inspection of all new storm sewer connections and establishing a
16-77 1977 charge therefor. (C.O. § 1042.03)
Ord.  9-2- Establishes sewer maintenance and repair rates and sewage treatment rates for
66-80 1980 the Briarwood Sewage Treatment Plant.
Ord.  9-2- Establishing sewer maintenance and repair rates and sewage treatment rates for
68-80 1980 Avery Meadows Sewage Treatment Plant.
Ord.  1-   Adopting a wastewater management program, user classes and a user charge
13-86 21-  system. (C.O. §§ 1043.01 to 1043.04, 1043.09 to 1043.13)
      1986
Ord.  1-   Establishing rules and regulations governing connection to, discharge into and
14-86 21-  use of the sanitary sewer system of the city. (C.O. §§ 1042.01, 1042.04(B) to
      1986 1042.06(A), (C) to (G), 1042.10 to 1042.12, 1042.15 to 1042.18, 1042.99)
Ord.  1-   Establishing sanitary service connection standards. (C.O. §§ 1042.03, 1042.04
15-86 27-  (A), 1042.06(H), 1042.07, 1042.13, 1042.14, 1042.18, 1042.99) Repealed by Ord.
      1986 34-87.
Ord.  3-3- Revising permit application procedure, permit fees and bond requirements for
21-86 1986 excavations. (C.O. §§ 1022.01 to 1022.03)
Ord.  2-
6-87  17-  Fixing tap-in charges for Akins Road water line west of Broadview Road.
      1987
Ord.  4-6- Establishing sanitary service connection standards. Repeals 15-86. (C.O. §§
34-87 1987 1042.03, 1042.04(A), 1042.06, 1042.07(A) to (H), (J) to (L), (N), 1042.13,
           1042.14, 1042.99, 1043.09(G))
Ord.  5-4- Amends Ord. 34-87. (C.O. §§ 1042.07(I), (M), 1042.18)
42-87 1987
Ord.  7-7- Providing for the imposition of revised sewer user rates and for the
83-87 1987 administration thereof. (C.O. §§ 1043.01 to 1043.04, 1043.09(A) to (E), 1043.10
           to 1043.13)
Ord.  7-7- Authorizing settlement agreement in the case of Ralph Emig v The City of
88-87 1987 Broadview Hts. re Akins Road water line assessments.
Ord.  10-  Requiring permits and establishing charges for connection to or increased use
128-  19-  of sewer system, providing penalties for violations and providing for
87    1987 certification of unpaid permit charges to County Auditor. (C.O. §§ 1044.01(A),
           (B), (D) to 1044.07, 1044.99) Repealed by Ord. 171-88.
Ord.  1-4- Fixing tap-in charges for storm sewer connections with respect to certain
5-88  1988 parcels of property in the city. (P.P. Nos. 581-29-029, 581-29-032, 582-17-001,
           582-17-039 and 582-17-040).
Ord.  12-  Requiring permits, establishing fees for connection to or increased use of
171-  5-   sewer system, providing penalties for violations and providing for
88    1988 certification of unpaid permit charges to County Auditor. Repeals Ord. 128-87.
           (C.O. §§ 1044.01(A), (B), (D) to 1044.07, 1044.99)
Ord.  2-6- Fixing tap-in charges for Avery Road and Woodmere Drive water mains.
23-89 1989
Ord.  10-  Authorizing Mayor to enter into a contract with the City of Seven Hills for
134-  30-  provision of sanitary sewer service to certain residents of Seven Hills, and
89    1989 providing for user charges.
Ord.  12-  Providing for payment of connection fees by owners of abutting or otherwise
142-  4-   benefited property to the developer of Creekside Trace for costs of
89    1989 construction of public improvements.
Ord.  8-   Authorizing Mayor to enter into contract with the City of Seven Hills for
104-  20-  provision of sanitary sewer service to certain residents of Seven Hills and
90    1990 providing for user charges. Repeals Ord. 134-89.
Ord.  11-  Requiring permits and establishing tap- in charges for connection to sanitary
160-  9-   sewer in vicinity of Old Route 82 and providing for certification of unpaid
90    1990 charges to County Auditor. (C.O. § 1042.075)
Ord.  4-6- Amends Ord. 83-87. (C.O. § 1043.03)
30-92 1992
Ord.  3-1- Authorizing Mayor to enter into agreement with the City of North Royalton for
31-93 1993 construction of force main and gravity sewer to be connected to existing
           sewerage facilities connecting to the Medina County Wastewater Treatment Plant.
Ord.  4-   Amending agreement with Medina County for construction of force main and
40-93 12-  gravity sewer to be connected to existing sewerage facilities connecting to the
      1993 Medina County Wastewater Treatment Plant.
Ord.  5-   Authorizing conditions for connection to sanitary sewers serving the Broadview
59-94 16-  Hts. South facilities plan drainage area. (C.O. § 1042.077)
      1994
Ord.  2-   Authorizing an Amendment No, 1 to sanitary service agreement with the County of
96-00 20-  Medina and the County of Summit.
      2001
Ord.  2-7- Establishing charges for connection to or for increasing the burden on
16-05 2005 municipal sewers located in portions of Sprague Road, Elmhurst Drive and
           McCreary Road.
Ord.  10-  Establishing charges for connection to or for increasing the burden on
126-  3-   municipal sewers located in the Glen Abbey Real Property Development.
03    2005
Res.  8-   Authorizing Finance Director to certify delinquent sanitary and storm sewerage
2018- 27-  service charges to the County Auditor for collection.
110   2018
          
 
TABLE X:  AGREEMENTS
 
Ord./Res. No. Date Description
–   - -  Contracts with the Cuyahoga County Board of Health for the provision of public
           health services to the city.
–   - -  Host agency agreements with the American Association for Retired Persons (AARP)
           for participation in the AARP Senior Community Service Employment Program.
–   - -  Agreements with the Ohio Municipal League for purposes of participating in a
           City Workers’ Compensation Group Rating Plan.
           Agreements with the Cuyahoga Board of County Commissioners, and the Cuyahoga
–   - -  Regional Information System (CRIS) Board of Advisors, for the provision of CRIS
           services to the city’s Mayor’s Court and the Police Department.
–   - -  Agreements with the Benjamin Rose Institute for the provision of community
           services for the senior citizens of the city.
           Intergovernment al service agreements between the U.S. Immigration and
–   - -  Naturalization Service and the City Police Department for the provision of the
           detention and care of persons charged with violations of the Immigration and
           Nationality Act, being 8 U.S.C. §§ 1101 et seq.
–   - -  Agreements between the city and the Ohio Bureau of Workers’ Compensation for
           the treatment of injured workers under applicable law.
Ord.  6-1- Agreement with the Regional Council of Governments to participate with the
45-71 1971 other municipalities which are members.
Ord.  12-
82-73 17-  Agreement to adopt the bylaws of the Southwest Disaster Services Authority.
      1973
Ord.  9-2- Agreement with the Metropolitan Health Planning Corporation for services and
68-75 1975 responsibilities pertaining to the Regional Emergency Medical Communication s
           System.
Res.  2-   Agreement with North Royalton, Strongsville, as well as nearby cities and
80-23 19-  townships which may elect to participate  in the Joint Ambulance District.
      1980
         Agreement in reference to the Broadview Heights Ambulance Service District.
         Agreement with the Board of County Commissioners for an ALS/CECOMS II UHF/VHF
           radio system for ambulance- hospital communications .
           Agreement with the Ohio Turnpike Commission to provide ambulance service to the
         Commission for that portion of the Turnpike (between Milepost 161.7 to Milepost
           169.9 westbound) which is located within the city.
Res.  7-   Agreement with North Royalton, Strongsville, as well as nearby cities and
80-47 30-  townships which may elect to participate  in the Joint Ambulance District.
      1980
         Agreement in reference to the Broadview Heights Ambulance Service District.
         Agreement with the Board of County Commissioners for an ALS/CECOMS II UHF/VHF
           radio system for ambulance- hospital communications .
           Agreement with the Ohio Turnpike Commission to provide ambulance service to the
         Commission for that portion of the Turnpike (between Milepost 161.7 to Milepost
           169.9 westbound) which is located within the city.
Ord.  7-
46-84 16-  Agreement with the Southwest Council of Governments.
      1984
Ord.  5-4- Agreement with the County Regional Planning Commission for plan development.
47-87 1987
Ord.  6-1- Agreement with North Royalton, Strongsville, as well as nearby cities and
64-87 1987 townships which may elect to participate  in the Joint Ambulance District.
         Agreement in reference to the Broadview Heights Ambulance Service District.
         Agreement with the Board of County Commissioners for an ALS/CECOMS II UHF/VHF
           radio system for ambulance- hospital communications .
           Agreement with the Ohio Turnpike Commission to provide ambulance service to the
         Commission for that portion of the Turnpike (between Milepost 161.7 to Milepost
           169.9 westbound) which is located within the city.
Ord.  3-
88-38 21-  Agreement with the County Regional Planning Commission for plan development.
      1988
Ord.  9-4-
130-  1990 Agreement with the Southwest Council of Governments.
90
Ord.  7-
58-91 22-  Agreement with the Southwest Council of Governments.
      1991
Ord.  12-  Contract with the Cuyahoga County Commissioners for the Cuyahoga County Plan of
92-91 16-  Cooperation Regarding Child Abuse and Neglect.
      1991
Ord.  8-   Agreement with the City of Seven Hills with respect to dispatching and jail
64-93 30-  services.
      1993
Ord.  12-  Agreement with the Board of County Commissioners of Cuyahoga County as trustees
124-  20-  of the Cuyahoga County Solid Waste Management District for the recycling of old
93    1993 newspaper and magazines in the city.
Ord.  2-   Agreement with the Cuyahoga County Board of Health for the provision of
21-94 21-  hepatitis B inoculations for the members of the Broadview Heights Police
      1994 Department.
Ord.  11-  Agreement on behalf of the city with various surrounding municipalities for the
135-  7-   purpose of forming a joint municipal improvement consortium.
94    1994
Ord.  2-3- Agreement with the Cuyahoga County Planning Commission for the provision of
6-97  1997 services and supplies for the implementation of a geographical information
           system to be known as the Broadview Heights Locational Resource Center.
Ord.  10-
144-  16-  Agreement establishing the Northeast Ohio Public Energy Council.
00    2000
Ord.  1-6- Agreement with the Suburban Water Regional Council of Governments.
01-03 2003
Ord.  2-3- Inter-Agency Agreement with the Cuyahoga County Juvenile Court for the
11-03 2003 provision of a Community Diversion Program.
Ord.  2-3- Agreement with North Royalton, Strongsville, as well as nearby cities and
12-03 2003 townships which may elect to participate  in the Joint Ambulance District.
         Agreement in reference to the Broadview Heights Ambulance Service District.
         Agreement with the Board of County Commissioners for an ALS/CECOMS II UHF/VHF
           radio system for ambulance- hospital communications .
           Agreement with the Ohio Turnpike Commission to provide ambulance service to the
         Commission for that portion of the Turnpike (between Milepost 161.7 to Milepost
           169.9 westbound) which is located within the city.
Ord.  10-  Agreement with the United States Department of Justice for the provision of a
148-  6-   federal equitable sharing agreement for the Police Department.
03    2003
Ord.  10-  Contract with the City of Bedford Heights for the housing of jail prisoners for
151-  20-  the Police Department.
03    2003
Ord.  2-   Agreement with the Board of Cuyahoga County Commissioners and the city for the
22-05 14-  FY 2001 State Domestic Preparedness Program Grant.
      2005
Res.  4-3-
2017- 2017 Agreement with Specialized Construction for the 2017-2018 Road Program.
32
Res.  11-
2017- 13-  Agreement with American Legal Publishing Corporation for codification services.
98    2017
Res.  11-  Agreement with Schirmer Construction for the State Route 82 Median
2017- 13-  Redevelopment Project.
99    2017
Res.  11-
2017- 20-  Agreement with Great Lakes Petroleum for the purchase of fuel in the city.
101   2017
Res.  11-  Agreement with University Hospitals of Cleveland relative to the Cuyahoga
2017- 20-  County OVI Task Force Grant.
103   2017
Res.  11-  Agreement with Climaco, Wilcox, Peca & Garofoli Co, L.P.A. and Napoli Shkolnik
2017- 20-  PLLC, for the provision of legal services to the city with respect to opioid
105   2017 litigation.
Res.  11-  Joint cooperative agreement between the City of Broadview Heights and the City
2017- 20-  of Brecksville for the State Route 82 widening project in the Cities of
106   2017 Broadview Heights and Brecksville.
Res.  12-
2017- 11-  Mutual Aid agreement between the City of Broadview Heights and Summit County.
111   2017
Res.  12-
2017- 18-  Agreement for establishment of the Cuyahoga Valley Council of Governments.
114   2017
Res.  12-
2017- 18-  New Member Participation Agreement with the Chagrin Valley Dispatch Council.
115   2017
Res.  12-  Agreement with Healthy Contributions, LLC for the provision of a fitness
2017- 18-  program.
118   2017
Res.  12-
2017- 18-  Agreement with British Soccer for the provision of soccer camps.
119   2017
Res.  12-  Agreement with the Cleveland Cavaliers for tickets for the Youth Basketball
2017- 18-  Program in the city.
122   2017
Res.  12-
2017- 18-  Agreement with Royalton Fieldhouse for 2018 facility rentals.
123   2017
           Agreement with Jackson-Dieken and Assoc. Insurance Company for the provision of
Res.  12-  a general liability, property casualty, auto, tools and equipment, boiler and
2017- 18-  machinery, electric data processing equipment, inland marine, umbrella, rescue
130   2017 squad, police professional liability, public official liability, cyber
           liability and employment practices liability insurance policy for the city.
Res.  12-  Agreement with Trugreen for lawn treatment services at the Broadview Center for
2017- 18-  the Parks and Recreation Department.
120   2017
Res.  12-  Agreement with Trugreen for lawn treatment services at the Broadview Center for
2017- 18-  the Parks and Recreation Department .
121   2017
Res.  1-   Agreement with Cuyahoga County Department of Public Works Division of Sanitary
2018- 16-  Engineering for the Tollis Parkway Sanitary Sewer repairs in the city.
06    2018
Res.  1-
2018- 16-  Agreement with R. M. Kole & Associates, Corp. for survey services in the city.
07    2018
Res.  1-   Agreement with Vermont Systems, Inc. for maintenance and upgrades to the
2018- 16-  recreation department software programs in the city.
08    2018
Res.  1-   Memorandum between the city and the Cuyahoga Soil and Water Conservation
2018- 16-  District for the implementation of a conservation program that corresponds with
10    2018 the city’s municipal separate storm sewer system permit and declaring an
           emergency.
Res.  2-5- Agreement with Sherman-Andrz ejczyk Group, Inc. for real estate appraisal
2018- 2018 services in the city.
17
Res.  2-5- Agreement with Stephen Campbell & Associates for a Guaranteed Maintenance
2018- 2018 Service Agreement for the Police Department recording equipment.
18
Res.  5-   Agreement with Panzica for Construction Manager Services for the Historical
2017- 15-  Society Building renovation.
59    2018
Res.  2-   Agreement with Cleveland Time Clock & Service, Co. for time clock maintenance
2018- 19-  in the city.
21    2018
Res.  2-   Agreement with the State of Ohio Department of Transportation to maintain
2018- 19-  highway landscaping in the city.
22    2018
Res.  2-   Agreement with the Ohio Department of Transportation for the widening of
2018- 19-  Wallings Road Bridge over IR-77 in the city.
24    2018
Res.  2-
2018- 19-  Agreement with Timberland Tree Service for S.R. 82 tree removal in the city.
25    2018
Res.  2-   Agreement with Hull, Inc. for engineering services for the Wyatt Road Retention
2018- 19-  Basin Project in the city.
27    2018
Res.  2-   Agreement with NOPEC, Inc. for participation in the NOPEC Energized Community
2018- 19-  Grant Program in the city.
29    2018
Res.  2-   Agreements with Adler, BSN, Koppel, Pyramid, and RDP for provision of uniforms
2018- 19-  and equipment for the year 2018 for the Department of Parks and Recreation in
30    2018 the city.
Res.  3-5- Agreement with Euthenics, Inc. for engineering services for the Broadview Road/
2018- 2018 Oakes Road intersection improvement project.
31
Res.  3-5- Agreement with Catts Construction for the Wright Road/Overlook Avenue
2018- 2018 improvement project.
32
Res.  3-5- Agreement with Medical Mutual of Ohio for provision of medical insurance for
2018- 2018 employees of the city.
35
Res.  3-5- Agreement with Ameritas for provision of dental and vision insurance for
2018- 2018 employees of the city.
36
Res.  3-5-
2018- 2018 Community cost share agreement with Northeast Ohio Regional Sewer District.
38
Res.  3-   Agreement with Arkinetics for completion of Historical Society Building
2018- 19-  drawings.
39    2018
Res.  3-   Agreement with the Ohio Facilities Construction Commission for the renovation
2018- 19-  of the Broadview Heights Historical Society Building.
41    2018
Res.  4-2-
2018- 2018 Agreement with Greve Chrysler Jeep Dodge for the purchase of police vehicles.
44
Res.  4-2- Agreement with the City of Brecksville for the provision of prisoner housing
2018- 2018 services.
45
Res.  4-2-
2018- 2018 Agreement with Rush Truck Centers for the purchase of salt trucks.
46
Res.  4-2-
2018- 2018 Agreement with Geotech Services, Inc. for culvert pipe repairs.
47
Res.  4-
2018- 23-  Agreement with American Fireworks Company for fireworks displays.
55    2018
Res.  4-   Agreement with Compmanageme nt, Inc. for inclusion in the Ohio Association of
2018- 23-  Public Treasurer’s Compensation Group Retrospective Program.
56    2018
Res.  4-   Agreement with Cuyahoga County for the resurfacing of East Mill Road, Wallings
2018- 23-  Road and Lacey Lane.
57    2018
Res.  4-
2018- 23-  Agreement with Kokosing Materials, Inc. for purchase of asphalt materials.
58    2018
Res.  4-   Agreement with Precision Heating & Cooling, Inc. for HVAC installation in the
2018- 23-  Historical Society Building.
60    2018
Res.  4-
2018- 23-  Amending agreement with Geotech Services, Inc. for culvert repairs.
61    2018
Res.  5-7- Agreement with Catts Construction for concrete for the Wright Road/Overlook
2018- 2018 Avenue improvement project.
65
Res.  5-7- Agreement with Catts Construction for concrete for the Wright Road/Overlook
2018- 2018 Avenue improvement project.
65
Res.  5-7- Community development supplemental agreement with Cuyahoga County for the
2018- 2018 Broadview Heights Community Amphitheater project.
66
Res.  5-7- Agreement with Graves for the purchase of lumber for the Spotlights Building
2018- 2018 project.
67
Res.  5-7-
2018- 2018 Agreement with Tri-County Concrete for concrete for 2018.
68
Res.  5-7- Agreement with Catts Construction for concrete for the Wright Road/Overlook
2018- 2018 Avenue improvement project.
72
Res.  5-
2018- 21-  Agreement with Miracle Stone for Historical Building flooring.
75    2018
Res.  5-
2018- 21-  Agreement with Cintas for rug service.
76    2018
Res.  5-
2018- 21-  Agreement with Cox Cable for cable services.
77    2018
Res.  5-
2018- 21-  Agreement with Cox Cable for internet services.
78    2018
Res.  5-
2018- 21-  Agreement with the City of North Royalton for prisoner housing.
79    2018
Res.  5-
2018- 21-  Agreement with FNB Commercial Leasing for fitness equipment.
80    2018
Res.  6-4-
2018- 2018 Agreement with Cargill for the provision of road salt.
84
Res.  6-4- Memorandum of understanding with Cuyahoga County for the use of the county’s
2018- 2018 mass notification system.
85
Res.  6-
2018- 18-  Agreement with Cintas for uniforms.
94    2018
Res.  6-
2018- 18-  Agreement with Corrine Chilcott for safety town instruction.
95    2018
Res.  6-
2018- 18-  Depository agreement with First National Bank.
96    2018
Res.  6-
2018- 18-  Agreement with Konica Minolta Business Solutions USA for copiers.
97    2018
Res.  7-2-
2018- 2018 Agreement with Senior Transportation Connection for transportation services.
99
Res.  6-
2018- 18-  Agreement with Specialized Construction for the 2019 road program.
100   2018
Res.  7-2-
2018- 2018 Agreement with Cox Cable for installation of cable and internet services.
102
Res.  7-2-
2018- 2018 Sponsorship agreement with World Elite Kids.
103
Res.  7-2-
2018- 2018 Agreement with JD Striping for the 2018 street striping program.
107
Res.  7-2-
2018- 2018 Agreement with Cox Cable for installation of cable and internet services.
108
Res.  8-
2018- 27-  Agreement with Konica Minolta Business Solutions USA for copiers.
112   2018
Res.  8-   Agreement with Cuyahoga County for the resurfacing of Sprague Road, Broad Road
2018- 27-  to eastern corporation line.
113   2018
Res.  8-
2018- 27-  Agreement with Precision Heating & Cooling, Inc.
116   2018
Res.  8-   Agreement with Mason Mechanical, LLC for HVAC installation in the Historical
2018- 27-  Society Building.
117   2018
Res.  8-
2018- 27-  Agreement with Giant Eagle for a vaccination program in the city.
120   2018
Res.  8-
2018- 27-  Agreement with J.D. Striping & Serv., Inc for striping removal.
122   2018
Res.  8-   Agreement with Specialized Construction, Inc. for Avery Road bike lane
2018- 27-  widening.
123   2018
Res.  8-
2018- 27-  LPA federal local-LET project agreement with Ohio Department of Transportation.
124   2018
Res.  8-   Amending agreement with Specialized Construction, Inc. for the 2017-2018 road
2018- 27-  program.
125   2018
Res.  8-   Agreement with Catts Construction for the Wright Road/Overlook Avenue
2018- 27-  improvement project.
126   2018
Res.  9-4-
2018- 2018 Agreement with Cleveland Coca- Cola for beverage services.
136
Res.  9-   Agreement with Mechanical Piping Systems, Inc. for the replacement of air
2018- 17-  conditioning units in the city.
143   2018
Res.  10-
2018- 1-   Agreement with Geotech Services, Inc. for storm water repairs.
156   2018
Res.  10-  Agreement with Trans Systems for engineering services for the Broadview Road/
2018- 1-   Valley Parkway traffic signal design.
157   2018
Res.  10-  Agreement with Gerow Equipment Company for pump parts for the Avery Road pump
2018- 1-   station.
159   2018
Res.  10-  Agreement with Gerow Equipment Company for replacement pump for the Boston Road
2018- 1-   pump station.
160   2018
Res.  10-  Amending agreement with Mason Mechanical, LLC for HVAC installation in the
2018- 1-   Historical Society Building.
166   2018
Res.  10-
2018- 15-  Agreement with Cuyahoga County Board of Health for public health services.
167   2018
Res.  10-
2018- 15-  Community cost share agreement with Northeast Ohio Regional Sewer District.
168   2018
Res.  11-  Agreement with Smith & Nejedlik, Inc. for real estate expertise and litigation
2018- 5-   support services.
172   2018
Res.  11-
2018- 5-   Agreement with Geotech Services, Inc. for storm water repairs.
173   2018
Res.  11-  Agreement with Optumhealth Care Solutions, LLC for recreation center members
2018- 5-   access to the Be Well Program.
177   2018
Res.  11-  Agreement with Big “O” Entertainment, LLC for the provision of summer
2018- 5-   celebration services.
178   2018
Res.  11-
2018- 5-   Agreement with American Firework Company for fireworks displays.
179   2018
Ord.  11-  Continuing an agreement with Royalton 6001, Ltd. for the provision of
49-   19-  incentives available pursuant to R.C. Chapter 3735.
2018  2018
Res.  11-  Agreement with Comfort Systems USA for HVAC installation in the Spotlight
2018- 19-  Theatre Building.
197   2018
Res.  11-  Agreement with Gold Standard Construction, Co. for vinyl siding on the
2018- 19-  Spotlight Theatre Building.
199   2018
Res.  12-  Agreement with the Greatmats.com, Corporation for the purchase of group
2018- 3-   exercise flooring.
205   2018
Res.  12-
2018- 3-   Agreement with Nerone & Sons, Inc. for the Avery Road Pump Station repairs.
206   2018
Res.  12-  Agreement with the University Hospitals of Cleveland pursuant to the Cuyahoga
2018- 3-   County OVI Task Force Grant.
207   2018
Res.  12-
2018- 17-  Agreement with Aris Company for portable sanitation equipment.
232   2018
Res.  12-
2018- 17-  Agreement with British Soccer for the provision of soccer camps.
233   2018
Res.  12-
2018- 17-  Agreement with Royalton Fieldhouse for 2019 facility rentals.
234   2018
Res.  12-  Agreement with Trugreen for lawn treatment services for the Parks and
2018- 17-  Recreation Department.
235   2018
Res.  12-  Agreement with the Cleveland Cavaliers for tickets for the Youth Basketball
2018- 17-  Program.
236   2018
Res.  12-
2018- 17-  Agreement with Cox Cable for Cable services.
238   2018
           Agreement with Jackson-Dieken & Associates for the provision of a general
Res.  12-  liability, property casualty, auto, tools and equipment, boiler and machinery,
2018- 17-  electric data processing equipment, inland marine, umbrella, rescue squad,
241   2018 police professional liability, public official liability, cyber liability and
           employment practices liability insurance policy.
Res.  12-
2018- 17-  Agreement with Civic Plus, Inc. for web accessibility services.
243   2018
Res.  12-  Agreement with the Cleveland Foundation for the provision of a summer intern to
2018- 17-  the city.
244   2018
Res.  12-
2018- 17-  Agreement with David Williams and Associates for an amphitheater.
245   2018
Res.  12-  Agreement with the NOACA to provide enhanced mobility for seniors and
2018- 17-  individuals with disabilities.
246   2018
Res.  1-   Agreement with Warner Hollow Welding Ship for installation of a fire escape to
2019- 14-  the Historical Society Building.
01    2019
Res.  1-   Agreement with Euthenics, Inc. for engineering services for the Broadview Road/
2019- 22-  Oaks Road Intersection Improvement Project.
04    2019
Res.  1-   Agreement with the Cuyahoga Soil and Water Conservation District for assistance
2019- 22-  implementing soil and water conservation measures.
06    2019
Res.  1-   Agreement with the Cuyahoga Soil and Water Conservation District for public
2019- 22-  involvement and public education (PIPE) services.
07    2019
Res.  2-4-
2019- 2019 Agreement with Smith and Nejedlik, Inc. for appraisal services.
13
Res.  2-4- Agreement with Stephen Campbell & Associates for recording equipment
2019- 2019 maintenance.
14
Res.  2-4-
2019- 2019 Agreement with Hinckley Township for boundary roads.
15
Res.  2-4- Agreement with Sours, Buie and Associates, LLC for real estate appraisal and
2019- 2019 consulting services.
17
Res.  2-   Agreement with Medical Mutual of Ohio for the provision of medical insurance
2019- 18-  for the employees of the city for the period March 1, 2019 through February 29,
20    2019 2020.
Res.  2-   Agreement with Ameritas for the provision of dental and vision insurance for
2019- 18-  the employees of the city for the period of March 1, 2019 through February 29,
21    2019 2020.
Res.  2-   Agreement with McPhillips Plumbing, Heating and Cooling for a fire suppression
2019- 18-  system for the Spotlights Theatre.
23    2019
Res.  2-
2019- 25-  Agreement with Vancuren Services, Inc. for Route 82 tree clearing and grubbing.
25    2019
Res.  3-4-
2019- 2019 Agreement with Comdoc for the purchase of a printer.
28
Res.  3-4- Agreement with QCI for contract administration services for the Route 82
2019- 2019 widening project.
29
Res.  3-
2019- 18-  Agreement with Bus Services, Inc. for the purchase of a light transit vehicle.
35    2019
Res.  3-
2019- 18-  Agreement with the Ohio Public Works Commission for an interest free loan.
37    2019
Res.  3-   Agreement with Adler Team Sports, Challenger, BSN and Koppel for the provision
2019- 18-  of uniforms and equipment for the year 2019 for the Department of Parks and
45    2019 Recreation.
Res.  4-1- Agreement with Greve Chrysler Jeep Dodge for the purchase of replacement police
2019- 2019 vehicle.
46
Res.  4-1- Agreement with Ganley Chevrolet of Aurora LLC for the purchase of replacement
2019- 2019 police vehicle.
47
Res.  4-1-
2019- 2019 Agreement with Philips Lifeline for remote monitoring services.
48
Res.  4-1-
2019- 2019 Agreement with Tri-County Concrete for the provision of concrete for 2019.
50
Res.  4-1- Agreement with Digioia-Suburban Excavating, Inc. for the State Route 82
2019- 2019 widening project.
51
Res.  4-1-
2019- 2019 Agreement with Vancuren Services, Inc. for Route 82 tree clearing and grubbing.
53
Res.  4-1- Agreement with Rudzik Excavating for cistern work in the right-of-way near 8344
2019- 2019 Broadview Road.
54
Res.  4-1- Agreement with Rudzik Excavating for Emerald Creek/Falls Lane storm water
2019- 2019 dredging.
55
Res.  4-
2019- 15-  Agreement with American Fireworks for the provision of Home Days Fireworks.
56    2019
Res.  4-
2019- 15-  Agreement with XL Excavating for demolition services.
57    2019
Res.  4-   Agreement with Kokosing Materials, Inc. for asphalt materials for 2019 and
2019- 15-  2020.
58    2019
Res.  5-6- Agreement with Verizon for cellular services at GSA-FSS approved rates and
2019- 2019 features.
60
Res.  5-6-
2019- 2019 Agreement with David Williams and Associates for an amphitheater.
62
Res.  5-6- Agreement with Trugreen for lawn treatment services for the Parks and
2019- 2019 Recreation Department.
63
Res.  5-6- Agreement with Century Equipment for the purchase of Toro Sand Pro/Infield Pro
2019- 2019 3040 for the Parks and Recreation Department.
64
Res.  5-6- Sponsorship agreement with Ohio North Soccer Referee Committee in the
2019- 2019 Department of Parks and Recreation.
65
Res.  5-6-
2019- 2019 Agreement with the National Basketball Academy to administer a basketball camp.
66
Res.  5-6-
2019- 2019 Equipment lease agreement with Figure the Odds, LLC.
67
Res.  5-6- Change order with Digioia Suburban Excavating, LLC with respect to the State
2019- 2019 Route 82 Widening Project.
68
Res.  5-6- Agreement with Comp Management, Inc. for inclusion in the Ohio Association of
2019- 2019 Public Treasurers Group Retrospective Rating Program for 2020.
70
Res.  5-   Agreement with Citi Electric Inc. to provide electrical service for the
2019- 13-  amphitheater.
71    2019
Res.  5-   Agreement with the Industrial Appraisal Company for the insurance appraisal
2019- 20-  services.
72    2019
Res.  5-   Agreement with James G. Zupka, C.P.A., Inc. for professional accounting
2019- 20-  services for reporting years 2019, 2020, and 2021.
74    2019
Res.  6-3-
2019- 2019 Agreement with JD Striping for street striping in the city.
83
Res.  6-3- Repealing Res. 2019-73 which authorized an agreement with Cincy Autos, Inc., d/
2019- 2019 b/a Lebanon Ford for the purchase of three vehicles for the Service Department.
85
Res.  6-3- Agreement with Middletown Ford for the purchase of three vehicles for the
2019- 2019 Service Department.
86
Res.  6-3- Agreement with Rudzik Excavating for Cranberry Ridge and Ledgemont Drive storm
2019- 2019 outfall repairs.
87
Res.  6-
2019- 17-  Agreement with Osborne Stone for stone purchases.
91    2019
Res.  6-   Agreement with Buyansky Brothers for landscaping materials and disposal
2019- 17-  services.
92    2019
Res.  6-
2019- 17-  Agreement with Shannon Kincaid for Safety Town Instruction.
93    2019
18-   7-1- Agreement and release of full settlement of the case known as City of Broadview
2019  2019 Heights v. Benjamin Taylor, et al.
19-   7-1- Agreement and release of full settlement of the case known as City of Broadview
2019  2019 Heights v. Paul Merrill, et al.
20-   7-1- Agreement and release of full settlement of the case known as City of Broadview
2019  2019 Heights vs. James Cipriani, et al.
21-   7-1- Agreement in full settlement of the case known as Steve Wojnarowski vs. City of
2019  2019 Broadview Heights.
Res.  7-1- Amending Res. 2018-31 regarding an agreement with Euthenics, Inc. for
2019- 2019 engineering services for the Broadview Road/Oakes Road Intersection Improvement
95         Project.
Res.  7-1- Agreement with Robert’s Mechanical Equipment for the purchase of two high
2019- 2019 efficiency boilers.
97
Res.  7-1- Amending Res. 2018-173 regarding an agreement with Geotech Services for storm
2019- 2019 water repairs.
98
Res.  7-1- Agreement with Vance’s Law Enforcement for the purchase and trade-in of
2019- 2019 shotguns.
99
Res.  7-1- Agreement with Snider Recreation, Inc. for the purchase of playground
2019- 2019 equipment.
100
Res.  7-1-
2019- 2019 Lease agreement with the Brecksville-Broadview Heights Preschool Mother’s Club.
101
Res.  7-1- Agreement with the National Center for Safety Initiatives, L.L.C. to provide
2019- 2019 background checks for employees and coaches in the Parks and Recreation
102        Department.
Res.  7-1-
2019- 2019 Lease agreement with the Broadview Heights Spotlights.
104
Res.  7-   Amending Res. 2019-37 regarding an agreement with the Ohio Public Works
2019- 23-  Commission for an interest free loan.
107   2019
Res.  7-   LPA Federal Local-LET Project Agreement with the State of Ohio Department of
2019- 23-  Transportation.
108   2019
Res.  7-   Agreement with Trans Systems for engineering services for the Broadview Road/
2019- 23-  Valley Parkway traffic signal design.
111   2019
Res.  8-
2019- 26-  Agreement with Area Temps for temporary help services.
115   2019
Res.  8-
2019- 26-  Agreement with MT Business Technologies for the purchase of a copy machine.
119   2019
Res.  8-   Amending Res. 2018-198 regarding memorandum of understanding with the Cuyahoga
2019- 26-  County Planning Commission.
121   2019
Res.  8-   Agreement with NuCO2, LLC for the lease of a bulk Co2 tank and gas detector
2019- 26-  system.
122   2019
Res.  8-
2019- 26-  Lease agreement with the Broadview Heights Historical Society.
123   2019
Res.  8-   Amending Res. 2018-100 regarding an agreement with Specialized Construction,
2019- 26-  Inc. for the 2019 Road Program.
125   2019
Res.  8-
2019- 26-  Agreement with Winter Equipment for the purchase of snow plow parts.
127   2019
Res.  8-   Amending Res. 2017-32 and Res. 2018-125 with Specialized Construction, Inc. for
2019- 26-  the 2017-2018 Road Program.
128   2019
Res.  9-9- Agreement with Rosenbauer Minnesota, LLC for the purchase of a new 100' mid-
2019- 2019 mount platform ladder truck.
129
Res.  9-9- Agreement with S.A. Comunale Total Mechanical Contractors for a boiler system
2019- 2019 replacement.
130
Res.  9-9- Agreement with Tri Mor Corporation for the Broadview Road/Oakes Road
2019- 2019 intersection improvement.
131
Res.  9-9- Agreement with Vance’s Law Enforcement for the purchase and trade-in of
2019- 2019 weapons.
132
Res.  9-   Agreement with Bridge Payment for credit card processing in the Building
2019- 23-  Department.
134   2019
Res.  9-   Agreement with Bridge Payment for credit card processing in the Finance
2019- 23-  Department.
135   2019
Res.  9-
2019- 23-  Agreement with Bridge Payment for credit card processing in the Mayor’s Court.
136   2019
Res.  9-
2019- 23-  Agreement with Easton Telecom for phone service.
137   2019
Res.  9-   Agreement with Osborn Engineering for engineering services for the Wallings
2019- 23-  Road over I-77 Project.
138   2019
Res.  9-   Amending Res. 2019-51 regarding an agreement with Digioia-Suburban Excavating,
2019- 23-  LLC with respect to the State Route 82 Widening Project.
139   2019
Res.  9-
2019- 23-  Agreement with United Survey for sanitary sewer maintenance.
140   2019
Res.  9-
2019- 23-  Community Cost Share Agreement with the Northeast Ohio Regional Sewer District.
144   2019
37-   10-  Final Settlement Agreement in City of Broadview Heights vs. 82 A, L.L.C., et
2019  7-   al., Cuyahoga County Probate Court, Case No. 2018ADV239581.
      2019
Res.  10-
2019- 7-   Agreement with Challenger Sport Corp. for soccer camps.
148   2019
Res.  10-
2019- 7-   Agreement with Cincinnati Floor Company for gymnasium floor services.
149   2019
Res.  10-
2019- 7-   Agreement with Hermes Sports and Events for race management services.
150   2019
Res.  10-
2019- 7-   Agreement with Pure Image Photo Booth for photo booth services.
151   2019
Res.  10-  Agreement with Snider Recreation, Inc. for the purchase of playground
2019- 7-   equipment.
153   2019
Res.  10-
2019- 7-   Agreement with Strongsville for prisoner housing services.
155   2019
Res.  10-  Agreement with QCI for contract administration, inspection and testing services
2019- 21-  for the Broadview Road and Oakes Road intersection improvement project.
158   2019
Res.  10-  Agreement with DiGioia-Suburban Excavating, LLC with respect to the State Route
2019- 21-  82 Widening Project.
159   2019
Res.  10-
2019- 21-  Agreement with Cargill, Inc. for the provision of salt.
160   2019
Res.  10-
2019- 21-  Agreement with the American Fireworks Company for fireworks displays.
162   2019
39-   11-
2019  4-   Terminating the agreement dated September 16, 2002 with Royalton 6001, Ltd.
      2019
Res.  11-
2019- 4-   Agreement with Concord Road Equipment, Mfg. for truck conversion services.
165   2019
Res.  11-
2019- 4-   Agreement with Shred-It for shredding services.
166   2019
Res.  11-  Agreement with Excel K-9 Services Inc. for the purchase and training of a
2019- 4-   police service dog for the Police Department.
170   2019
Res.  11-
2019- 4-   Agreement with Fastsigns for the purchase of a city sign.
171   2019
Res.  11-  Agreement with University Hospitals of Cleveland relative to the Cuyahoga
2019- 18-  County OVI Task Force Grant.
172   2019
Res.  11-
2019- 18-  Agreement with Ports Petroleum for the purchase of fuel.
174   2019
Res.  12-  Repealing Resolution 2019-161, agreement with Borchert Fence for the purchase
2019- 2-   of guardrail installation.
175   2019
Res.  12-
2019- 2-   Agreement with Cuyahoga Fence, LLC for guardrail installation.
176   2019
Res.  12-  Agreement with NAPA Ohio, Inc. for the purchase of a tire changer and wheel
2019- 16-  balancer.
178   2019
Res.  12-  Agreement with the National Alliance for youth sports for the Start Smart ESPN
2019- 16-  grant.
179   2019
Res.  12-
2019- 16-  Agreement with NOACA for NOACA 2021-2024 Tip Funding Award.
180   2019
Res.  12-  Agreement with NOPEC, Inc. for the grant of an electronic device charging
2019- 16-  station.
181   2019
Res.  12-
2019- 16-  Agreement with PRADCO for police testing services.
182   2019
Res.  12-
2019- 16-  Agreement with Royalton Fieldhouse for 2020 facility rentals.
183   2019
Res.  12-  Agreement with the Cleveland Cavaliers for tickets for the 2020 Youth
2019- 16-  Basketball Program.
184   2019
Res.  12-  Agreement with the Cuyahoga SWCD for technical assistance services related to
2019- 16-  the MS4 Program Minimum Control Measures 4 & 5.
185   2019
           Agreement with McGowan Governmental Underwriters of America for the provision
Res.  12-  of a general liability, property casualty, auto, tools and equipment, boiler
2019- 16-  and machinery, electric data processing equipment, inland marine, umbrella,
187   2019 rescue squad, police professional liability, public official liability, cyber
           liability and employment practices liability insurance policy for the city.
Res.  12-  Agreement with Steps Educational Group for providing off site emergency
2019- 16-  shelters.
190   2019
01-   1-   Authorizing the Mayor to enter into final settlement agreement with Diane
2020  21-  Dergance, et al.
      2020
Res.  1-
2020- 21-  Agreement with Senior Transportation Connection.
02    2020
Res.  1-
2020- 21-  Agreement with Medical Mutual of Ohio.
07    2020
Res.  1-
2020- 21-  Agreement with Ameritas.
08    2020
Res.  1-
2020- 21-  Agreement with JP Mohler, LLC.
09    2020
Res.  1-
2020- 21-  Amending agreement with Digioia-Suburban Excavating.
10    2020
Res.  1-
2020- 21-  Amending agreement with United Survey.
13    2020
Res.  1-
2020- 21-  Amending agreement with Trans Systems.
14    2020
Res.  1-
2020- 21-  Agreement with Wiss, Janney, Elstner Associates, Inc.
16    2020
Res.  1-
2020- 21-  Amending agreement with OHM Advisors.
17    2020
Res.  1-
2020- 21-  Agreement with Rudzik Excavating.
18    2020
Res.  1-
2020- 21-  Amending agreement with Catts Construction.
20    2020
Res.  2-3-
2020- 2020 Agreement with Cuyahoga Soil and Water Conservation District.
25
Res.  2-3-
2020- 2020 Agreement with Lebanon Ford.
26
Res.  2-3-
2020- 2020 Agreement with Sherry Chrysler.
27
Res.  2-3-
2020- 2020 Agreement with Nerone & Sons.
28
Res.  2-3-
2020- 2020 Agreement with Nerone & Sons.
29
Res.  2-3-
2020- 2020 Agreement with Stephen Campbell & Associates.
30
Res.  2-3-
2020- 2020 Agreement with MAS Financial Advisory Services, LLC.
33
Res.  2-3-
2020- 2020 Agreement with Howell Rescue Systems, Inc.
36
Res.  2-3-
2020- 2020 Agreement with Tri-County Concrete.
38
Res.  2-
2020- 17-  Agreement with Xavus Solutions.
39    2020
Res.  3-2-
2020- 2020 Agreement with Cuyahoga Court of Common Pleas.
40
Res.  3-2-
2020- 2020 Agreement with Flipside VR, LLC.
41
Res.  3-2-
2020- 2020 Agreement with Medical Mutual.
42
Res.  3-2-
2020- 2020 Agreement with All Covered.
43
Res.  3-2-
2020- 2020 Agreement with SHI.
44
Res.  3-2-
2020- 2020 Agreement with National Basketball Academy.
46
Res.  3-2-
2020- 2020 Agreement with National Center for Safety Services.
47
Res.  3-2-
2020- 2020 Agreement with Ohio North Soccer Referee Committee.
48
Res.  3-2-
2020- 2020 Agreement with Pure Image Photo Booth.
49
Res.  3-2-
2020- 2020 Agreement with Steps Educational Group.
50
Res.  3-2-
2020- 2020 Agreement with Play-Well Teknologies.
51
Res.  3-2-
2020- 2020 Agreement with ODOT.
52
Res.  3-2-
2020- 2020 Agreement with RE/MAX Beyond 2000.
53
Res.  3-2-
2020- 2020 Agreement with Shred-It.
54
Res.  3-2-
2020- 2020 Agreement with Rudzik Excavating Services.
55
Res.  3-2-
2020- 2020 Agreement with Thyssenkrupp Elevator Corp.
56
Res.  3-2-
2020- 2020 Agreement with Trugreen.
58
Res.  3-2-
2020- 2020 Agreement with Trugreen.
59
Res.  3-2- Agreement with Adler, BSN, Challenger, Flag House, Koppel, Pyramid and RDP
2020- 2020 Sports.
60
Res.  3-
2020- 23-  Agreement with D.J.L. Material Supply, Inc.
61    2020
Res.  3-
2020- 23-  Agreement with Fallsway Equipment Co.
62    2020
Res.  3-
2020- 23-  Agreement with Leads Online.
63    2020
Res.  3-
2020- 23-  Agreement with Penn Care, Inc.
64    2020
Res.  3-
2020- 23-  Agreement with Positive Impact HR, LLC.
65    2020
Res.  3-
2020- 23-  Amending agreement with Cuyahoga County.
66    2020
Res.  3-
2020- 23-  Agreement with Yousof Azzi for sale of property (repealed).
67    2020
Res.  4-
2020- 20-  Agreement with Kokosing Materials, Inc.
72    2020
Res.  4-
2020- 20-  Agreement with Garland/DBS, Inc.
73    2020
Res.  4-
2020- 20-  Agreement with Specialized Construction.
74    2020
Res.  4-
2020- 20-  Agreement with Carfax.
75    2020
Res.  4-
2020- 20-  Repealing Resolution 202-67 regarding agreement with Yousof Azizi.
76    2020
Res.  4-
2020- 20-  Agreement with J&J Enterprise Services, Inc.
79    2020
Res.  4-
2020- 20-  Agreement with Seven Hills.
80    2020
Res.  4-
2020- 20-  Agreement with Buyansky Bros.
81    2020
Res.  4-
2020- 20-  Agreement with Rudzik Excavating.
82    2020
19-   5-
2020  18-  Entering final settlement agreement with A. Richard Marcelling, et al.
      2020
Res.  5-
2020- 18-  Agreement with Digioia-Suburban Excavating, LLC.
85    2020
Res.  5-
2020- 18-  Agreement with Osborne Concrete & Stone.
86    2020
Res.  5-
2020- 18-  Agreement with Osborne Engineering.
88    2020
Res.  5-
2020- 18-  Agreement with Verizon.
89    2020
Res.  5-
2020- 18-  Agreement with Comp Management, Inc.
90    2020
Res.  5-
2020- 18-  Master cooperation agreement with various municipalities.
91    2020
Res.  5-
2020- 18-  Agreement with Bridge Payment.
92    2020
Res.  5-
2020- 18-  Agreement with QCI.
93    2020
Res.  5-
2020- 18-  Agreement with Cargill.
95    2020
Res.  5-
2020- 18-  Agreement with Cargill.
96    202
Res.  5-
2020- 18-  Agreement with CT Consultants.
98    2020
Res.  6-
2020- 15-  Bridge agreement.
100   2020
Res.  6-
2020- 15-  Agreement with Verizon.
101   2020
Res.  6-
2020- 15-  Agreement with Signal Service.
105   2020
Res.  7-6-
2020- 2020 Agreement with American Fireworks.
108
Res.  7-6-
2020- 2020 Agreement with CK Industrial.
109
Res.  7-6-
2020- 2020 Agreement with Edge.
110
Res.  7-6-
2020- 2020 Agreement with Shred It.
111
Res.  7-6-
2020- 2020 Agreement with Stefanik, Iosue & Associates.
112
Res.  7-6-
2020- 2020 Master cooperation agreement with Cuyahoga County.
113
          
 
 
COMPARATIVE SECTION TABLE
References to Ohio Revised Code
References to Resolutions
References to Ordinances
REFERENCES TO OHIO REVISED CODE
 
Ohio R.C. Cites Code Section
1.01                                   202.01
1.02                                   202.02
1.05                                   202.02
1.14                                   202.03
1.15                                   202.03
1.23                                   202.05
1.42                                   202.03
1.43                                   202.03
1.44                                   202.02
1.45                                   202.03
1.50                                   202.06
1.55                                   202.05
1.57                                   202.04
1.58                                   202.04
1.59                                   202.02
124.09                                 274.01
124.09(A)                              274.01
124.09(C)                              274.01
124.14                                 274.01
124.22                                 274.02
124.26                                 274.01
124.31                                 274.01,
                                       274.02
124.33                                 274.01
124.38                                 274.02
124.40                                 274.01
124.40(A)                              274.02
124.44                                 274.02
124.45                                 274.02
124.48                                 274.02
124.56                                 274.01
128.01(A)                              606.31
128.32(E)-(G)                          606.31
701.01                                 202.02
901.51                                 642.06
925.62                                 618.06
951.01                                 618.19
951.02                                 618.01,
                                       618.19
955.10                                 618.095
955.11(A)                              618.19
955.21                                 618.08
955.22                                 618.19
955.24                                 618.09
955.25                                 618.10
955.99(E)-(H),(J)                      618.19
959.01                                 618.02
959.02                                 618.03
959.03                                 618.04
959.13                                 618.05
959.131                                618.05
959.21                                 618.21
959.99(C)                              618.04
959.99(D)                              618.21
959.99(E)(7)                           618.21
1349.17                                642.155
2307.44                                636.21
2901.01                                606.01
2901.02                                606.03
2901.03                                606.04
2901.04                                606.05
2901.09                                606.32
2901.11                                606.055
2901.13                                606.06
2901.21                                606.07
2901.22                                606.02
2901.23                                606.08
2901.24                                606.09
2903.05                                636.001
2903.06                                434.08
2903.08(A)(3), (C)(3), (D)(3), (E)-(G) 434.08
2903.09                                636.001
2903.10                                636.24
2903.13                                636.02
2903.14                                636.03
2903.16                                636.24
2903.21                                636.04
2903.211                               636.045
2903.22                                636.05
2903.31                                636.21
2905.03(A),(B),(D)                     636.06
2905.05                                636.075
2905.12                                636.08
2907.01                                666.01
2907.04                                666.02
2907.06                                666.03
2907.08                                666.05
2907.09                                666.04
2907.10                                666.06
2907.23                                666.07
2907.24(A),(D),(E)                     666.08
2907.241                               666.085
2907.25                                666.09
2907.26                                666.10
2907.31                                666.11
2907.311                               666.115
2907.33                                666.13
2907.35                                666.14
2907.36                                666.15
2907.37                                666.16
2907.38                                666.17
2907.39                                666.18
2907.40                                666.19
2909.01                                642.01
2909.03                                642.09
2909.06                                642.10
2909.07                                642.11
2909.08(A)-(E)                         672.13
2909.09                                642.10
2909.10                                642.35
2909.101                               642.35
2909.11(B)-(D)                         642.25
2909.31                                606.30
2911.21                                642.12
2911.211                               642.125
2911.23                                642.12
2911.32                                642.13
2913.01                                642.01
2913.02                                642.02
2913.03                                642.04
2913.04                                642.05
2913.07                                642.34
2913.11                                642.14
2913.21                                642.15
2913.31(B),(C)(2)                      642.145
2913.32                                642.146
2913.33                                642.16
2913.40                                642.32
2913.401                               642.32
2913.41                                642.17
2913.42                                642.18
2913.43                                642.19
2913.44                                642.20
2913.441                               606.26
2913.45                                642.21
2913.47                                642.29
2913.48                                642.33
2913.51                                642.22
2913.61(B)-(E)                         642.24
2913.71                                642.03
2913.72                                642.03
2915.01                                630.01
2915.02(A)-(G),(K)                     630.02
2915.03                                630.03
2915.04                                630.04
2915.05                                630.05
2915.06                                630.14
2915.061                               630.14
2915.09                                630.06
2915.091                               630.10
2915.092                               630.11
2915.093                               630.12
2915.094                               630.13
2915.10                                630.07
2915.11                                630.08
2915.12                                630.09
2915.13                                630.12
2917.01                                648.13
2917.03                                648.01
2917.031                               648.01
2917.04                                648.02
2917.05                                648.03
2917.11                                648.04
2917.12                                648.05
2917.13                                648.06
2917.21                                636.15
2917.211                               666.21
2917.31                                648.07
2917.32                                648.08
2917.40                                636.20
2917.41                                642.31
2919.18(A),(B),(D)                     636.25
2919.21                                636.09
2919.22(A)-(E),(H)                     636.11
2919.23                                636.12
2919.24                                636.125
2919.25                                636.17
2919.27                                636.045
2921.01                                606.01
2921.13                                606.10
2921.14                                606.105
2921.21                                606.11
2921.22                                606.12
2921.23                                606.13
2921.29                                606.30
2921.31                                606.14
2921.32                                606.15
2921.321(A)-(D),(F)-(H)                642.08
2921.33                                606.16
2921.331(A)-(C),(E),(F)                606.165
2921.36                                612.10
2921.42                                606.17
2921.43                                606.18
2921.44                                606.19
2921.45                                606.20
2921.51                                606.25
2921.52(A)-(D)                         606.29
2923.02                                606.21
2923.03                                606.22
2923.11                                672.01,
                                       672.10
2923.12(A)-(E)                         672.02
2923.12(H)                             672.02
2923.1211(B)                           672.16
2923.1212                              672.16
2923.122(C)-(G)                        672.15
2923.126                               672.16
2923.131                               672.025
2923.15                                672.03
2923.16(A)-(H),(J)-(L)                 672.04
2923.162                               672.125
2923.18                                672.05
2923.19                                672.06
2923.201                               672.17
2923.211                               672.085
2923.24                                672.14
2925.01                                624.01
2925.03(A)-(C) , (I)                   624.02
2925.04(A),(B),(C)(5),(G)              624.025
2925.11                                624.03
2925.12                                624.04
2925.13                                624.05
2925.14                                624.14
2925.141                               624.14
2925.31                                624.07
2925.32(B)(4),(D)(2),(F),(G)           624.073
2925.33                                624.076
2925.34                                624.17
2925.36(A)-(C)                         624.08
2925.37(A),(G)                         624.15
2925.50                                624.11
2925.51                                624.10
2925.511                               624.10
2925.55                                624.16
2925.56                                624.16
2925.57                                624.16
2925.58                                624.16
2927.02                                636.22
2927.021                               636.22
2927.022                               636.22
2927.023                               636.22
2927.024                               636.22
2927.03                                636.23
2927.11                                642.07
2927.15                                636.26
2927.17                                666.20
2929.21                                202.99
2929.23                                666.98
2929.24                                202.99
2929.25                                202.99
2929.26                                202.99
2929.27                                202.99
2929.28                                202.99
2929.31                                202.99
2935.041                               606.23
2981.07                                642.205
2981.11                                606.24
2981.12                                606.24
2981.13(A)                             606.24
3701.81                                660.02
3701.82                                660.01
3701.99(B)                             660.01
3701.99(C)                             660.02
3715.05                                624.16
3715.06                                624.16
3716.11                                636.16
3716.99(C)                             636.16
3719.08(A),(E)                         624.13
3719.172(A),(B)                        624.09
3719.19                                624.11
3719.99(C)                             624.13
3719.99(E)                             624.09
3743.01                                672.10
3743.54                                672.10
3743.60(E)-(J)                         672.10
3743.61(E)-(J)                         672.10
3743.63                                672.10
3743.64                                672.10
3743.65(A)-(E)                         672.10
3743.66                                672.10
3743.68(B)                             672.10
3743.80                                672.10
3743.99(C),(D)                         672.10
3767.13                                660.04
3767.29                                660.06
3767.99(B)                             660.06
3767.99(C)                             660.04
3781.55                                666.04
3791.031                               660.14
3796.08                                1288.01
3796.22                                1288.01
3796.23                                1288.01
4301.01                                612.01
4301.22(A)(2)                          612.11
4301.22(B)                             612.03
4301.244                               612.01
4301.62                                612.07
4301.63                                612.02
4301.631                               612.11
4301.633                               612.02
4301.634                               612.02
4301.637                               612.06
4301.64                                612.04
4301.65                                612.11
4301.69                                612.02
4301.99(B)                             612.11
4301.99(D),(H)                         612.03
4301.99(E)                             612.02,
                                       612.11
4301.99(F)                             612.02
4303.202(D)(2)                         612.08
4303.208(C)                            612.08
4303.25                                612.05
4501.01                                440.01
4501.01(LL)                            402.075
4501.01(TT)                            416.12
4503.11(A)                             436.09
4503.11(D)                             436.09
4503.111(A),(C)                        436.09
4503.111(B)                            436.09
4503.21(A),(B)                         436.09
4503.21(C)                             436.09
4505.18                                436.08
4506.01                                442.01
4506.011                               442.02
4506.04(A),(B)                         442.03
4506.04(C)                             442.03
4506.10(A),(E)                         442.04
4506.12(I)                             442.03
4506.12(J)                             442.03
4506.15                                442.05
4506.19                                442.06
4506.20                                442.07
4506.23                                442.08
4507.02(A)                             436.01
4507.02(A)(2)                          436.02
4507.03                                436.01
4507.04                                436.01
4507.05(F)                             436.03
4507.071(B)-(I)                        436.035
4507.213                               432.01
4507.30                                436.04
4507.35                                436.06
4507.99                                436.02
4509.102                               606.10
4510.037(J)                            436.071
                                       436.071,
4510.04                                436.073 -
                                       436.075
4510.05                                404.99,
                                       606.99
4510.11                                436.071
4510.111                               436.071
4510.12                                436.072
4510.14                                436.073
4510.16                                436.074
4510.21                                436.075
4510.44                                434.011
4511.01                                402.54
4511.01(A)                             402.53
4511.01(B)                             402.20
4511.01(C)                             402.21
4511.01(D)                             402.12
4511.01(E)                             402.29
4511.01(F)                             402.37
4511.01(G)                             402.05
4511.01(H)                             402.22
4511.01(I)                             402.08
4511.01(J)                             402.02
4511.01(K)                             402.51
4511.01(L)                             402.06
4511.01(M)                             402.50
4511.01(N)                             402.38
4511.01(O)                             402.26
4511.01(P)                             402.30
4511.01(Q)                             402.32
4511.01(T)                             402.13
4511.01(U)                             402.15
4511.01(V)                             402.17
4511.01(W)                             402.25
4511.01(X)                             402.24
4511.01(Y)                             402.11
4511.01(Z)                             402.27
4511.01(BB)                            402.44
4511.01(CC)                            402.09
4511.01(DD)                            402.28
4511.01(EE)                            402.35
4511.01(FF)                            402.39
4511.01(GG)                            402.19
4511.01(HH)                            402.45
4511.01(JJ)                            402.40
4511.01(KK)                            402.18
4511.01(LL)                            402.10
4511.01(MM)                            402.36
4511.01(NN)                            402.07
4511.01(OO)                            402.33
4511.01(PP)                            402.52
4511.01(QQ)                            402.48
4511.01(RR)                            402.49
4511.01(SS)                            402.31
4511.01(TT)                            402.47
4511.01(UU)                            402.34
4511.01(VV)                            402.355
4511.01(WW)                            402.165
4511.01(XX)                            402.03
4511.01(YY)                            402.16
4511.01(ZZ)                            402.14
4511.01(AAA)                           402.46
4511.01(BBB)                           402.42
4511.01(CCC)                           402.04
4511.01(DDD)                           402.335
4511.01(EEE)                           402.225
4511.01(FFF)                           402.077
4511.01(GGG)                           402.02
4511.01(HHH)                           402.227
4511.01(III)                           402.275
4511.01(JJJ)                           402.345
4511.01(KKK)                           402.045
4511.01(LLL)                           402.177
4511.01(MMM)                           402.175
4511.01(NNN)                           402.195
4511.01(OOO)                           402.277
4511.01(PPP)                           402.385
4511.01(QQQ)                           402.173
4511.01(SSS)                           402.115
4511.01(TTT)                           402.115
4511.01(UUU)                           402.115
4511.03                                432.18
4511.031                               414.10
4511.04                                404.03
4511.041                               404.035
4511.042                               404.035
4511.05                                404.04
4511.051                               412.05
4511.08                                404.08
4511.12(A)                             414.01
4511.121(A)-(C),(E)                    414.01
4511.12(B)                             414.01
4511.121(D)                            414.01
4511.13                                414.03
4511.131                               414.04
4511.132                               432.155
4511.14                                414.05
4511.16                                414.07
4511.17                                414.08
4511.18                                414.085
4511.19                                434.01
4511.202                               434.026
4511.203                               436.05
4511.204                               432.43
4511.205                               432.44
4511.21(A)-(G)                         434.03
4511.21(O)                             434.03
4511.21(P)                             434.03
4511.211(A)-(E)                        434.035
4511.213                               432.195
4511.214                               434.09
4511.215                               434.09
4511.216                               434.09
4511.22                                434.04
4511.23                                434.05
4511.24                                434.06
4511.25                                432.01
4511.251                               434.07
4511.26                                432.02
4511.27                                432.03
4511.28                                432.04
4511.29                                432.05
4511.30                                432.06
4511.31                                432.07
4511.32                                432.28
4511.33                                432.08
4511.34                                432.09
4511.35                                432.29
4511.36                                432.10
4511.37                                432.11
4511.38                                432.12
4511.39                                432.13
4511.40                                432.14
4511.41                                432.15
4511.42                                432.16
4511.43                                432.17
4511.431                               432.20
4511.432(A)-(C),(E)                    432.205
4511.44                                432.20
4511.441                               416.09
4511.45                                432.19
4511.451                               432.21
4511.454                               432.19
4511.46                                416.01
4511.47                                416.02
4511.48                                416.03
4511.481                               416.10
4511.49                                416.04
4511.491                               416.11
4511.50                                416.05
4511.51                                416.06
4511.512                               416.12
4511.513                               416.13
4511.52                                474.01
4511.521                               474.11
4511.522                               474.12
4511.53                                474.02
4511.54                                474.03
4511.55                                474.04
4511.56                                474.05
4511.60                                432.27
4511.61                                432.32
4511.62                                432.31
4511.63                                432.32
4511.64                                432.33
4511.65                                414.02
4511.66                                452.01
4511.661                               452.06
4511.67                                452.01
4511.681                               452.055
4511.69                                452.04
4511.70                                432.23,
                                       452.07
4511.701                               440.08
4511.71(A)                             432.24
4511.71(B)                             432.24
4511.711(A)                            432.22
4511.712                               432.34
4511.713                               432.40
4511.714(A),(B)                        432.24
4511.714(D)                            432.24
4511.72(A)                             432.25
4511.73                                432.26
4511.74                                412.01
4511.75                                432.30
4511.762                               440.11
4511.79                                442.09
4511.81(A)-(H),(K)                     438.29
4511.82(A),(B),(D)                     432.41
4511.84                                432.42
4511.85                                440.18
4511.911                               404.99
4511.99                                404.99
4513.02                                438.01
4513.021                               438.26
4513.03                                438.02
4513.04                                438.03
4513.05                                438.04
4513.06                                438.05
4513.07                                438.06
4513.071                               438.25
4513.08                                438.07
4513.09                                438.08
4513.10                                438.09
4513.11                                438.10
4513.111                               438.10
4513.12                                438.11
4513.13                                438.12
4513.14                                438.13
4513.15                                438.14
4513.16                                438.15
4513.17                                438.16
4513.171                               438.165
4513.182                               438.17
4513.19                                438.18
4513.20                                438.19
4513.21                                438.20
4513.22                                438.21
4513.23                                438.22
4513.24                                438.23
4513.241(C)-(J)                        438.235
4513.263                               438.30
4513.27                                440.12
4513.28                                440.13
4513.29                                440.04
4513.30                                438.24
4513.31                                440.06
4513.32                                440.05
4513.33                                440.16
4513.34                                440.01
4513.36                                404.02
4513.361                               404.10
4513.60                                452.055
4513.601                               452.055
4513.66                                436.15
4513.68                                436.15
4519.01                                476.01
4519.02                                476.08
4519.20                                476.02
4519.40                                476.03
4519.401                               434.09
4519.41                                476.04
4519.44                                476.05
4519.46                                476.06
4519.48                                476.07
4519.66                                476.09
4549.02                                436.11
4549.021                               436.12
4549.03                                436.13
4549.05                                444.02
4549.08                                436.10
4549.081(B)                            414.01
4549.11(A)                             436.09
4549.11(B)                             436.09
4549.12(A)                             436.09
4549.20                                438.32
4933.18                                642.26
4933.19                                642.26
5507.041                               440.01
5577.01                                440.01
5577.03                                440.01
5577.04                                440.01
5577.05                                440.02
5577.06                                440.02
5577.11                                440.03
5577.15                                440.05
5589.08                                440.07
5589.081                               440.07
                                       
 
REFERENCES TO RESOLUTIONS
 
Res. No. Date Passed Code Section
414      10-13-1952 TSO Table III
29-53    12-28-1953 TSO Table IV
21-54    12-13-1954 TSO Table IV
22-54    12-13-1954 TSO Table IV
23-54    12-13-1954 TSO Table IV
4-55     - -        TSO Table IV
6-55     4-11-1955  TSO Table IV
12-55    7-25-1955  TSO Table IV
5-61A    3-7-1961   TSO Table IV
14-62    7-30-1962  TSO Table IV
17-62    9-4-1962   TSO Table IV
63-23    9-3-1963   TSO Table IV
64-7     5-18-1964  TSO Table IV
53-67    12-26-1967 TSO Table VII
68-2     5-6-1968   TSO Table VII
68-20    5-27-1968  TSO Table IV
69-59    10-27-1969 TSO Table VII
69-60    10-27-1969 TSO Table VII
71-25    9-13-1971  TSO Table II
71-34    11-22-1971 TSO Table II
72-14    4-3-1972   256.02 -
                    256.04
72-14    4-3-1972   256.05
80-23    2-19-1980  TSO Table X
80-47    7-30-1980  TSO Table X
80-49    9-2-1980   TSO Table II
81-63    1-2-1981   TSO Table III
81-28    6-1-1981   TSO Table V
81-48    9-8-1981   TSO Table II
81-49    9-8-1981   TSO Table II
81-50    9-8-1981   TSO Table II
82-56    11-15-1982 290.01
83-20    8-15-1983  TSO Table III
86-40    5-19-1986  TSO Table VII
86-46    5-19-1986  TSO Table IV
86-59    8-18-1986  232.03
87-23    3-9-1987   TSO Table IV
87-24    3-9-1987   TSO Table IV
87-28    3-16-1987  236.07
1-89     1-23-1989  TSO Table IV
30-89    3-27-1989  TSO Table IV
52-89    7-17-1989  TSO Table IV
64-89    9-11-1989  TSO Table IV
90-9     2-5-1990   240.01
90-21    2-19-1990  TSO Table IV
90-27    3-5-1990   TSO Table IV
90-35    5-14-1990  TSO Table IV
90-41    6-4-1990   TSO Table IV
90-42    6-4-1990   TSO Table IV
90-43    6-4-1990   TSO Table IV
90-55    8-20-1990  TSO Table IV
91-9     2-18-1991  TSO Table IV
91-76    10-21-1991 TSO Table IV
92-9     3-2-1992   TSO Table IV
92-10    3-2-1992   TSO Table IV
92-13    3-16-1992  TSO Table IV
92-14    6-15-1992  TSO Table IV
92-66    10-5-1992  TSO Table IV
93-7     1-18-1993  TSO Table IV
93-25    3-15-1993  TSO Table IV
93-103   7-19-1993  TSO Table IV
94-13    1-31-1994  TSO Table IV
94-59    4-4-1994   TSO Table II
94-67    6-6-1994   TSO Table IV
94-87    7-18-1994  TSO Table VIII
94-68    8-22-1994  TSO Table IV
94-68    8-22-1994  TSO Table II
94-163   11-21-1994 TSO Table IV
94-164   11-21-1994 TSO Table IV
94-171   12-19-1994 TSO Table IV
94-172   12-19-1994 TSO Table IV
96-3     1-8-1996   TSO Table IV
96-4     1-8-1996   TSO Table IV
96-5     1-8-1996   TSO Table IV
96-20    2-5-1996   TSO Table IV
96-21    2-5-1996   TSO Table IV
96-53    5-20-1996  258.02
96-98    9-16-1996  TSO Table IV
96-106   11-4-1996  TSO Table IV
96-113   12-9-1996  TSO Table IV
97-21    3-3-1997   TSO Table IV
97-27    4-7-1997   TSO Table IV
97-34    5-5-1997   TSO Table IV
97-43    5-19-1997  TSO Table IV
97-49    6-23-1997  TSO Table IV
97-50    6-23-1997  TSO Table IV
97-59    7-28-1997  TSO Table IV
97-102   11-3-1997  TSO Table IV
97-114   12-15-1997 TSO Table II,
                    TSO Table IV
98-19    2-2-1998   TSO Table IV
98-30    3-16-1998  TSO Table IV
98-37    4-20-1998  TSO Table IV
98-45    4-20-1998  TSO Table IV
98-53    5-18-1998  TSO Table IV
98-54    5-18-1998  TSO Table IV
98-79    7-27-1998  TSO Table IV
104-98   7-27-1998  256.02,
                    256.05
98-89    8-24-1998  TSO Table IV
98-121   9-8-1998   TSO Table IV
98-142   12-7-1998  TSO Table IV
98-144   12-14-1998 TSO Table IV
99-26    4-5-1999   TSO Table IV
99-48    6-7-1999   TSO Table IV
99-49    6-7-1999   TSO Table IV
99-50    6-7-1999   TSO Table IV
99-60    8-23-1999  TSO Table IV
99-65    9-7-1999   TSO Table IV
99-67    9-20-1999  TSO Table IV
99-82    12-20-1999 TSO Table IV
99-83    12-20-1999 TSO Table IV
99-84    12-20-1999 TSO Table IV
00-14    2-7-2000   TSO Table IV
00-15    2-7-2000   TSO Table IV
00-16    2-7-2000   TSO Table IV
00-39    4-3-2000   236.07
00-45    5-1-2000   TSO Table V
01-10    2-5-2001   TSO Table IV
01-11    2-5-2001   TSO Table IV
01-14    3-19-2001  TSO Table IV
01-15    3-19-2001  TSO Table IV
01-29    6-18-2001  TSO Table IV
01-45    7-16-2001  TSO Table IV
01-46    7-16-2001  TSO Table IV
01-86    10-15-2001 TSO Table IV
01-87    10-15-2001 TSO Table IV
02-23    3-18-2002  TSO Table IV
02-31    4-15-2002  TSO Table IV
02-36    5-6-2002   TSO Table IV
02-55    7-22-2002  TSO Table IV
02-59    8-19-2002  TSO Table IV
02-60    8-19-2002  TSO Table IV
02-68    9-3-2002   TSO Table IV
02-69    9-3-2002   TSO Table IV
02-78    10-7-2002  TSO Table IV
03-04    1-6-2003   TSO Table IV
03-02    1-21-2003  TSO Table IV
03-03    1-21-2003  TSO Table IV
03-05    2-3-2003   TSO Table IV
03-29    6-16-2003  TSO Table IV
03-30    6-16-2003  TSO Table IV
03-38    7-21-2003  TSO Table IV
03-39    7-21-2003  TSO Table IV
03-40    7-21-2003  TSO Table IV
03-55    9-15-2003  TSO Table IV
03-56    9-15-2003  TSO Table IV
03-60    10-6-2003  TSO Table IV
03-61    10-6-2003  TSO Table IV
03-62    10-6-2003  TSO Table IV
04-07    2-2-2004   TSO Table IV
04-19    3-15-2004  TSO Table IV
04-26    4-5-2004   TSO Table IV
04-29    4-19-2004  TSO Table VII
04-51    7-19-2004  TSO Table IV
04-85    12-6-2004  TSO Table IV
05-11    2-22-2005  TSO Table IV
05-12    3-7-2005   TSO Table IV
05-15    3-21-2005  212.01
05-16    3-21-2005  TSO Table IV
05-34    6-6-2005   TSO Table IV
05-45    10-3-2005  TSO Table IV
06-35    7-17-2006  TSO Table IV
06-34    8-21-2006  TSO Table IV
06-41    9-5-2006   TSO Table IV
06-55    10-16-2006 TSO Table IV
07-01    1-2-2007   TSO Table IV
07-02    1-16-2007  TSO Table IV
07-03    1-16-2007  TSO Table IV
07-09    2-5-2007   TSO Table IV
07-17    4-16-2007  TSO Table IV
07-37    7-16-2007  TSO Table IV
07-54    11-5-2007  TSO Table IV
08-01    1-7-2008   TSO Table V
08-30    6-16-2008  TSO Table II
09-38    6-1-2009   TSO Table IV
12-31    5-7-2012   TSO Table IV
13-39    9-16-2013  TSO Table IV
13-49    11-4-2013  TSO Table IV
14-194   12-15-2014 TSO Table IV
15-14    2-16-2015  TSO Table IV
15-32    3-16-2015  TSO Table VI
15-51    5-4-2015   TSO Table VI
2017-32  4-3-2017   TSO Table X
2017-98  11-13-2017 TSO Table X
2017-99  11-13-2017 TSO Table X
2017-101 11-20-2017 TSO Table X
2017-103 11-20-2017 TSO Table X
2017-105 11-20-2017 TSO Table X
2017-106 11-20-2017 TSO Table X
2017-107 12-11-2017 TSO Table V
2017-108 12-11-2017 TSO Table V
2017-109 12-11-2017 TSO Table V
2017-111 12-11-2017 TSO Table X
2017-114 12-18-2017 TSO Table X
2017-115 12-18-2017 TSO Table X
2017-118 12-18-2017 TSO Table X
2017-119 12-18-2017 TSO Table X
2017-120 12-18-2017 TSO Table X
2017-121 12-18-2017 TSO Table X
2017-122 12-18-2017 TSO Table X
2017-123 12-18-2017 TSO Table X
2017-130 12-18-2017 TSO Table X
2018-06  1-16-2018  TSO Table X
2018-07  1-16-2018  TSO Table X
2018-08  1-16-2018  TSO Table X
2018-09  1-16-2018  TSO Table V
2018-10  1-16-2018  TSO Table X
2018-17  2-5-2018   TSO Table X
2018-18  2-5-2018   TSO Table X
2018-21  2-19-2018  TSO Table X
2018-22  2-19-2018  TSO Table X
2018-24  2-19-2018  TSO Table X
2018-25  2-19-2018  TSO Table X
2018-27  2-19-2018  TSO Table X
2018-29  2-19-2018  TSO Table X
2018-30  2-19-2018  TSO Table X
2018-31  3-5-2018   TSO Table X
2018-32  3-5-2018   TSO Table X
2018-33  3-5-2018   TSO Table V
2018-34  3-5-2018   TSO Table V
2018-35  3-5-2018   TSO Table X
2018-36  3-5-2018   TSO Table X
2018-38  3-5-2018   TSO Table X
2018-39  3-19-2018  TSO Table X
2018-40  3-19-2018  TSO Table VI
2018-41  3-19-2018  TSO Table X
2018-42  3-19-2018  TSO Table VI
2018-43  3-26-2018  TSO Table II,
                    TSO Table V
2018-44  4-2-2018   TSO Table X
2018-45  4-2-2018   TSO Table X
2018-46  4-2-2018   TSO Table X
2018-47  4-2-2018   TSO Table X
2018-49  4-2-2018   TSO Table V
2018-50  4-2-2018   TSO Table V
2018-51  4-2-2018   TSO Table V
2018-52  4-2-2018   TSO Table V
2018-53  4-2-2018   TSO Table V
2018-55  4-23-2018  TSO Table X
2018-56  4-23-2018  TSO Table X
2018-57  4-23-2018  TSO Table X
2018-58  4-23-2018  TSO Table X
2018-59  4-23-2018  TSO Table V
2018-60  4-23-2018  TSO Table X
2018-61  4-23-2018  TSO Table X
2018-65  5-7-2018   TSO Table X
2018-65  5-7-2018   TSO Table X
2018-66  5-7-2018   TSO Table X
2018-67  5-7-2018   TSO Table X
2018-68  5-7-2018   TSO Table X
2018-69  5-7-2018   TSO Table VI
2018-72  5-7-2018   TSO Table V,
                    TSO Table X
2018-73  5-7-2018   TSO Table V
2017-59  5-15-2018  TSO Table X
2018-75  5-21-2018  TSO Table X
2018-76  5-21-2018  TSO Table X
2018-77  5-21-2018  TSO Table X
2018-78  5-21-2018  TSO Table X
2018-79  5-21-2018  TSO Table X
2018-80  5-21-2018  TSO Table X
2018-84  6-4-2018   TSO Table X
2018-85  6-4-2018   TSO Table X
2018-90  6-4-2018   TSO Table V
2018-91  6-4-2018   TSO Table V
2018-94  6-18-2018  TSO Table X
2018-95  6-18-2018  TSO Table X
2018-96  6-18-2018  TSO Table X
2018-97  6-18-2018  TSO Table X
2018-98  6-18-2018  TSO Table V
2018-100 6-18-2018  TSO Table X
2018-99  7-2-2018   TSO Table X
2018-102 7-2-2018   TSO Table X
2018-103 7-2-2018   TSO Table X
2018-107 7-2-2018   TSO Table X
2018-108 7-2-2018   TSO Table X
2018-110 8-27-2018  TSO Table IX
2018-112 8-27-2018  TSO Table X
2018-113 8-27-2018  TSO Table X
2018-114 8-27-2018  TSO Table V
2018-116 8-27-2018  TSO Table X
2018-117 8-27-2018  TSO Table X
2018-120 8-27-2018  TSO Table X
2018-122 8-27-2018  TSO Table X
2018-123 8-27-2018  TSO Table X
2018-124 8-27-2018  TSO Table X
2018-125 8-27-2018  TSO Table X
2018-126 8-27-2018  TSO Table X
2018-127 8-27-2018  TSO Table V
2018-128 8-27-2018  TSO Table V
2018-129 8-27-2018  TSO Table V
2018-130 8-27-2018  TSO Table V
2018-131 8-27-2018  TSO Table V
2018-132 8-27-2018  TSO Table V
2018-133 8-27-2018  TSO Table V
2018-134 8-27-2018  TSO Table V
2018-135 8-27-2018  TSO Table V
2018-136 9-4-2018   TSO Table X
2018-138 9-4-2018   TSO Table V
2018-139 9-4-2018   TSO Table V
2018-141 9-4-2018   TSO Table V
2018-142 9-17-2018  TSO Table V
2018-143 9-17-2018  TSO Table X
2018-144 9-17-2018  TSO Table V
2018-145 9-17-2018  TSO Table V
2018-146 9-17-2018  TSO Table V
2018-147 9-17-2018  TSO Table V
2018-148 9-17-2018  TSO Table V
2018-149 9-17-2018  TSO Table V
2018-150 9-17-2018  TSO Table V
2018-153 9-17-2018  TSO Table V
2018-154 9-17-2018  TSO Table V
2018-156 10-1-2018  TSO Table X
2018-157 10-1-2018  TSO Table X
2018-158 10-1-2018  TSO Table V
2018-159 10-1-2018  TSO Table X
2018-160 10-1-2018  TSO Table X
2018-161 10-1-2018  TSO Table V
2018-162 10-1-2018  TSO Table V
2018-164 10-1-2018  TSO Table VI
2018-166 10-1-2018  TSO Table X
2018-167 10-15-2018 TSO Table X
2018-168 10-15-2018 TSO Table X
2018-169 10-15-2018 TSO Table V
2018-170 10-15-2018 TSO Table V
2018-172 11-5-2018  TSO Table X
2018-173 11-5-2018  TSO Table X
2018-177 11-5-2018  TSO Table X
2018-178 11-5-2018  TSO Table X
2018-179 11-5-2018  TSO Table X
2018-181 11-5-2018  TSO Table II
2018-181 11-5-2018  TSO Table V
2018-182 11-5-2018  TSO Table II,
                    TSO Table V
2018-183 11-5-2018  TSO Table II,
                    TSO Table V
2018-186 11-5-2018  TSO Table II,
                    TSO Table V
2018-187 11-5-2018  TSO Table II,
                    TSO Table V
2018-188 11-5-2018  TSO Table II,
                    TSO Table V
2018-189 11-5-2018  TSO Table II,
                    TSO Table V
2018-190 11-5-2018  TSO Table II,
                    TSO Table V
2018-194 11-5-2018  TSO Table II,
                    TSO Table V
2018-197 11-19-2018 TSO Table X
2018-199 11-19-2018 TSO Table X
2018-202 11-19-2018 TSO Table V
2018-203 11-19-2018 TSO Table V
2018-203 11-19-2018 TSO Table V
2018-205 12-3-2018  TSO Table X
2018-206 12-3-2018  TSO Table X
2018-207 12-3-2018  TSO Table X
2018-209 12-3-2018  TSO Table V
2018-210 12-3-2018  TSO Table V
2018-211 12-3-2018  TSO Table V
2018-212 12-3-2018  TSO Table V
2018-213 12-3-2018  TSO Table V
2018-214 12-3-2018  TSO Table V
2018-215 12-3-2018  TSO Table V
2018-216 12-3-2018  TSO Table V
2018-217 12-3-2018  TSO Table V
2018-227 12-17-2018 TSO Table V
2018-228 12-17-2018 TSO Table V
2018-229 12-17-2018 TSO Table V
2018-230 12-17-2018 TSO Table V
2018-231 12-17-2018 TSO Table V
2018-232 12-17-2018 TSO Table X
2018-233 12-17-2018 TSO Table X
2018-234 12-17-2018 TSO Table X
2018-235 12-17-2018 TSO Table X
2018-236 12-17-2018 TSO Table X
2018-238 12-17-2018 TSO Table X
2018-241 12-17-2018 TSO Table X
2018-243 12-17-2018 TSO Table X
2018-244 12-17-2018 TSO Table X
2018-245 12-17-2018 TSO Table X
2018-246 12-17-2018 TSO Table X
2019-01  1-14-2019  TSO Table X
2019-03  1-22-2019  TSO Table II
2019-04  1-22-2019  TSO Table X
2019-06  1-22-2019  TSO Table X
2019-07  1-22-2019  TSO Table X
2019-13  2-4-2019   TSO Table X
2019-14  2-4-2019   TSO Table X
2019-15  2-4-2019   TSO Table X
2019-17  2-4-2019   TSO Table X
2019-20  2-18-2019  TSO Table X
2019-21  2-18-2019  TSO Table X
2019-23  2-18-2019  TSO Table X
2019-25  2-25-2019  TSO Table X
2019-28  3-4-2019   TSO Table X
2019-29  3-4-2019   TSO Table X
2019-32  3-4-2019   TSO Table II
2019-35  3-18-2019  TSO Table X
2019-37  3-18-2019  TSO Table X
2019-45  3-18-2019  TSO Table X
2019-46  4-1-2019   TSO Table X
2019-47  4-1-2019   TSO Table X
2019-48  4-1-2019   TSO Table X
2019-50  4-1-2019   TSO Table X
2019-51  4-1-2019   TSO Table X
2019-53  4-1-2019   TSO Table X
2019-54  4-1-2019   TSO Table X
2019-55  4-1-2019   TSO Table X
2019-56  4-15-2019  TSO Table X
2019-57  4-15-2019  TSO Table X
2019-58  4-15-2019  TSO Table X
2019-60  5-6-2019   TSO Table X
2019-62  5-6-2019   TSO Table X
2019-63  5-6-2019   TSO Table X
2019-64  5-6-2019   TSO Table X
2019-65  5-6-2019   TSO Table X
2019-66  5-6-2019   TSO Table X
2019-67  5-6-2019   TSO Table X
2019-68  5-6-2019   TSO Table X
2019-70  5-6-2019   TSO Table X
2019-71  5-13-2019  TSO Table X
2019-72  5-20-2019  TSO Table X
2019-74  5-20-2019  TSO Table X
2019-75  5-20-2019  236.30
2019-76  5-20-2019  236.31
2019-77  5-20-2019  236.32
2019-83  6-3-2019   TSO Table X
2019-85  6-3-2019   TSO Table X
2019-86  6-3-2019   TSO Table X
2019-87  6-3-2019   TSO Table X
2019-91  6-17-2019  TSO Table X
2019-92  6-17-2019  TSO Table X
2019-93  6-17-2019  TSO Table X
2019-95  7-1-2019   TSO Table X
2019-97  7-1-2019   TSO Table X
2019-98  7-1-2019   TSO Table X
2019-99  7-1-2019   TSO Table X
2019-100 7-1-2019   TSO Table X
2019-101 7-1-2019   TSO Table X
2019-102 7-1-2019   TSO Table X
2019-104 7-1-2019   TSO Table X
2019-107 7-23-2019  TSO Table X
2019-108 7-23-2019  TSO Table X
2019-111 7-23-2019  TSO Table X
2019-115 8-26-2019  TSO Table X
2019-119 8-26-2019  TSO Table X
2019-121 8-26-2019  TSO Table X
2019-122 8-26-2019  TSO Table X
2019-123 8-26-2019  TSO Table X
2019-124 8-26-2019  TSO Table V
2019-125 8-26-2019  TSO Table X
2019-127 8-26-2019  TSO Table X
2019-128 8-26-2019  TSO Table X
2019-129 9-9-2019   TSO Table X
2019-130 9-9-2019   TSO Table X
2019-131 9-9-2019   TSO Table X
2019-132 9-9-2019   TSO Table X
2019-134 9-23-2019  TSO Table X
2019-135 9-23-2019  TSO Table X
2019-136 9-23-2019  TSO Table X
2019-137 9-23-2019  TSO Table X
2019-138 9-23-2019  TSO Table X
2019-139 9-23-2019  TSO Table X
2019-140 9-23-2019  TSO Table X
2019-143 9-23-2019  TSO Table IV
2019-144 9-23-2019  TSO Table X
2019-148 10-7-2019  TSO Table X
2019-149 10-7-2019  TSO Table X
2019-150 10-7-2019  TSO Table X
2019-151 10-7-2019  TSO Table X
2019-153 10-7-2019  TSO Table X
2019-155 10-7-2019  TSO Table X
2019-158 10-21-2019 TSO Table X
2019-159 10-21-2019 TSO Table X
2019-160 10-21-2019 TSO Table X
2019-162 10-21-2019 TSO Table X
2019-163 10-21-2019 TSO Table V
2019-164 11-4-2019  TSO Table VI
2019-165 11-4-2019  TSO Table X
2019-166 11-4-2019  TSO Table X
2019-170 11-4-2019  TSO Table X
2019-171 11-4-2019  TSO Table X
2019-172 11-18-2019 TSO Table X
2019-174 11-18-2019 TSO Table X
2019-175 12-2-2019  TSO Table X
2019-176 12-2-2019  TSO Table X
2019-177 12-16-2019 TSO Table VI
2019-178 12-16-2019 TSO Table X
2019-179 12-16-2019 TSO Table X
2019-180 12-16-2019 TSO Table X
2019-181 12-16-2019 TSO Table X
2019-182 12-16-2019 TSO Table X
2019-183 12-16-2019 TSO Table X
2019-184 12-16-2019 TSO Table X
2019-185 12-16-2019 TSO Table X
2019-187 12-16-2019 TSO Table X
2019-190 12-16-2019 TSO Table X
2020-02  1-21-2020  TSO Table X
2020-07  1-21-2020  TSO Table X
2020-08  1-21-2020  TSO Table X
2020-09  1-21-2020  TSO Table X
2020-10  1-21-2020  TSO Table X
2020-13  1-21-2020  TSO Table X
2020-14  1-21-2020  TSO Table X
2020-16  1-21-2020  TSO Table X
2020-17  1-21-2020  TSO Table X
2020-18  1-21-2020  TSO Table X
2020-20  1-21-2020  TSO Table X
2020-25  2-3-2020   TSO Table X
2020-26  2-3-2020   TSO Table X
2020-27  2-3-2020   TSO Table X
2020-28  2-3-2020   TSO Table X
2020-29  2-3-2020   TSO Table X
2020-30  2-3-2020   TSO Table X
2020-33  2-3-2020   TSO Table X
2020-36  2-3-2020   TSO Table X
2020-38  2-3-2020   TSO Table X
2020-39  2-17-2020  TSO Table X
2020-40  3-2-2020   TSO Table X
2020-41  3-2-2020   TSO Table X
2020-42  3-2-2020   TSO Table X
2020-43  3-2-2020   TSO Table X
2020-44  3-2-2020   TSO Table X
2020-46  3-2-2020   TSO Table X
2020-47  3-2-2020   TSO Table X
2020-48  3-2-2020   TSO Table X
2020-49  3-2-2020   TSO Table X
2020-50  3-2-2020   TSO Table X
2020-51  3-2-2020   TSO Table X
2020-52  3-2-2020   TSO Table X
2020-53  3-2-2020   TSO Table X
2020-54  3-2-2020   TSO Table X
2020-55  3-2-2020   TSO Table X
2020-56  3-2-2020   TSO Table X
2020-58  3-2-2020   TSO Table X
2020-59  3-2-2020   TSO Table X
2020-60  3-2-2020   TSO Table X
2020-61  3-23-2020  TSO Table X
2020-62  3-23-2020  TSO Table X
2020-63  3-23-2020  TSO Table X
2020-64  3-23-2020  TSO Table X
2020-65  3-23-2020  TSO Table X
2020-66  3-23-2020  TSO Table X
2020-67  3-23-2020  TSO Table X
2020-72  4-20-2020  TSO Table X
2020-73  4-20-2020  TSO Table X
2020-74  4-20-2020  TSO Table X
2020-75  4-20-2020  TSO Table X
2020-76  4-20-2020  TSO Table X
2020-77  4-20-2020  TSO Table V
2020-79  4-20-2020  TSO Table X
2020-80  4-20-2020  TSO Table X
2020-81  4-20-2020  TSO Table X
2020-82  4-20-2020  TSO Table X
2020-85  5-18-2020  TSO Table X
2020-86  5-18-2020  TSO Table X
2020-88  5-18-2020  TSO Table X
2020-89  5-18-2020  TSO Table X
2020-90  5-18-2020  TSO Table X
2020-91  5-18-2020  TSO Table X
2020-92  5-18-2020  TSO Table X
2020-93  5-18-2020  TSO Table X
2020-95  5-18-2020  TSO Table X
2020-96  5-18-2020  TSO Table X
2020-98  5-18-2020  TSO Table X
2020-108 7-6-2020   TSO Table X
2020-109 7-6-2020   TSO Table X
2020-110 7-6-2020   TSO Table X
2020-111 7-6-2020   TSO Table X
2020-112 7-6-2020   TSO Table X
2020-113 7-6-2020   TSO Table X
                   
 
 
REFERENCES TO ORDINANCES
 
Ord. No. Date Passed Code Section
–     - -        TSO Table X
–     - -        TSO Table X
–     - -        TSO Table X
–     - -        TSO Table X
–     - -        TSO Table X
–     - -        TSO Table X
–     - -        TSO Table X
83      7-8-1930   TSO Table I
84      7-8-1930   TSO Table I,
                   TSO Table II
107     5-9-1933   TSO Table I
155     5-26-1938  TSO Table I
171     6-24-1940  TSO Table I
203     6-26-1944  TSO Table I
205     1-8-1945   TSO Table I
207     1-8-1945   1650.03
244     5-1-1946   TSO Table I
245     6-19-1946  TSO Table I
254     6-19-1947  TSO Table I
294     7-10-1950  618.01,
                   618.07
297     10-23-1950 TSO Table VII
307     3-26-1951  TSO Table I
314     10-8-1951  TSO Table V
324     4-14-1952  TSO Table I
332     9-8-1952   TSO Table I,
                   TSO Table II
333     9-8-1952   TSO Table I
338     12-22-1952 TSO Table IV
19-53   9-14-1953  TSO Table VII
28-53   11-23-1953 1022.04,
                   1022.05
3-54    2-8-1954   TSO Table II
27-54   10-25-1954 TSO Table IV
2-55    1-10-1955  TSO Table II
3-55    1-10-1955  TSO Table II
4-55    1-24-1955  TSO Table II
16-55   4-25-1955  TSO Table II
25-55   7-25-1955  TSO Table I
30-55   9-26-1955  TSO Table IV
31-55   9-26-1955  TSO Table V
28-55   10-24-1955 1322.01 -
                   1322.03
33-55   10-24-1955 TSO Table IV
40-55   11-28-1955 TSO Table V
41-55   12-27-1955 TSO Table IV
43-55   12-27-1955 TSO Table V
51-55   12-27-1955 TSO Table IV
3-56    2-13-1956  TSO Table IV
28-56   6-25-1956  TSO Table I
31-56   7-9-1956   1040.01
43-56   10-8-1956  TSO Table II
44-56   10-8-1956  TSO Table I
51-56   12-10-1956 TSO Table VI
9-57    1-28-1957  TSO Table IV
14-57   2-11-1957  TSO Table V
30-57   6-24-1957  TSO Table IV
31-57   7-16-1957  TSO Table IV
35-57   7-16-1957  TSO Table IV
44-57   10-28-1957 TSO Table IV
46-57   11-12-1957 TSO Table VII
51-57   12-23-1957 1040.02
19-58   4-28-1958  TSO Table II
20-58   4-28-1958  TSO Table II
25-58   5-12-1958  TSO Table II
30-58   8-7-1958   TSO Table IV
17-59   5-25-1959  TSO Table II
25-59   9-14-1959  TSO Table IV
28-59   9-28-1959  1020.01 -
                   1020.03
30-59   10-12-1959 TSO Table IV
31-59   10-12-1959 TSO Table IV
33-59   10-26-1959 TSO Table IV
34-59   10-26-1959 TSO Table IV
5-60    1-11-1960  TSO Table I
14-60   2-8-1960   TSO Table II
15-60   2-8-1960   TSO Table II
                   1332.01 -
17-60   2-22-1960  1332.03,
                   1332.06 -
                   1332.17
18-60   3-14-1960  TSO Table IX
21-60   3-28-1960  TSO Table II
37-60   6-27-1960  TSO Table II
39-60   7-11-1960  TSO Table II
48-60   9-26-1960  TSO Table II
5-61    1-23-1961  TSO Table IV
22-61   3-7-1961   TSO Table IV
11-61   3-13-1961  TSO Table II
35-61   7-10-1961  TSO Table IX
36-61   7-10-1961  TSO Table IX
44-61   8-14-1961  TSO Table I
56-61   11-30-1961 TSO Table II
16-62   4-16-1962  TSO Table II
18-62   4-16-1962  TSO Table II
22-62   5-15-1962  TSO Table IV
32-62   9-4-1962   TSO Table IV
35-62   9-17-1962  1302.01,
                   1302.02
38-62   10-1-1962  TSO Table II
39-62   10-1-1962  TSO Table II
40-62   10-1-1962  TSO Table IV
42-62   10-1-1962  TSO Table IV
43-62   10-1-1962  TSO Table IV
56-62   11-5-1962  TSO Table IV
6-63    1-21-1963  TSO Table II
19-63   3-18-1963  TSO Table IV
22-63   4-15-1963  TSO Table I
26-63   5-6-1963   TSO Table IV
                   1240.01 -
                   1240.08,
                   1242.01 -
                   1242.06,
                   1244.01,
                   1244.03,
                   1244.07 -
16-63   5-20-1963  1244.10,
                   1246.01 -
                   1246.06,
                   1248.01 -
                   1248.12,
                   1248.15,
                   1250.01,
                   1250.02
34-63   7-1-1963   278.02 -
                   278.05
45-63   9-3-1963   TSO Table IV
49-63   9-3-1963   TSO Table II
56-63   11-18-1963 TSO Table II
4-64    3-16-1964  1620.01,
                   1620.03
12-64   4-6-1964   TSO Table IV
7-64    4-20-1964  TSO Table IV
14-64   4-20-1964  TSO Table IV
19-64   5-4-1964   TSO Table IX
20-64   5-4-1964   TSO Table IX
23-64   6-15-1964  TSO Table IX
28-64   6-15-1964  TSO Table II
29-64   7-3-1964   1302.02
33-64   7-6-1964   TSO Table IV
38-64   7-24-1964  TSO Table II
34-64   8-7-1964   TSO Table II
37-64   9-21-1964  TSO Table II
40-64   10-19-1964 TSO Table IX
41-64   10-19-1964 TSO Table IV
50-64   1-4-1965   TSO Table IV
31-65   6-24-1965  1024.01 -
                   1024.11
35-65   7-29-1965  TSO Table III
39-65   8-12-1965  TSO Table IV
40-65   10-18-1965 TSO Table II
42-65   10-23-1965 TSO Table II
44-65   11-1-1965  TSO Table III
47-65   11-15-1965 TSO Table IV
45-65   12-6-1965  TSO Table III
5-66    1-17-1966  1324.01,
                   1324.02
10-66   4-18-1966  TSO Table IV
18-66   5-16-1966  TSO Table I
19-66   6-6-1966   TSO Table IV
33-66   8-10-1966  TSO Table V
42-66   10-3-1966  230.04
3-67    1-16-1967  TSO Table V
11-67   3-27-1967  TSO Table IV
7-67    4-3-1967   1248.07
20-67   4-3-1967   TSO Table VIII
21-67   4-3-1967   1042.11
14-67   4-17-1967  TSO Table IX
37-67   7-3-1967   TSO Table VIII
52-67   9-18-1967  TSO Table IV
                   880.01,
                   880.02,
                   880.04 -
                   880.07,
                   880.09,
                   880.10,
                   880.12 -
                   880.15,
66-67   12-18-196  880.19,
                   880.25 -
                   880.27,
                   880.29 -
                   880.32,
                   880.36 -
                   880.46,
                   880.48 -
                   880.53,
                   880.99
6-68    2-19-1968  244.08
18-68   4-29-1968  452.05
21-68   5-6-1968   618.14
53-68   12-2-1968  TSO Table VIII
56-68   12-2-1968  1042.02,
                   TSO Table IX
50-68   12-11-1968 TSO Table VIII
                   1262.01,
                   1262.02,
                   1262.04,
                   1262.99,
46-68   2-3-1969   1264.02,
                   1266.01 -
                   1266.03,
                   1268.01,
                   1268.04,
                   1282.02
22-69   4-14-1969  TSO Table VIII
5-69    4-21-1969  TSO Table VIII
39-69   6-25-1969  TSO Table III
40-69   6-25-1969  TSO Table IV
43-69   7-21-1969  1248.07
46-69   7-21-1969  432.38
44-69   8-4-1969   TSO Table IV
57-69   9-22-1969  TSO Table IV
5-70    3-10-1970  236.05
14-70   4-13-1970  1448.06
37-70   7-13-1970  1338.01 -
                   1338.08
29-70   9-14-1970  TSO Table I
60-70   10-26-1970 818.02
62-70   11-9-1970  TSO Table VII
21-71   3-10-1971  1448.07
24-71   3-10-1971  1336.01
36-71   5-10-1971  1320.01 -
                   1320.07
42-71   5-10-1971  TSO Table IV
45-71   6-1-1971   TSO Table X
53-71   6-28-1971  832.01 -
                   832.09
54-71   6-28-1971  820.01 -
                   820.08
                   1620.04,
56-71   7-26-1971  1620.05,
                   1650.01
69-71   9-13-1971  TSO Table I
86-71   12-16-1971 TSO Table IV
1-72    1-3-1972   220.01
                   880.08,
                   880.11,
                   880.16,
15-72   1-3-1972   880.17,
                   880.20,
                   880.22,
                   880.35,
                   880.47
24-72   3-20-1972  TSO Table I
29-72   3-20-1972  1446.02
31-72   3-20-1972  TSO Table I
67-72   9-18-1972  TSO Table IV
70-72   10-30-1972 TSO Table II
81-72   12-4-1972  TSO Table V
88-72   12-18-1972 248.01
87-72   1-2-1973   TSO Table V
98-72   1-2-1973   TSO Table IV
100-72  1-2-1973   TSO Table IV
13-73   2-5-1973   1640.01 -
                   1640.05
17-73   2-5-1973   TSO Table II
40-72   2-5-1973   1448.01
6-73    2-20-1973  TSO Table IV
8-73    2-20-1973  TSO Table IV
10-73   2-20-1973  TSO Table IV
85-72   4-2-1973   TSO Table VIII
20-73   4-9-1973   TSO Table VIII
56-72   4-16-1973  TSO Table VIII
41-73   6-4-1973   TSO Table IV
43-73   6-4-1973   TSO Table IV
45-73   6-4-1973   TSO Table IV
48-73   6-18-1973  TSO Table I
50-73   6-25-1973  236.03
51-73   6-25-1973  236.04
12-73   7-2-1973   TSO Table VIII
31-73   7-2-1973   TSO Table VIII
38-73   7-16-1973  TSO Table VIII
                   884.01,
54-73   9-4-1973   884.03 -
                   884.07
68-73   10-15-1973 TSO Table I
67-73   11-19-1973 TSO Table III
76-73   11-19-1973 880.18,
                   880.21
78-73   12-3-1973  244.01
82-73   12-17-1973 TSO Table X
83-73   12-17-1973 452.12
3-74    1-7-1974   232.01
92-74   1-20-1974  TSO Table I
80-73   2-11-1974  TSO Table VIII
81-73   2-11-1974  TSO Table VIII
22-74   3-4-1974   TSO Table IV
27-74   3-18-1974  TSO Table VIII
34-74   3-18-1974  1630.01 -
                   1630.07
46-74   4-15-1974  432.36
48-74   4-17-1974  244.03
41-74   5-6-1974   618.16
89-74   12-9-1974  236.01
5-75    1-6-1975   244.03
6-75    1-6-1975   230.02
7-75    1-6-1975   230.03
32-75   5-5-1975   TSO Table II
31-75   6-16-1975  TSO Table VIII
35-75   6-16-1975  TSO Table VIII
38-75   6-16-1975  TSO Table IV
39-75   6-16-1975  TSO Table IV
40-75   6-16-1975  TSO Table IV
50-75   7-7-1975   TSO Table II
51-75   7-7-1975   TSO Table II
52-75   7-7-1975   TSO Table II
53-75   7-7-1975   TSO Table II
54-75   7-7-1975   TSO Table II
55-75   7-7-1975   TSO Table II
61-75   7-14-1975  1022.06
68-75   9-2-1975   TSO Table X
6-76    1-19-1976  208.01 -
                   208.07
8-76    1-19-1976  290.01
21-76   3-1-1976   TSO Table II
4-76    4-19-1976  TSO Table VIII
38-76   4-19-1976  TSO Table I
23-76   5-17-1976  TSO Table VIII
25-76   5-17-1976  TSO Table VIII
74-76   9-20-1976  204.01
80-76   2-7-1977   TSO Table VIII
88-76   2-7-1977   TSO Table VIII
13-77   2-21-1977  242.02
20-77   4-18-1977  1302.04
53-77   5-23-1977  TSO Table IV
56-77   6-6-1977   TSO Table I
66-77   8-1-1977   TSO Table II
15-77   9-6-1977   1042.06,
                   TSO Table IX
16-77   9-6-1977   1042.10,
                   TSO Table IX
75-77   9-12-1977  TSO Table II
88-77   10-31-1977 TSO Table IV
86-77   11-21-1977 TSO Table IV
104-77  12-5-1977  TSO Table II
105-77  12-5-1977  TSO Table II
106-77  12-5-1977  TSO Table II
107-77  12-19-1977 TSO Table II
109-77  12-19-1977 TSO Table II
110-77  12-19-1977 248.03
7-78    2-6-1978   TSO Table IV
10-78   2-21-1978  TSO Table IV
15-78   4-17-1978  TSO Table IV
24-78   5-15-1978  TSO Table IV
18-78   7-3-1978   TSO Table IV
71-76   7-12-1978  TSO Table II
72-76   7-12-1978  TSO Table II
73-76   7-12-1978  TSO Table II
67-78   8-18-1978  TSO Table IV
72-78   9-5-1978   TSO Table VII
73-78   9-5-1978   648.09
74-78   9-5-1978   TSO Table I
71-78   10-2-1978  TSO Table IV
80-78   10-16-1978 452.17
70-78   11-6-1978  TSO Table II,
                   TSO Table IV
93-78   11-6-1978  618.15
97-78   11-6-1978  618.01
59-78   11-20-1978 TSO Table VIII
60-78   11-20-1978 TSO Table VIII
105-78  12-4-1978  208.08
9-78    12-18-1978 1266.15,
                   1266.16
61-78   12-18-1978 TSO Table VIII
4-79    1-2-1979   236.02
10-79   2-5-1979   242.03
18-79   2-20-1979  TSO Table II
20-79   2-20-1979  TSO Table IV
21-79   3-5-1979   624.02,
                   624.10
27-79   3-19-1979  660.07
19-79   4-2-1979   TSO Table V
45-79   5-7-1979   1342.01 -
                   1342.12
49-79   5-7-1979   TSO Table VI
59-79   6-4-1979   TSO Table I
65-79   6-18-1979  446.01 -
                   446.04
61-79   7-9-1979   230.06
79-79   8-15-1979  648.11
46-79   8-27-1979  TSO Table VIII
51-79   8-27-1979  TSO Table VIII
52-79   8-27-1979  TSO Table VIII
86-79   8-27-1979  230.05
90-79   10-1-1979  TSO Table IV
9-80    2-4-1980   222.04
3-80    2-19-1980  TSO Table VIII
10-80   3-17-1980  TSO Table VIII
113-79  3-17-1980  832.10,
                   832.99
42-80   5-5-1980   230.06
46-80   5-5-1980   242.02
47-80   5-5-1980   TSO Table I
49-80   7-7-1980   TSO Table VIII
55-80   9-2-1980   TSO Table VIII
56-80   9-2-1980   TSO Table VIII
66-80   9-2-1980   TSO Table IX
68-80   9-2-1980   TSO Table IX
77-80   11-3-1980  840.01,
                   840.99
81-80   11-17-1980 220.02
4-81    3-16-1981  TSO Table VIII
6-81    4-1-1981   TSO Table VIII
22-81   4-6-1981   618.17
28-81   5-4-1981   648.11
                   814.01 -
46-81   9-8-1981   814.10,
                   814.99
48-81   10-5-1981  260.01 -
                   260.03
62-81   12-7-1981  TSO Table I
16-82   2-15-1982  TSO Table II
11-82   3-1-1982   TSO Table VIII
18-82   4-5-1982   TSO Table VI
21-82   4-5-1982   TSO Table VIII
22-82   4-5-1982   TSO Table VIII
28-82   5-17-1982  884.02
42-82   8-2-1982   TSO Table VI
74-82   12-27-1982 244.05
6-83    2-7-1983   220.03,
                   232.02
11-83   3-21-1983  242.01
14-83   3-21-1983  636.21,
                   642.15
                   434.02,
15-83   3-21-1983  434.025,
                   452.05
19-83   4-18-1983  TSO Table V
39-83   8-1-1983   TSO Table IV
25-83   8-15-1983  TSO Table IV
42-83   8-15-1983  TSO Table IV
                   1445.02,
56-83   11-7-1983  1445.04,
                   1445.07 -
                   1445.09
60-83   11-7-1983  TSO Table IV
87-83   12-19-1983 TSO Table V
88-83   12-19-1983 TSO Table V
89-83   12-19-1983 TSO Table V
90-83   12-19-1983 TSO Table V
91-83   12-19-1983 TSO Table V
92-83   12-19-1983 TSO Table V
93-83   12-19-1983 TSO Table V
94-83   12-19-1983 TSO Table V
95-83   12-19-1983 TSO Table V
96-83   12-19-1983 TSO Table V
97-83   12-19-1983 TSO Table V
98-83   12-19-1983 TSO Table V
100-83  12-19-1983 TSO Table V
103-83  12-19-1983 TSO Table V
104-83  12-19-1983 TSO Table V
99-83   12-28-1983 TSO Table V
118-83  12-28-1983 TSO Table V
119-83  12-28-1983 TSO Table V
101-83  1-4-1984   TSO Table V
102-83  1-4-1984   TSO Table V
6-84    1-16-1984  1318.03 -
                   1318.05
7-84    1-16-1984  1262.05
9-84    3-19-1984  TSO Table VIII
11-84   5-7-1984   TSO Table IV
45-84   7-16-1984  618.13
18-84   9-4-1984   1448.01
48-84   9-4-1984   TSO Table VIII
                   1610.02,
63-84   9-17-1984  1610.04,
                   1610.99,
                   1620.02
65-84   9-17-1984  244.07
71-84   10-15-1984 1445.02
73-84   10-15-1984 660.13
70-84   11-19-1984 1326.04 -
                   1326.09
86-84   11-19-1984 606.27
93-84   12-17-1984 TSO Table IV
19-85   3-18-1985  880.23,
                   880.24
5-85    5-20-1985  TSO Table VIII
39-85   6-3-1985   244.10
6-85    9-3-1985   TSO Table VIII
68-85   9-16-1985  TSO Table II
80-85   11-4-1985  TSO Table II
81-85   11-4-1985  TSO Table II
76-85   11-18-1985 TSO Table VIII
121-86  1-5-1986   TSO Table VIII
4-86    1-21-1986  1042.12 -
                   1042.14
11-86   1-21-1986  TSO Table II
13-86   1-21-1986  TSO Table IX
                   1042.01,
                   1042.04 -
14-86   1-21-1986  1042.06,
                   1042.18 -
                   1042.21,
                   TSO Table IX
15-86   1-27-1986  TSO Table IX
12-86   2-10-1986  880.03
24-86   2-18-1986  660.07
8-86    3-3-1986   TSO Table VIII
20-86   3-3-1986   1248.14
21-86   3-3-1986   1022.01,
                   TSO Table IX
22-86   3-3-1986   TSO Table VIII
67-85   3-3-1986   TSO Table VIII
                   258.01,
33-86   5-5-1986   258.03 -
                   258.06
40-86   5-5-1986   TSO Table II
47-86   5-19-1986  TSO Table II
50-86   5-19-1986  452.03,
                   452.20
53-86   5-19-1986  832.09
72-86   7-14-1986  242.02
76-86   7-21-1986  TSO Table II
85-86   8-18-1986  TSO Table IV
99-86   10-6-1986  TSO Table VIII
108-86  10-6-1986  TSO Table V
110-86  10-6-1986  TSO Table III
1-12-86 12-1-1986  TSO Table V
107-86  12-1-1986  TSO Table VIII
125-86  12-15-1986 TSO Table VI
151-87  1-19-1987  TSO Table VIII
2-87    2-2-1987   TSO Table VIII
3-87    2-2-1987   TSO Table VIII
9-87    2-2-1987   TSO Table VI
6-87    2-17-1987  TSO Table IX
20-87   3-9-1987   TSO Table II
                   288.01 -
13-87   3-16-1987  288.06,
                   1026.01 -
                   1026.15
24-87   3-16-1987  672.07
                   816.01 -
17-87   4-6-1987   816.09,
                   816.99
                   1042.03,
                   1042.04,
                   1042.06,
34-87   4-6-1987   1042.07,
                   1042.15,
                   1042.16,
                   1042.22,
                   TSO Table IX
35-87   4-6-1987   452.21
36-87   4-6-1987   440.99
38-87   4-20-1987  TSO Table II
                   1042.07,
42-87   5-4-1987   1042.21,
                   TSO Table IX
45-87   5-4-1987   1268.02
46-87   5-4-1987   1620.06
47-87   5-4-1987   TSO Table X
50-87   5-18-1987  TSO Table II
61-87   6-1-1987   TSO Table II
62-87   6-1-1987   TSO Table II
64-87   6-1-1987   TSO Table X
83-87   7-7-1987   TSO Table IX
88-87   7-7-1987   TSO Table IX
56-87   8-3-1987   TSO Table VIII
57-87   8-3-1987   TSO Table VIII
86-87   8-31-1987  406.04,
                   452.03
89-87   8-31-1987  TSO Table VIII
                   1266.06,
                   1272.01 -
                   1272.05,
                   1272.08 -
90-87   9-2-1987   1272.12,
                   1272.14,
                   1272.15,
                   1272.16,
                   TSO Table VIII
107-87  9-2-1987   TSO Table II
80-87   9-9-1987   TSO Table VI
99-87   10-19-1987 TSO Table VI
123-87  10-19-1987 TSO Table II
128-87  10-19-1987 TSO Table IX
130-87  10-26-1987 TSO Table IV
127-87  11-2-1987  TSO Table IV
137-87  11-16-1987 TSO Table II
5-88    1-4-1988   TSO Table IX
88-3    1-4-1988   1248.07
88-4    1-4-1988   1248.04,
                   1248.11
88-11   2-16-1988  TSO Table VIII
88-13   2-16-1988  TSO Table VIII
                   1266.07,
165-87  2-16-1988  1275.01 -
                   1275.12
88-23   2-29-1988  TSO Table IV
88-30   3-7-1988   TSO Table IV
88-31   3-7-1988   TSO Table II
88-35   3-21-1988  TSO Table II
88-38   3-21-1988  TSO Table X
88-39   3-21-1988  440.06
88-42   4-4-1988   289.01 -
                   289.05
88-45   4-11-1988  1330.01,
                   1330.02
88-46   4-11-1988  TSO Table II
88-71   5-2-1988   TSO Table II
88-66   5-16-1988  1248.11
88-84   6-6-1988   1040.03
88-107  7-18-1988  TSO Table II
88-126  7-18-1988  TSO Table II
88-87   8-15-1988  TSO Table VIII
88-98   8-15-1988  880.34
88-131  8-15-1988  TSO Table II
                   1262.06,
                   1266.08 -
                   1266.11,
                   1276.01 -
88-137  9-6-1988   1276.06,
                   1276.08 -
                   1276.12,
                   1280.01 -
                   1280.16,
                   TSO Table VIII
88-147  9-6-1988   1220.01
88-163  10-3-1988  244.07
88-155  10-17-1988 886.01
88-165  10-17-1988 290.02
88-179  11-21-1988 TSO Table II
                   1044.01 -
88-171  12-5-1988  1044.07,
                   1044.99
88-188  12-5-1988  452.03
171-88  12-5-1988  TSO Table IX
88-197  12-19-1988 TSO Table II
88-198  12-19-1988 TSO Table II
89-2    1-9-1989   TSO Table II
89-6    1-23-1989  1650.04
89-13   1-23-1989  232.02
23-89   2-6-1989   TSO Table IX
89-5    2-6-1989   TSO Table II
                   1284.01 -
88-187  2-27-1989  1284.05,
                   1284.07 -
                   1284.12
89-8    2-27-1989  1278.01 -
                   1278.09
89-9    2-27-1989  TSO Table VIII
89-51   5-1-1989   TSO Table II
89-42   5-15-1989  TSO Table VI
89-57   5-15-1989  1268.07
89-71   6-5-1989   TSO Table III
89-72   6-5-1989   TSO Table IV
89-77   6-19-1989  1248.19
89-78   6-19-1989  TSO Table III
89-80   6-19-1989  TSO Table IV
89-84   7-17-1989  TSO Table II
89-87   7-17-1989  1020.04,
                   1248.07
89-88   7-17-1989  TSO Table IV
89-89   7-17-1989  TSO Table IV
89-91   7-17-1989  TSO Table IV
89-94   7-17-1989  TSO Table III
89-99   7-17-1989  TSO Table II
89-101  8-14-1989  TSO Table II
89-55   8-15-1989  660.085
89-102  8-21-1989  648.095,
                   648.12
89-103  8-21-1989  TSO Table II
89-105  8-21-1989  TSO Table II
89-129  10-16-1989 TSO Table V
134-89  10-30-1989 TSO Table IX
89-145  11-20-1989 TSO Table II
                   1445.02,
89-149  12-4-1989  1445.05,
                   1445.08
142-89  12-4-1989  TSO Table IX
89-153  12-18-1989 440.17
89-156  12-18-1989 432.42
15-90   2-19-1990  818.01
16-90   2-19-1990  TSO Table II
2-90    3-5-1990   TSO Table VIII
3-90    3-5-1990   TSO Table VIII
13-90   3-5-1990   234.01
22-90   3-5-1990   1248.07
89-151  3-5-1990   1282.01
14-90   3-19-1990  1248.07
28-90   3-19-1990  606.27
32-90   3-19-1990  TSO Table II
30-90   4-16-1990  660.03
                   848.01 -
40-90   5-7-1990   848.10,
                   848.99
49-90   5-7-1990   TSO Table II
                   1244.02,
                   1244.05,
                   1244.06,
                   1248.13,
52-90   5-7-1990   1248.16 -
                   1248.18,
                   1250.03,
                   1250.04,
                   1272.17
61-90   5-21-1990  TSO Table II
70-90   6-4-1990   TSO Table II
74-90   6-4-1990   Part 12,
                   Title 4, App. I
75-90   6-4-1990   244.08
80-90   6-18-1990  1023.01
82-90   6-18-1990  TSO Table II
85-90   6-18-1990  TSO Table II
93-90   7-23-1990  1310.01
101-90  7-23-1990  620.01 -
                   620.05
104-90  8-20-1990  TSO Table IX
121-90  8-20-1990  Part 12,
                   Title 4, App. I
125-90  8-20-1990  1276.07
126-90  8-20-1990  TSO Table II
128-90  9-4-1990   1268.02
130-90  9-4-1990   TSO Table X
143-90  10-15-1990 TSO Table II
150-90  10-15-1990 242.02
155-90  11-5-1990  TSO Table VII
160-90  11-9-1990  TSO Table IX
158-90  11-19-1990 236.09
160-90  11-19-1990 1042.08
1-91    1-7-1991   1286.01 -
                   1286.14
10-91   2-4-1991   Part 12,
                   Title 4, App. I
12-91   2-18-1991  278.06
31-91   5-6-1991   1244.06; Part 12,
                   Title 4, App. I
35-91   5-20-1991  236.11
44-91   6-17-1991  452.22
45-91   6-17-1991  244.04
                   1260.01 -
37-91   7-22-1991  1260.04,
                   1262.07
52-91   7-22-1991  236.10
58-91   7-22-1991  TSO Table X
67-91   9-3-1991   1064.01 -
                   1064.03
82-91   11-4-1991  1318.01
86-91   11-18-1991 278.01
89-91   12-9-1991  TSO Table II
90-91   12-9-1991  TSO Table II
91-91   12-9-1991  TSO Table II
92-91   12-16-1991 TSO Table X
101-97  12-16-1991 TSO Table IV
102-91  12-16-1991 TSO Table IV
103-91  12-16-1991 TSO Table IV
104-91  12-16-1991 TSO Table IV
105-91  12-16-1991 TSO Table IV
4-92    1-6-1992   830.01 -
                   830.04
6-92    1-20-1992  TSO Table III
18-92   3-2-1992   814.08
22-92   3-16-1992  830.04
7-92    3-30-1992  244.11
30-92   4-6-1992   TSO Table IX
37-92   4-6-1992   240.02
                   814.02,
44-92   4-20-1992  814.03,
                   814.05
36-92   5-4-1992   TSO Table I
56-92   5-18-1992  1252.01 -
                   1252.04
58-92   6-1-1992   1448.08
59-92   6-1-1992   TSO Table II
60-92   6-1-1992   TSO Table VII
55-92   6-15-1992  618.11,
                   618.14
64-92   6-15-1992  236.12
66-92   6-15-1992  678.02, 678.04
73-92   7-20-1992  1022.03
71-92   8-17-1992  TSO Table VIII
81-92   8-17-1992  258.06
80-92   9-21-1992  1244.06,
                   1248.13
110-92  10-5-1992  TSO Table II
                   848.02,
                   1248.03,
108-92  10-19-1992 1248.13; Part 12,
                   Title 4, App. I;
                   1316.05
117-92  11-2-1992  236.13
118-92  11-2-1992  Part 12,
                   Title 4, App. I
121-92  11-16-1992 TSO Table II
106-92  12-7-1992  1248.07
126-92  12-7-1992  1446.01,
                   1446.03
                   1316.01,
1-93    1-4-1993   1316.02,
                   1316.04,
                   1316.06
5-93    1-4-1993   828.03
                   258.01,
15-93   2-1-1993   258.03 -
                   258.06
21-93   3-1-1993   TSO Table I
28-93   3-1-1993   810.01
31-93   3-1-1993   TSO Table IX
25-93   3-15-1993  TSO Table III
40-93   4-12-1993  TSO Table IX
42-93   4-19-1993  TSO Table II
46-93   4-19-1993  1332.05
49-93   5-3-1993   TSO Table IV
55-93   5-10-1993  TSO Table V,
                   TSO Table VI
56-93   5-10-1993  TSO Table VI
                   1260.04,
29-93   6-7-1993   1276.09,
                   1280.02
65-93   6-21-1993  TSO Table II
                   1318.01,
73-93   7-19-1993  1318.03,
                   1318.04
74-93   7-19-1993  1326.03
75-93   7-19-1993  TSO Table II
76-93   7-19-1993  TSO Table II
64-93   8-30-1993  TSO Table X
81-93   8-30-1993  TSO Table VIII
88-93   9-7-1993   TSO Table V
90-93   9-7-1993   1316.04
91-93   9-7-1993   1448.01
105-93  10-18-1993 TSO Table IV
116-93  11-15-1993 TSO Table II
120-93  12-6-1993  811.01 -
                   811.15
124-93  12-20-1993 TSO Table X
12-94   2-7-1994   TSO Table V
13-94   2-7-1994   TSO Table V
14-94   2-7-1994   TSO Table V
15-94   2-7-1994   TSO Table V
21-94   2-21-1994  TSO Table X
                   1060.01 -
                   1060.06,
26-94   3-7-1994   1060.08 -
                   1060.10,
                   1060.99
                   258.01,
28-94   3-7-1994   258.03 -
                   258.06
59-94   5-16-1994  1042.09,
                   TSO Table IX
74-94   6-20-1994  TSO Table II
88-94   7-18-1994  TSO Table V
104-94  8-15-1994  TSO Table II
91-94   8-22-1994  1276.03
116-94  8-22-1994  TSO Table II
111-94  8-29-1994  TSO Table VI
120-94  9-6-1994   TSO Table II
124-94  11-7-1994  1262.99
135-94  11-7-1994  TSO Table X
136-94  11-7-1994  828.04
140-94  11-21-1994 236.14
3-95    1-3-1995   606.28
149-94  1-3-1995   648.09
8-95    1-17-1995  256.08
155-94  1-17-1995  TSO Table I
14-95   2-6-1995   660.05
27-95   3-6-1995   283.01 -
                   283.05
34-95   3-20-1995  236.15
43-95   4-3-1995   274.01
59-95   5-1-1995   236.08
65-95   5-15-1995  256.11
66-95   5-15-1995  256.10
69-95   5-15-1995  TSO Table II
80-96   6-5-1995   1026.12
84-95   6-19-1995  1448.02
104-95  7-17-1995  288.01
106-95  7-17-1995  248.08
119-95  8-21-1995  618.14
122-95  8-21-1995  248.08
123-95  8-21-1995  TSO Table V
129-95  9-18-1995  236.16
154-95  1-16-1996  TSO Table VIII
9-96    2-20-1996  TSO Table IV
12-96   3-4-1996   TSO Table V
22-96   4-15-1996  1282.01
37-96   4-15-1996  648.095
41-96   4-29-1996  248.07
42-96   4-29-1996  TSO Table V
56-96   5-20-1996  1650.02
59-96   5-20-1996  TSO Table V
                   1276.02,
44-96   6-3-1996   1276.04,
                   1280.03
64-96   6-3-1996   1246.03; Part 12,
                   Title 4, App. IV
67-96   6-17-1996  256.12
21-96   7-22-1996  1284.05
                   888.01 -
58-96   7-22-1996  888.06,
                   888.08 -
                   888.10
93-96   7-22-1996  1308.01 -
                   1308.03
8-96    8-19-1996  TSO Table IV
                   1028.02 -
68-96   8-19-1996  1028.07,
                   1028.09 -
                   1028.11
104-96  9-3-1996   1262.08
95-96   9-9-1996   TSO Table V,
                   TSO Table VI
112-96  9-30-1996  236.17
131-96  10-21-1996 888.04
137-96  11-4-1996  248.07
138-96  11-4-1996  256.07
2-97    1-6-1997   TSO Table II
3-97    1-6-1997   TSO Table II
6-97    2-3-1997   TSO Table X
12-97   2-3-1997   1448.09
13-97   2-3-1997   1220.02
20-97   2-18-1997  1650.05
24-97   3-3-1997   Part 12,
                   Title 4, App. I
23-97   3-31-1997  256.13
43-97   4-7-1997   TSO Table II
44-97   4-7-1997   TSO Table II
16-97   6-2-1997   1344.01 -
                   1344.06
64-97   6-2-1997   612.09
78-97   6-2-1997   TSO Table II
                   1244.05,
                   1272.17,
92-97   6-23-1997  1275.05,
                   1276.10,
                   1278.08,
                   1280.12
146-97  9-15-1997  242.02
148-97  9-15-1997  256.14
153-97  10-6-1997  618.115
                   1304.01 -
156-97  10-6-1997  1304.03,
                   1304.99
169-97  11-3-1997  236.18
183-97  11-24-1997 248.05
190-97  12-15-1997 TSO Table II
191-97  12-15-1997 TSO Table II
4-98    1-5-1998   TSO Table V
9-98    1-20-1998  880.36
12-98   1-20-1998  290.03
13-98   1-20-1998  232.02
18-98   2-2-1998   824.01 -
                   824.14
32-98   2-17-1998  256.15
35-98   2-17-1998  222.03
40-98   3-2-1998   1344.05
44-98   3-2-1998   248.06
47-98   3-2-1998   1280.05,
                   1280.06
57-98   4-6-1998   1272.07,
                   1272.12
                   1240.04,
60-98   4-6-1998   1268.02,
                   1268.05
62-98   4-6-1998   256.16
61-98   4-20-1998  1280.05,
                   1280.06
68-98   4-20-1998  1262.03
69-98   4-20-1998  1421.01,
                   1421.02
                   1302.03,
                   1316.03,
                   1318.02,
                   1318.05,
                   1322.04,
                   1326.01,
                   1326.02,
                   1440.01 -
                   1440.10,
                   1440.14 -
70-98   4-20-1998  1440.27,
                   1440.99,
                   1445.03,
                   1445.06,
                   1445.08,
                   1445.09,
                   1448.04,
                   1448.05,
                   1449.01,
                   1449.03 -
                   1449.13,
                   1449.15
85-98   5-18-1998  256.10
97-98   6-1-1998   TSO Table II
59-98   6-15-1998  TSO Table V
120-98  6-15-1998  1344.07
121-98  6-15-1998  848.02
122-98  6-15-1998  1240.06
126-98  6-15-1998  1277.01
89-98   7-27-1998  TSO Table VIII
90-98   7-27-1998  1244.04,
                   1244.06
                   208.02,
104-98  7-27-1998  256.02,
                   256.05
                   1348.02 -
123-98  7-27-1998  1348.11,
                   1348.99
125-98  7-27-1998  1276.09
138-98  7-27-1998  TSO Table II
139-98  7-27-1998  TSO Table II
140-98  7-27-1998  TSO Table II
141-98  7-27-1998  TSO Table II
142-98  8-24-1998  1280.11
147-98  8-24-1998  TSO Table II
152-98  8-24-1998  1028.01
159-98  9-8-1998   1344.04
                   1440.11,
                   1440.12,
160-98  9-8-1998   1440.20,
                   1445.01,
                   1449.07
164-98  9-8-1998   TSO Table II
170-98  9-21-1998  244.02
192-98  10-19-1998 888.07
194-98  10-19-1998 TSO Table I
203-98  11-2-1998  TSO Table II
204-98  11-2-1998  TSO Table IV
217-98  11-16-1998 242.04
243-98  12-21-1998 TSO Table V
245-98  1-4-1999   TSO Table VII
11-99   1-19-1999  240.02
19-99   2-1-1999   222.01
244-98  2-1-1999   1266.04,
                   1266.05
27-99   3-1-1999   258.03
23-99   3-15-1999  TSO Table I
43-99   3-15-1999  TSO Table VI
                   1244.06,
                   1272.17,
189-98  3-15-1999  1275.05,
                   1278.08,
                   1280.12
                   1244.06,
                   1246.03,
                   1246.05,
                   1248.19,
220-98  3-15-1999  1260.04,
                   1268.03,
                   1272.06,
                   1284.04,
                   1284.06
52-99   4-19-1999  1062.01
54-99   4-19-1999  1284.04
                   624.03,
69-99   5-3-1999   624.14,
                   624.99
68-99   5-17-1999  256.17
76-99   5-17-1999  230.01
106-99  6-7-1999   236.13
111-99  6-7-1999   848.02
120-99  6-21-1999  TSO Table II
121-99  6-21-1999  TSO Table II
126-99  7-26-1999  TSO Table I
132-99  7-26-1999  230.02
139-99  8-23-1999  236.19
157-99  8-23-1999  TSO Table II
86-99   9-7-1999   TSO Table VI
128-99  9-7-1999   1272.07
163-99  9-7-1999   1268.02 -
                   1332.04
169-99  9-20-1999  1312.01 -
                   1312.13
172-99  9-20-1999  236.20
192-99  11-1-1999  TSO Table VI
198-99  11-1-1999  Part 12,
                   Title 4, App. I
199-99  11-15-1999 1312.03,
                   1312.06
201-99  11-15-1999 TSO Table II
202-99  11-15-1999 TSO Table II
203-99  11-15-1999 TSO Table II
205-99  11-15-1999 258.07
207-99  11-15-1999 236.13
200-99  12-20-1999 1272.13
230-99  12-20-1999 222.03
6-00    1-3-2000   256.01
                   248.02,
7-00    1-3-2000   248.04,
                   248.05
9-00    1-18-2000  1348.08
11-00   1-18-2000  230.07
5-00    2-7-2000   232.05
19-00   2-7-2000   1264.01
15-00   2-22-2000  1062.02
27-00   2-22-2000  244.08
21-00   3-6-2000   1284.05
22-00   3-20-2000  1270.01 -
                   1270.05
23-00   3-20-2000  1271.01 -
                   1271.14
58-00   4-3-2000   TSO Table V
                   1276.07 -
                   1276.10,
69-00   5-8-2000   1277.01,
                   1277.02,
                   1277.05 -
                   1277.12
101-00  6-19-2000  236.21
103-00  6-19-2000  1448.03
105-00  6-19-2000  248.09
106-00  6-26-2000  290.04
113-00  6-26-2000  TSO Table V
115-00  6-26-2000  290.04
97-00   7-24-2000  1277.04
120-00  7-24-2000  1650.06
128-00  8-21-2000  TSO Table II
141-00  9-5-2000   452.23
142-00  9-18-2000  244.08
147-00  10-2-2000  1028.08
143-02  10-7-2000  1268.06
144-00  10-16-2000 TSO Table X
155-00  10-16-2000 236.22
70-00   11-6-2000  1268.06
159-00  11-6-2000  1262.05
13-01   2-5-2001   1421.01,
                   1421.02
26-01   2-20-2001  1302.01
96-00   2-20-2001  TSO Table IX
33-01   3-5-2001   230.08
37-01   3-5-2001   TSO Table IV
49-01   4-16-2001  TSO Table IV
50-01   5-7-2001   1271.05,
                   1271.06
61-01   5-7-2001   1448.04
73-01   5-21-2001  236.23
91-01   7-16-2001  TSO Table II
124-01  10-1-2001  813.01,
                   813.02
130-01  10-1-2001  TSO Table II
137-01  10-29-2001 TSO Table V
138-01  10-29-2001 TSO Table V
139-01  10-29-2001 TSO Table V
140-01  10-29-2001 TSO Table V
141-01  10-29-2001 TSO Table V
142-01  10-29-2001 TSO Table V
143-01  10-29-2001 TSO Table V
143-01  11-5-2001  256.01
147-01  11-19-2001 438.30
17-02   2-4-2002   TSO Table II
18-02   2-4-2002   TSO Table II
19-02   2-4-2002   TSO Table II
20-02   2-4-2002   TSO Table II
21-02   2-4-2002   TSO Table II
24-02   2-19-2002  TSO Table I
29-02   2-19-2002  230.09
30-02   2-19-2002  256.18
31-02   2-19-2002  256.01
15-02   2-25-2002  TSO Table VIII
22-02   3-4-2002   TSO Table II
48-02   3-18-2002  1248.07
45-02   4-1-2002   1420.01
65-02   5-20-2002  1448.09
74-02   6-3-2002   1262.05
88-02   6-3-2002   1448.08
101-02  6-17-2002  1332.04
104-02  6-17-2002  TSO Table II
105-02  6-17-2002  TSO Table II
132-02  8-19-2002  256.19
133-02  8-19-2002  256.01
149-02  9-16-2002  1024.10
150-02  9-16-2002  1336.01,
                   1336.02
142-02  10-7-2002  1277.01 -
                   1277.12
152-02  10-21-2002 1220.02
153-02  10-21-2002 1449.01,
                   1449.02
166-02  10-21-2002 TSO Table II
168-02  10-21-2002 TSO Table I
171-02  10-21-2002 256.20
172-02  10-21-2002 256.21
193-02  12-2-2002  242.04
196-02  12-16-2002 TSO Table II
202-02  12-16-2002 236.01
01-03   1-6-2003   TSO Table X
06-03   1-6-2003   1220.03
11-03   2-3-2003   TSO Table X
12-03   2-3-2003   TSO Table X
14-03   2-3-2003   TSO Table II
13-03   2-18-2003  TSO Table II
17-03   2-18-2003  1440.17
29-04   3-1-2003   TSO Table IV
25-03   3-3-2003   1041.01
27-03   4-7-2003   256.09
28-03   4-7-2003   256.01
39-03   4-7-2003   236.24
43-03   4-7-2003   672.105
47-03   4-7-2003   1449.06
56-03   4-21-2003  TSO Table VI
61-03   5-5-2003   TSO Table II
77-03   6-16-2003  1041.02
90-03   7-21-2003  236.26
101-03  7-21-2003  434.01
111-03  8-18-2003  244.12
124-03  8-18-2003  TSO Table II
125-03  8-18-2003  TSO Table II
142-03  9-15-2003  1023.02
144-03  9-15-2003  TSO Table VIII
145-03  10-6-2003  414.035
148-03  10-6-2003  TSO Table X
149-03  10-6-2003  236.27
151-03  10-20-2003 TSO Table X
155-03  10-20-2003 TSO Table VI
158-03  11-3-2003  1248.04
165-03  11-17-2003 1440.06
177-03  12-1-2003  244.12
180-03  12-15-2003 222.01
181-03  12-15-2003 1262.05
3-04    1-5-2004   TSO Table II
16-04   2-2-2004   1449.06
17-04   2-17-2004  880.02,
                   880.03
18-04   2-17-2004  1302.03
19-04   2-17-2004  1449.04,
                   1449.05
20-04   2-17-2004  1448.08
23-04   2-17-2004  278.01
28-04   3-1-2004   TSO Table VI
38-04   4-5-2004   222.03
39-04   4-5-2004   452.23
                   1334.01,
61-04   4-9-2004   1334.05 -
                   1334.23
66-04   5-3-2004   1421.01,
                   1421.02
67-04   5-3-2004   1449.07
                   1348.01 -
74-04   5-17-2004  1348.11,
                   1348.99
83-04   6-21-2004  275.01 -
                   275.03
84-04   6-21-2004  1334.19
85-04   6-21-2004  TSO Table I
103-04  8-23-2004  1445.01
90-04   9-7-2004   1041.02
91-04   9-7-2004   1334.19
                   1334.01,
                   1334.30 -
109-04  9-20-2004  1334.35,
                   1334.37 -
                   1334.47
116-04  9-20-2004  236.28
118-04  9-20-2004  256.01
117-04  10-4-2004  830.02
123-04  10-4-2004  TSO Table I
130-04  10-18-2004 256.20
136-04  11-1-2004  1449.08
143-04  11-15-2004 TSO Table V
01-05   1-10-2005  220.04
159-04  1-24-2005  264.01 -
                   264.17
11-05   2-7-2005   TSO Table VI
16-05   2-7-2005   TSO Table IX
                   1049.01 -
                   1049.11,
17-05   2-7-2005   1049.13 -
                   1049.18,
                   1049.99
18-05   2-7-2005   1047.03
19-05   2-7-2005   1047.02
20-05   2-7-2005   1047.01
22-05   2-14-2005  TSO Table X
31-05   3-21-2005  1449.07,
                   1449.08
32-05   3-21-2005  Part 12,
                   Title 4, App. I
46-05   4-18-2005  1449.08
50-05   5-2-2005   290.05
52-05   5-2-2005   242.04
75-05   6-20-2005  256.20
80-05   6-20-2005  1334.40
82-05   6-20-2005  TSO Table VI
73-05   7-18-2005  TSO Table VIII
91-05   7-18-2005  TSO Table II
92-05   7-18-2005  TSO Table II
                   828.03,
101-05  7-26-2005  828.04,
                   828.99
102-05  8-22-2005  TSO Table VI
                   828.02 -
106-05  8-22-2005  828.04,
                   828.99
                   1328.01,
                   1328.03,
                   1328.05 -
107-05  8-22-2005  1328.11,
                   1328.13 -
                   1328.16,
                   1328.18
113-05  9-6-2005   1048.01
126-03  10-3-2005  TSO Table IX
131-05  10-17-2005 1346.01 -
                   1346.18
148-05  12-19-2005 618.20
13-06   2-6-2006   256.20
15-06   2-6-2006   Part 12,
                   Title 4, App. III
145-05  2-6-2006   1280.03
19-06   2-13-2006  256.20
                   242.01 -
                   242.04,
                   1610.01 -
                   1610.04,
                   1610.99,
                   1620.01 -
28-06   3-6-2006   1620.06,
                   1630.01 -
                   1630.07,
                   1640.01 -
                   1640.05,
                   1650.01 -
                   1650.06
47-06   4-17-2006  1449.07
63-06   5-15-2006  250.01
76-06   5-15-2006  1306.01,
                   1306.99
77-06   5-15-2006  1421.01,
                   1421.02
89-06   6-5-2006   1300.01,
                   1300.99
91-06   6-19-2006  TSO Table II
102-06  7-17-2006  1248.04
103-06  7-17-2006  Part 12,
                   Title 4, App. III
117-06  8-21-2006  TSO Table II
121-06  9-5-2006   1328.13
122-06  9-5-2006   256.01
                   828.01 -
134-06  9-18-2006  828.05,
                   828.99
137-06  10-2-2006  1042.06
170-06  12-18-2006 264.02
171-06  12-18-2006 1440.06
172-06  12-18-2006 1312.11
                   1287.01,
173-06  12-18-2006 1287.02,
                   1287.99
174-06  12-18-2006 1448.09
177-06  12-18-2006 TSO Table IV
178-06  12-18-2006 TSO Table IV
179-06  12-18-2006 TSO Table IV
180-06  12-18-2006 TSO Table IV
176-06  12-26-2006 206.01 -
                   206.04
03-07   1-16-2007  830.04
11-07   2-5-2007   TSO Table VI
12-07   2-5-2007   TSO Table VI
32-07   3-5-2007   1340.01
35-07   3-5-2007   256.20
                   1281.01 -
61-07   6-4-2007   1281.09,
                   1281.11
                   1264.01,
                   1266.12,
70-07   6-4-2007   1279.01 -
                   1279.12,
                   TSO Table VIII
73-07   6-4-2007   1348.08
74-07   6-4-2007   TSO Table IV
89-07   7-16-2007  1023.01 -
                   1023.05
108-07  8-20-2007  1332.01,
                   1332.05
100-07  9-4-2007   1041.03
109-07  11-5-2007  TSO Table VIII
136-07  11-5-2007  232.02
128-07  11-19-2007 Part 12,
                   Title 4, App. II
141-07  12-3-2007  1445.06
148-07  12-17-2007 1287.01
152-07  12-17-2007 1281.04
05-08   1-22-2008  1610.01
08-08   1-22-2008  1043.01 -
                   1043.10
13-08   1-22-2008  264.02 -
                   264.17
15-08   2-4-2008   TSO Table I
18-08   2-4-2008   TSO Table II
19-08   2-4-2008   TSO Table II
20-08   2-4-2008   TSO Table II
22-08   2-19-2008  811.16
29-08   2-19-2008  256.01
30-08   2-19-2008  TSO Table VI
52-08   4-21-2008  1041.03
54-08   4-21-2008  TSO Table II
57-08   4-28-2008  811.16
47-08   5-5-2008   TSO Table VIII
48-08   5-5-2008   TSO Table VIII
56-08   5-5-2008   TSO Table II
58-08   5-5-2008   1344.05
64-08   5-19-2008  1049.10
69-08   5-19-2008  250.02
92-08   6-16-2008  434.03
79-08   7-14-2008  TSO Table VIII
80-08   7-14-2008  TSO Table VIII
81-08   7-14-2008  TSO Table VIII
91-08   7-14-2008  TSO Table VIII
102-08  8-18-2008  TSO Table VIII
103-08  8-18-2008  TSO Table VIII
104-08  8-18-2008  TSO Table VI
114-08  8-18-2008  TSO Table II
115-08  8-18-2008  TSO Table II
116-08  8-18-2008  TSO Table II
117-08  8-18-2008  TSO Table II
118-08  8-18-2008  TSO Table II
119-08  8-18-2008  TSO Table II
120-08  8-18-2008  TSO Table V
101-08  9-2-2008   1281.01 -
                   1281.04
129-08  9-15-2008  TSO Table VI
131-08  9-15-2008  1028.08
142-08  10-13-2008 TSO Table II
134-08  10-20-2008 828.03
147-08  10-20-2008 250.03
148-08  11-3-2008  264.02 -
                   264.17
160-08  11-17-2008 1026.08,
                   1026.09
01-09   1-5-2009   TSO Table IV
14-09   1-20-2009  214.01,
                   214.02
02-09   3-2-2009   TSO Table IV
03-09   3-2-2009   TSO Table IV
04-09   3-2-2009   TSO Table IV
05-09   3-2-2009   TSO Table IV
06-09   3-2-2009   TSO Table IV
07-09   3-2-2009   TSO Table IV
30-09   4-6-2009   288.01
48-09   4-20-2009  1449.08
                   1345.01 -
47-09   5-4-2009   1345.11,
                   1345.99
56-09   5-4-2009   222.01
57-09   5-4-2009   208.08
73-09   7-13-2009  TSO Table II
70-09   8-10-2009  TSO Table VIII
97-09   9-8-2009   TSO Table II
98-09   9-8-2009   TSO Table II
                   1328.09 -
114-09  10-5-2009  1328.11,
                   1328.18,
                   1328.19
122-09  11-2-2009  TSO Table I
03-10   1-4-2010   1220.04
01-10   2-1-2010   TSO Table IV
02-10   2-1-2010   TSO Table IV
13-10   2-1-2010   1280.08
14-10   2-1-2010   1284.05
15-10   2-1-2010   1277.08
16-10   2-1-2010   1276.08
17-10   2-1-2010   1312.05
37-10   3-15-2010  TSO Table IV
51-10   4-19-2010  1449.11
52-10   4-19-2010  TSO Table V
56-10   4-19-2010  220.04
89-10   6-21-2010  TSO Table IV
90-10   6-21-2010  TSO Table IV
91-10   6-21-2010  TSO Table IV
92-10   6-21-2010  TSO Table IV
78-10   7-19-2010  TSO Table VIII
83-10   8-23-2010  TSO Table IV
84-10   8-23-2010  TSO Table IV
85-10   8-23-2010  TSO Table IV
86-10   8-23-2010  TSO Table IV
87-10   8-23-2010  TSO Table IV
88-10   8-23-2010  TSO Table IV
99-10   8-23-2010  1028.08
                   1049.06,
                   1049.08 -
102-10  8-23-2010  1049.13,
                   1049.17,
                   1049.18
                   1314.01 -
                   1314.11,
                   1314.20 -
                   1314.31,
                   1314.40 -
103-10  8-23-2010  1314.49,
                   1314.60 -
                   1314.65,
                   1314.70,
                   1314.71,
                   1314.99
                   1334.30 -
104-10  8-23-2010  1334.35,
                   1334.37 -
                   1334.47
108-10  9-7-2010   880.17,
                   880.24
111-10  9-7-2010   TSO Table IV
112-10  9-7-2010   TSO Table IV
113-10  9-7-2010   TSO Table IV
122-10  9-20-2010  TSO Table V
                   1060.01,
                   1060.02,
134-10  10-4-2010  1060.06,
                   1060.09,
                   1060.10,
                   1060.99
161-10  12-29-2010 TSO Table II
162-10  12-29-2010 TSO Table V
163-10  12-29-2010 TSO Table V
164-10  12-29-2010 TSO Table II
165-10  12-29-2010 TSO Table II
166-10  12-29-2010 TSO Table II
167-10  12-29-2010 TSO Table II
168-10  12-29-2010 TSO Table II
75-11   6-20-2011  TSO Table II
                   278.01,
103-11  8-22-2011  278.04,
                   278.07
108-11  9-6-2011   1650.07
119-11  9-19-2011  TSO Table II
130-11  10-17-2011 1284.13
143-11  11-7-2011  1042.17
144-11  11-7-2011  TSO Table IV
158-11  12-5-2011  220.04
                   1312.01 -
160-11  12-19-2011 1312.13,
                   1312.99
161-11  12-19-2011 TSO Table IV
162-11  12-19-2011 TSO Table IV
04-12   2-21-2012  TSO Table IV
                   434.01,
97-12   6-18-2012  434.02,
                   434.025
                   220.04,
                   824.04,
                   1248.11,
                   1252.04; Part 12,
                   Title 4, App. I;
                   1275.05,
                   1275.07,
                   1275.10,
                   1276.09,
                   1276.10,
                   1277.05,
                   1277.09 -
                   1277.11,
                   1279.05,
                   1279.09,
137-12  9-17-2012  1279.11,
                   1280.11,
                   1280.12,
                   1300.01,
                   1312.03,
                   1312.05,
                   1312.06,
                   1312.10,
                   1318.01,
                   1326.03,
                   1328.09 -
                   1328.11,
                   1328.16,
                   1328.18,
                   1344.04,
                   1345.07,
                   1440.25
138-12  9-17-2012  TSO Table VI
154-12  10-15-2012 TSO Table II
155-12  10-15-2012 222.03,
                   1022.01
156-12  10-15-2012 1022.04,
                   1022.06
84-13   1-17-2013  TSO Table VI
194-12  1-22-2013  1283.01 -
                   1283.08
195-12  1-22-2013  1276.01 -
                   1276.12
20-13   2-18-2013  264.02 -
                   264.17
78-13   6-3-2013   274.02
157-13  11-18-2013 1345.05
01-14   1-21-2014  1610.05
04-14   2-24-2014  1283.07
10-14   4-21-2014  1268.02
12-14   4-21-2014  1277.05
                   1024.02,
14-14   4-21-2014  1024.04,
                   1024.10
17-14   5-5-2014   880.19
38-14   7-14-2014  TSO Table V
43-14   10-6-2014  256.20
45-14   10-20-2014 264.02 -
                   264.17
47-14   12-1-2014  880.34
48-14   12-1-2014  TSO Table IV
02-15   1-5-2015   1023.02
                   848.01 -
05-15   2-2-2015   848.10,
                   848.99
13-15   5-4-2015   256.20
15-15   6-15-2015  1328.01 -
                   1328.19
18-15   8-31-2015  1023.01 -
                   1023.03
19-15   8-31-2015  TSO Table V
                   881.01 -
22-15   11-2-2015  881.26,
                   881.99
23-15   12-7-2015  618.12
18-16   2-8-2016   1281.05
                   1248.01 -
                   1248.05,
12-16   2-22-2016  1248.07,
                   1248.08,
                   1248.10 -
                   1248.17
15-16   2-22-2016  1286.07
21-16   2-22-2016  256.20
23-16   2-22-2016  256.21
02-16   3-7-2016   Part 12,
                   Title 4, App. I
03-16   3-7-2016   Part 12,
                   Title 4, App. II
04-16   3-7-2016   Part 12,
                   Title 4, App. III
05-16   3-7-2016   Part 12,
                   Title 4, App. IV
06-16   3-7-2016   1041.01,
                   1041.02
                   1042.13,
                   1042.16,
                   1042.17,
07-16   3-7-2016   1042.19,
                   1042.35 -
                   1042.44,
                   1042.99
                   1242.04 -
09-16   3-7-2016   1242.06,
                   1242.99
                   1244.02,
                   1244.03,
10-16   3-7-2016   1244.05 -
                   1244.07,
                   1244.09,
                   1244.10
11-16   3-7-2016   1246.03,
                   1246.05
13-16   3-7-2016   1250.02,
                   1250.04
                   1334.05,
                   1334.07,
                   1334.10 -
                   1334.12,
                   1334.14,
                   1334.15,
                   1334.17 -
                   1334.20,
16-16   3-7-2016   1334.22,
                   1334.23,
                   1334.30,
                   1334.32,
                   1334.35 ,
                   1334.37 -
                   1334.42,
                   1334.44 -
                   1334.47
25-16   3-14-2016  236.29
27-16   4-4-2016   1268.06
30-16   5-23-2016  1043.02,
                   1043.03
32-16   6-6-2016   618.12
33-16   6-6-2016   266.01 -
                   266.06
36-16   6-20-2016  1348.08
37-16   6-20-2016  1449.11
38-16   6-20-2016  1312.06,
                   1312.07
44-16   10-17-2016 222.01
47-16   11-7-2016  1283.04
48-16   11-21-2016 1449.11
50-16   12-19-2016 1043.03
2-2017  2-20-2017  1334.40
8-2017  5-1-2017   242.04
13-2017 5-1-2017   1630.08,
                   1630.09
14-2017 5-1-2017   1650.08
9-2017  5-15-2017  1284.04
16-2017 6-19-2017  1348.08,
                   1348.99
17-2017 6-19-2017  1440.20
18-2017 6-19-2017  1448.07
19-2017 6-19-2017  1448.08
23-2017 7-10-2017  1047.02
27-2017 9-18-2017  220.01,
                   220.04
28-2017 9-18-2017  1448.08
29-2017 9-18-2017  1047.02
33-2017 12-18-2017 1022.01 -
                   1022.03
34-2017 12-18-2017 1348.08
35-2017 12-18-2017 1449.08
                   881.02,
                   881.04,
01-2018 2-5-2018   881.05,
                   881.07,
                   881.18
02-2018 2-19-2018  TSO Table VII
03-2018 2-19-2018  220.01
04-2018 2-19-2018  208.08
05-2018 2-19-2018  250.03
09-2018 4-2-2018   TSO Table V
                   881.03,
10-2018 4-23-2018  881.05,
                   881.27
14-2018 5-7-2018   1268.02
15-2018 5-7-2018   1448.08
20-2018 5-21-2018  256.20
                   1305.01 -
25-2018 7-2-2018   1305.19,
                   1305.99
27-2018 9-17-2018  264.01 -
                   264.17
29-2018 9-17-2018  TSO Table V
30-2018 9-17-2018  TSO Table V
31-2018 9-17-2018  TSO Table V
32-2018 10-1-2018  256.21
33-2018 10-15-2018 828.05
34-2018 10-15-2018 274.02
                   1348.01 -
35-2018 11-5-2018  1348.11,
                   1348.99
37-2018 11-5-2018  222.03
38-2018 11-5-2018  236.13
39-2018 11-5-2018  256.17
40-2018 11-5-2018  256.19
41-2018 11-5-2018  1262.03
42-2018 11-5-2018  1271.05
43-2018 11-5-2018  1271.06
44-2018 11-5-2018  1312.06
45-2018 11-5-2018  1312.07
46-2018 11-5-2018  1449.07
49-2018 11-19-2018 TSO Table X
50-2018 11-19-2018 TSO Table V
51-2018 11-19-2018 TSO Table V
52-2018 11-19-2018 TSO Table V
53-2018 11-19-2018 TSO Table V
54-2018 11-19-2018 TSO Table V
55-2018 11-19-2018 TSO Table V
56-2018 11-19-2018 TSO Table V
57-2018 11-19-2018 TSO Table V
58-2018 11-19-2018 TSO Table V
59-2018 11-19-2018 TSO Table V
60-2018 11-19-2018 TSO Table V
61-2018 11-19-2018 TSO Table V
63-2018 11-19-2018 TSO Table V
65-2018 12-3-2018  TSO Table V
01-2019 2-18-2019  TSO Table VIII
05-2019 2-4-2019   274.02
07-2019 3-18-2019  1042.43
13-2019 6-17-2019  274.02
18-2019 7-1-2019   TSO Table X
19-2019 7-1-2019   TSO Table X
20-2019 7-1-2019   TSO Table X
21-2019 7-1-2019   TSO Table X
25-2019 9-9-2019   1288.01,
                   1288.02
26-2019 9-9-2019   TSO Table II
27-2019 9-9-2019   TSO Table II
28-2019 9-9-2019   TSO Table II
29-2019 9-9-2019   TSO Table II
30-2019 9-9-2019   TSO Table II
31-2019 9-9-2019   TSO Table II
33-2019 9-23-2019  TSO Table IV
34-2019 9-23-2019  TSO Table IV
37-2019 10-7-2019  TSO Table X
38-2019 10-21-2019 1332.05
39-2019 11-4-2019  TSO Table X
41-2019 11-4-2019  TSO Table IV
42-2019 11-4-2019  TSO Table IV
43-2019 11-4-2019  TSO Table IV
                   1328.04 -
                   1328.06,
48-2019 12-16-2019 1328.09 -
                   1328.11,
                   1328.13 -
                   1328.17
49-2019 12-16-2019 848.02
01-2020 1-21-2020  TSO Table X
02-2020 1-21-2020  Repeals 1334.36
07-2020 2-17-2020  264.01 -
                   264.17
14-2020 3-23-2020  432.30
15-2020 3-23-2020  830.02
19-2020 5-18-2020  TSO Table X
22-2020 7-6-2020   678.01 to 678.05,
                   678.99
                   1283.04,
23-2020 7-6-2020   1283.04,
                   1283.06,
                   1283.07
24-2020 7-6-2020   452.12
25-2020 7-6-2020   1328.09
26-2020 7-6-2020   1449.11
27-2020 7-6-2020   1350.01
                  
 
 
