Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 1 – General Provisions – September 2018
ARTICLE 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 1.01 Title
This Resolution and any subsequent amendments shall be known as and may be cited
and referred to as the “Bethel Township Zoning Resolution, Miami County, Ohio”.
Section 1.02 Intent and Purpose
First adopted on December 8, 1956, this Resolution, formally adopted by the Township
Trustees on June 12, 2007, is based on the Bethel Township Comprehensive Land Use
Plan, adopted November 30, 2010, the purpose of which is to lessen the congestion on
public streets, to reduce undue hazards due to flooding, and to promote the public health,
and safety. This above-mentioned Plan has been formulated with due consideration,
among other things, to:
A. The character of each district of the Township and its peculiar suitability for particular
uses;
B. The conservation of property values;
C. The general trend and character of building and population development;
D. The advancement of social and economic stability; and
E. The adequate provision of public transportation, streets, highways, sewers, water
mains, schools, recreational areas, and other public facilities.
Except as otherwise provided in this Section, in the interest of the public health and
safety, the Bethel Township Board of Township Trustees may regulate by Resolution, in
accordance with a comprehensive plan, the location, height, bulk, number of stories, and
size of buildings and other structures, including tents, cabins, and trailer coaches,
percentages of lot areas that may be occupied, set back building lines, sizes of yards,
courts, and other open spaces, the density of population, the uses of buildings and other
structures, including tents, cabins, recreational vehicles and mobile homes, and the uses
of land for trade, industry, residence, recreation, or other purposes in the unincorporated
territory of the Township.
The Board of Trustees may divide all or any part of the unincorporated territory of the
Township into districts or zones of such number, shape, and area as the Board of
Trustees determines. All such regulations shall be uniform for each class or kind of
building or other structure or use throughout any district or zone, but the regulations in
one district or zone may differ from those in other districts or zones.
Section 1.03 Applicability
This Resolution has been passed under the authority granted to the Township under
Section 519.01 et seq. of the Ohio Revised Code and embraces the provisions thereof
regarding enforcement and penalties for violations.
Section 1.04 Jurisdiction
The provisions of this Zoning Resolution shall apply to all land, land development, use of
all structures, and uses of land within the unincorporated areas of Bethel Township,
Miami County, Ohio.
Section 1.05 Interpretations and Conflict
In its interpretation and application, the provisions of this Resolution shall be held to be
minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, and the
general welfare. Wherever the requirements of this Resolution are at variance with the
requirements of any other lawfully adopted rules, regulations, or Resolutions, the most
restrictive or that imposing the highest standards shall govern.
This Resolution is not intended to interfere with or revoke any easements, covenants, or
agreements between private parties, provided that wherever this Resolution proposes a
greater restriction upon the use of buildings or land, upon the location or height of
buildings or structures, or upon requirements for open areas than those that are imposed
or required by such easements, covenants, or agreements between parties, the provision
of this Resolution shall govern.
Section 1.06 Validity and Severability
Should any section or provision of this Resolution be declared by the courts to be
unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the Resolution as a
whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid.
Section 1.07 Zoning Certificate Required
With the exception of agricultural uses as regulated by Section 519.21 of the Ohio
Revised Code, it shall be unlawful for an owner to use or to permit the use of any
structure, building or land, or part thereof, hereafter erected, created, changed, converted
or enlarged, wholly or partly, until a Zoning Certificate is issued by the Zoning
Administrator in accordance with Article 2, Administration and Enforcement, Section 2.06,
Zoning Certificate.
Furthermore:
A. Such Zoning Certificate, when issued, shall state that such building, premises or a part
thereof, and the proposed use thereof are in conformity with the provisions of this
Resolution.
B. The Zoning Administrator shall not issue any Zoning Certificate for grading,
excavation, or construction unless the plans, specifications, and the intended use
conform to the provisions of this Resolution.
Section 1.08 Transitional Rules
A. Effective Date
This Resolution shall be in full force and effect 30 days following the adoption
date of the Resolution by the Board of Township Trustees.
B. Violations Continue
Any violation under previous Resolutions repealed by the adoption of this
Zoning Resolution shall continue to be a violation under this Resolution and are
subject to penalties and enforcement under Article 40, Violations and Corrective
Actions, unless the use, structure, building, development, construction, or other
activity complies with the provisions of this Resolution.
C. Nonconformities Continue
Any legal nonconformity under any previous resolutions repealed by this
Resolution shall also continue to be a legal nonconformity under this
Resolution, as long as the situation that resulted in the nonconforming
status under the previous Resolutions continues to exist.
If a legal nonconformity under the previous Resolutions repealed by this
Resolution becomes conforming because of the adoption of this
Resolution, then the situation will be considered conforming and shall no
longer be nonconforming subject to the nonconforming use regulations.
D. Approved Projects
1. Any building, structure, or development for which a building permit or Zoning
Certificate was issued prior to the effective date of this Resolution may,
at the applicant’s option, be completed in conformance with the issued
permit and any other applicable permits and conditions, even if such
building, structure, or development does not fully comply with provisions
of this Resolution.
2. If the building or structure is not completed within the time required under the
original issued Certificate or Permit or any extension granted as of the
effective date of this Resolution, then the building, structure, or
development may be constructed, completed, or occupied only in
compliance with this Resolution unless the Zoning Commission grants
additional extensions.
3. Any application submitted prior to the effective date of this Resolution shall be
subject to the standards in effect at the time of application.
4. Any reapplication for an expired project approval shall meet the standards in
effect at the time of reapplication.
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 2 – Administration and Enforcement – September 2018
ARTICLE 2
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section 2.01 Purpose
This Article sets both the powers and duties of the Township Board of Trustees, Zoning
Commission, the Board of Zoning Appeals and the Zoning Administrator with respect to
the administration of the provisions of this Resolution.
Section 2.02 Township Board of Trustees
For the purpose of this Resolution, the Board of Township Trustees shall have the
following duties:
A. Initiate proposed amendments to this Resolution.
B. Review and decide on all proposed amendments to this Resolution.
C. Perform all other duties as specified in Chapter 519 of the Ohio Revised Code and as
specified in this Resolution.
Title 5 of the Ohio Revised Code shall regulate the election of the Trustees; establish
their rules of meetings, meeting times, and quorum.
Section 2.03 Zoning Administrator
The Zoning Administrator, as established by Section 519.16 of the Ohio Revised Code,
shall have the following responsibilities and powers:
A. Enforce the provisions of this Resolution and interpret the meaning and application of
its provisions.
B. Receive, review and make determinations on applications for Zoning Permits and
Certificates of Occupancy.
C. Issue Zoning Certificates as provided by this Resolution and keep a record of same with
notations of special conditions involved.
D. Review and process plans pursuant to the provisions of this Resolution.
E. Make determinations as to whether violations of this Resolution exist, determine the
nature and extent thereof, and notify the owner in writing, specifying the exact
nature of the violation and the manner in which it shall be corrected by the owner,
pursuant to the procedures in this Resolution.
F. Conduct inspections of buildings and uses of land to determine compliance or noncompliance
with this Resolution.
G. Maintain permanent and current records required by this Resolution, including but not
limited to the Official Zoning Map, Zoning Certificates, inspection documents and
records of all variances, amendments and Conditional Uses. These records shall
be made available for use of the Board of Township Trustees, Zoning Commission,
the Township Board of Zoning Appeals and to the public.
H. Revoke a Zoning Permit or approval issued contrary to this Resolution or based on a
false statement or misrepresentation on the application.
I. Document non-conforming uses and structures.
J. Such other duties as specified from time to time by the Board of Township Trustees.
Section 2.04 Comprehensive Land Use Plan
The Bethel Township Comprehensive Land Use Plan was initiated by the Bethel
Township Trustees to help guide future growth, development and enhancement of the
Township while keeping in mind the rural traditions and values of a strong community.
This Comprehensive Land Use Plan is a guide for Planning and Zoning and is not the
sole determiner of allowed zoning changes, conditional uses and variances.
Section 2.05 Zoning Commission
The Township Board of Trustees, for the purpose and intentions of this Resolution,
hereby creates and establishes the Bethel Township Zoning Commission, hereafter
referred to as the Zoning Commission. The Zoning Commission shall be appointed and
organized as established under Section 519.04, Township Zoning Commission, of the
Ohio Revised Code.
A. Powers and Duties
The Zoning Commission shall have all the appropriate power and duties
prescribed by law and by this Resolution. The Zoning Commission shall have the
following duties and powers:
1. Initiation of Zoning Resolution and Map Amendments
To initiate proposed amendments to this Resolution. Any proposed
amendment that is denied by the Zoning Commission shall not be
resubmitted for a period of less than twelve (12) consecutive months. All
amendments shall be reviewed, and recommendations made to the
Board of Township Trustees.
2. Other Duties
Perform all other duties as specified in Chapter 519 of the Ohio Revised
Code and as specified in this Resolution.
B. Alternates
1. The Township Board of Trustees may appoint two (2) alternate members to
the Zoning Commission, for terms to be determined by the Township
Board of Trustees as identified in Section 519.04 of the Ohio Revised
Code.
2. An alternate member shall take the place of an absent regular member at any
meeting of the Zoning Commission to guarantee a quorum.
3. An alternate member shall meet the same appointment criteria as a regular
member.
4. When attending a meeting on behalf of an absent member, the alternate
member may vote on any matter on which the absent member is
authorized to vote. If the hearing is tabled for vote where the alternate
member is present, the alternate shall be required to attend the next
meeting scheduled for vote on the tabled matter.
Section 2.06 Board of Zoning Appeals
The Township Board of Trustees, for the purpose and intentions of this Resolution,
hereby creates and establishes the Bethel Township Board of Zoning Appeals, hereafter
referred to as the Board of Zoning Appeals. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall be
appointed and organized as established under Sections 519.13, through 519.15 of the
Ohio Revised Code.
A. Powers and Duties
The Board of Appeals shall have all the appropriate power and duties prescribed
by law and by this Resolution. The Board shall have the following duties and
powers:
1. Administrative Review
To hear and decide appeals only in such cases where it is alleged there
is an error in any order, requirements, decision, or determination made
by the Zoning Administrator/Enforcing Officer in the enforcement of this
Resolution. The concurring vote of a majority of those members of the
Board present and voting shall be necessary to reverse any order,
requirements, decision, or determination of the Zoning
Administrator/Enforcing Officer or to decide in favor of the applicant on
any matter upon which the Board is required to pass under the terms of
this Resolution.
2. Determination of Similar Uses
To determine if uses not specifically mentioned in this Resolution are
similar to uses permitted within a district.
3. Determination of District Boundary Location
To determine the exact location of any district boundary if there is
uncertainty as to exact location thereof. In making such determination
the Board shall be guided by the provisions of this Resolution.
4. Conditional Use Permits
To hear and decide only such conditional uses as the Board of Appeals
is specifically authorized to pass on under the terms of this Resolution or
to deny Conditional Use Permits when not in harmony with the intent and
purpose of this Resolution. The following requirements shall be complied
with prior to any approval or denial of a conditional use permit by the
Board of Appeals.
a. A written application for a conditional use is submitted
indicating the section of this Resolution under which the
conditional use is sought and stating the grounds on which it is
requested.
b. A public hearing shall be held as required under Section
519.15 of the Ohio Revised Code.
c. The Board of Appeals shall determine:
1. Authority: If it has the authority to grant the request.
2. Adverse Affect: That the granting of the conditional use will not
adversely affect the neighborhood in which the
conditional use is to be located.
3. Conditions: In granting any Conditional Use Permit, the Board
of Zoning Appeals may prescribe appropriate conditions
and safeguards in conformity to the provisions of this
Resolution. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall require a
performance bond or letter of credit to assure
conformance to such conditions and safeguards as may
be necessary. Violation of such conditions and
safeguards shall cause the aforementioned performance
bond to be forfeited or a draft to be drawn on the full
amount of the letter of credit and shall be deemed a
violation of this Resolution and punishable under Article
40, Violations and Corrective Actions.
A Conditional Use Permit shall expire in one (1) year
after it is issued unless actual construction has taken
place or is underway except as provided elsewhere in
this Resolution. A conditional use permit issued for other
than construction shall expire in six (6) months after it is
issued unless the actual use has been established. The
validity of a Conditional Use Permit will continue until
such use is terminated by the discontinuance of the use,
by special conditions set forth by the Board of Zoning
Appeals, or by change of ownership of the property on
which such use is located. However, change of property
ownership shall not invalidate a conditional use permit
issued for a dwelling constructed as a second residence
in the A-2 and A-1 Agricultural Districts.
4. Variances
a. To vary the strict application of any of the requirements of this
Resolution in the case of exceptionally irregular, narrow, shallow
or deep lots or other exceptional physical conditions, whereby
such strict application would result in practical difficulty or
unnecessary hardship - not economic in nature - that would
deprive the owner of the reasonable use of the land or building
involved but in no other case. The fact that another use would be
more profitable is not a valid basis for legally granting a variance.
No nonconforming use of neighboring lands, structures, or
buildings in the same district, and no permitted use of lands,
structures or buildings in other districts shall be considered
grounds for the issuance of a variance. No variance in the strict
application of this Resolution shall be granted by the Board of
Zoning Appeals unless and until the applicant submits, and the
Board concurs with the following:
1. Conditions and Circumstances: That special conditions and
circumstances exist which are peculiar to the land,
structure or building involved and which are not
applicable to other lands, structures, or buildings in the
same district.
2. Property Rights: That literal interpretation of the provisions of
this Resolution would deprive the applicant of property
rights commonly enjoyed by other properties in the same
district under the terms of this Resolution.
3. Applicant Not at Fault: That the special conditions and
circumstances do not result from the actions of the
applicant, his agents, or prior property owners.
4. No Special Privilege: That granting the variance requested will
not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is
denied by this Resolution to other lands, structures, or
buildings in the same district.
5. Harmony with Locality: That the variance requested shall not
alter the essential character of the locality.
b. Procedure for Consideration of Petitions for Variance:
1. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall make a finding that the
reasons set forth in the application are valid and justify
the granting of the variance. The Board shall also
determine if the variance is the minimum variance that
will make possible the reasonable use of land, building,
or structure.
2. Under no circumstances shall the Board of Appeals grant a
variance, which will permit a use, which is not permitted
in the district involved.
3. Conditions: The Board of Zoning Appeals may prescribe
appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with
this Resolution. The Board of Zoning Appeals shall
require a performance bond or irrevocable letter of credit
to assure conformance to such conditions and
safeguards as the Board may require.
4. Violation: Violation of such conditions and safeguards when
such are made a party of the terms under which a
variance is granted, shall cause the aforementioned
performance bond to be forfeited or a draft to be drawn
on the full amount of the letter of credit and shall be
deemed in violation of this Resolution punishable under
Article 40, Violations and Corrective Actions.
5. Public Hearings: Prior to taking action on a request for a
variance, the Board of Appeals shall hold a public
hearing and give notice to property owners as in Section
2.05 A. 4. b., of this Resolution.
c. Effective Date:
The decision of the Board of Zoning Appeals shall not become
final until the expiration of five (5) days from the date of entry of
such order unless the Board shall find the immediate effect of
such order is necessary for the preservation of property or
personal rights and shall so certify on the record.
B. Withdrawal Procedure
Any application for a variance, conditional use, change of use, and expansion of
a non-conformity or appeal may be withdrawn by the applicant up to seven (7)
days before the scheduled public hearing thereon. Such request must be in
writing, signed by the applicant and filed in the office of the Zoning Administrator
holding such hearing. Such withdrawal shall void said application and cancel all
future proceedings upon said application. If said withdrawal is not properly and
timely filed, Article 2.05 C, Application Frequency Limitations shall apply to any
future applications. In no case shall application fees be refunded, either in part or
in whole, regardless of the proceedings or lack thereof, after the filing of any such
application for a variance, conditional use or appeal.
C. Application Frequency Limitations
For any parcel of property or portion thereof only one (1) of each of the following
applications shall be filed for consideration during any consecutive
twelve (12) month period: Conditional Use Permit, Change of Use Permit
or Variance.
D. Regulation of Conditional Uses
The provisions of this Section of this Resolution apply to the location and
maintenance of any and all conditional uses.
1. Purpose
In recent years the characteristics and impacts of an ever-increasing
number of new and unique uses, together with the broadening of
numerous conventional uses, have fostered the development of more
flexible regulations designed to accommodate these activities in a
reasonable and equitable manner, while safeguarding both the property
rights of all individuals and the health, and safety of the community.
Towards these ends, it is recognized that this Resolution should provide
for more detailed evaluation of each use conditionally permissible in a
specific district with respect to such considerations as location, design,
size, and method of operation, intensity of use, public facilities
requirements, traffic generation, impact and effect on surrounding
properties. Accordingly, conditional use permits shall conform to the
procedures and requirements of this Resolution.
2. Contents of Conditional Use Permit Application
Any owner or agent thereof, of property for which a conditional use is
proposed shall make an application for a conditional use permit by filing
it with the Zoning Administrator. The application shall contain the
following information:
a. Name, address and phone number of the applicant;
b. Legal description of the property or the tax map of the property;
c. Zoning district;
d. Description of existing use;
e. Description of proposed conditional use;
f. A plan of the proposed site for the conditional use showing the
location of all buildings, parking and loading areas, streets and
traffic access ways, open spaces, refuse and service areas,
utilities, signs, yards, landscaping features, and such information
as the Board of Zoning Appeals may require;
g. A narrative statement discussing the compatibility of the
proposed use with the existing uses of adjacent properties to
include an evaluation of the effects on adjoining properties of
such elements as traffic circulation, noise, glare, odor, fumes and
vibration.
h. A fee established by Resolution.
3. General Standards for All Conditional Uses
In addition to the specific requirements for conditionally permitted uses,
the Board shall review the particular facts and circumstances of each
proposed use in terms of the following standards and shall find adequate
evidence showing that such use at the proposed location:
a. Is in fact a conditional use as established under the provisions of this
Resolution and appears on the list of conditionally permitted
uses adopted for the district involved;
b. Will be in accordance with the general objectives, or with any
comprehensive plan and/or the zoning resolution;
c. Will be designed, constructed, operated and maintained so as to be
harmonious and appropriate in appearance with the existing or
intending character of the general vicinity and that such use will
not change the essential character of the same area;
d. Will not be hazardous or disturbing to existing or future neighboring
uses;
e. Will be served adequately by essential public facilities and services
such as highways, streets, police and fire protection, drainage
structures, refuse disposal, water and sewer; and schools; or
that the persons or agencies responsible for the establishment of
the proposed use shall be able to provide adequately any such
services;
f. Will not create excessive additional requirements at public cost for
public facilities and services and will not be detrimental to the
economic welfare of the community;
g. Will not involve uses, activities, processes, materials, equipment and
conditions of operation that will be detrimental to any persons,
property, or the general welfare by reason of excessive
production of traffic, noise, smoke, fumes, glare, or odors.
h. Will have vehicular approaches to the property which shall be so
designed as not to create an interference with traffic on
surrounding public thoroughfares;
i. Will not result in the destruction, or loss of a natural, scenic, or historic
feature of major importance.
4. Invalidation of Conditional Use Permit
For the purposes of this Resolution, a conditional Use Permit shall cease
to be valid at such time as the premises for which it was issued is no
longer occupied by the holder of said permit or a change of ownership
has occurred or until such use is terminated by the discontinuance of the
use. A Conditional Use Permit shall also be immediately invalidated upon
conduct in any manner not approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
5. Specific Criteria for Conditional Uses.
The following are specific conditional use criteria and requirements for
those uses conditionally permitted in this Resolution. Nothing in this shall
prohibit the Board of Zoning Appeals from prescribing supplementary
conditions and safeguards in addition to these requirements in
accordance with this Resolution.
j. Sexually Oriented Businesses.
In every instance where a conditional use permit has been
applied for in the I-1 Light Industrial District or I-2 Heavy
Industrial District for a Sexually Oriented Business, the applicant
shall comply with the following conditions:
1. No Sexually Oriented Business shall be established within
1000 feet of any area zoned as a Residential District or
as an Office-Residential District. No Sexually Oriented
Business shall be located within 1000 feet of the right-ofway
on any divided, limited access highway.
2. No Sexually Oriented Business shall be established within
1000 feet of any school, library, teaching, educational
facility, whether public or private, governmental or
commercial, that is attended by persons under eighteen
(18) years of age. The term “school” includes any school
grounds.
3. No Sexually Oriented Business shall be established within
1000 feet of any park or recreational facility attended by
persons less than eighteen (18) years of age. The term
park or playgrounds, nature trails or recreational trails,
swimming pools, reservoirs, athletic fields, basketball or
tennis courts, pedestrian or bicycle paths, wilderness
areas, park districts, or other similar public land.
4. No Sexually Oriented Business shall be established within
1000 feet of any permanently established place of
religious services or worship which is attended by
persons less than eighteen (18) years of age or day care
centers of Type A or B family care home as defined by
the Ohio Revised Code.
5. No Sexually Oriented Business shall be established within
1000 feet of any other Sexually Oriented Business or
any of the following;
a. Establishments for the sale of beer or
intoxicating liquor for consumption on the
premises.
b. Pawn shops.
c. Pool or billiard halls.
d. Pinball palaces, halls or arcades.
f. Dance halls or discotheques.
g. Video arcades or establishments known by other
descriptions, but which provide video game
and/or other games or entertainment attended or
participated by persons under (18) years of age
h. Tattoo parlors/body piercing operations, excluding
ear-piercing operations.
6. Distances shall be measured by a straight-line distance
without regard for intervening structures from the
property lines or the zoning boundaries of any lot or
parcel of land which includes or which is operated or
used in connection with a building in which a Sexually
Oriented Business is located or in which any activity
described referred to in this section is located. If property
lines cannot be clearly established, measurements shall
be taken from the closest exterior structural wall or
section of wall enclosing the sexually oriented business
to the nearest property line or zoning boundary of the
other use in question.
7. All building openings, entries, windows, and the like at any
sexually oriented business shall be located, covered, or
screened in such a manner as to protect any public or
semi-public area, sidewalk or street. For new
construction, the building shall be oriented so as to
minimize any possibility of viewing the interior from pubic
or semi-public areas, any sidewalk, or any street.
8. No screens, loudspeakers or sound equipment shall be used
by a sexually oriented business that can be seen, heard
or discerned by the public from public or semi-public
areas, any discerned by the public from public or semipublic
areas, any sidewalk, or any street.
9. Off street parking shall be provided in accordance with Article
35, Off-Street Parking and Loading, of this Resolution for
similar uses, as well as all other standards for permitted
uses within the I-1 Light Industrial District and I-2 Heavy
Industrial District.
Section 2.07 Zoning Certificate
A. Applicability
A Zoning Certificate shall be required for any of the following:
1. New construction or structural alteration of any building or structure, including
accessory buildings;
2. Change in use of an existing building, accessory building, lot, or portion
thereof, to a use of a different classification, excluding changing to any
agricultural use;
3. Grading, excavation, or modification of any lot requiring an Earth Movement
Permit from the Ohio Department of Natural Resources.
4. Occupancy and use of vacant land excluding agricultural land;
5. Change in the use of land to a use of a different classification; or
6. Any change in the use of a nonconforming use.
B. Zoning Certificates for Nonconforming Uses
1. A Zoning Certificate shall be required for all lawful nonconforming uses of land
or buildings created by adoption of this Resolution.
2. Application for such certificate for a nonconforming use shall be filed with the
Zoning Administrator by the person with legal authority to file for a
Zoning Certificate.
3. Such applications shall be made within one (1) year of the effective date of this
Resolution.
C. Exemptions from Zoning Certificates
1. Essential Services
Essential services shall be permitted as authorized and regulated by law
and other resolutions of the Township and County, it being the intention
to exempt such essential services from the application of this Zoning
Resolution.
2. Agricultural Uses
a. Agricultural structures and uses on lots with a lot area of five (5) acres
or more shall be exempt from the requirements of this Resolution and
property owners shall not be required to obtain a Zoning Certificate for
such uses per Section 519.21 of the ORC.
b. For any platted subdivision approved under Section 711.05, 711.09 or
711.10 of the ORC, or in any area consisting of 15 or more lots approved
under Section 711.131 (711.13.1) of the ORC that are contiguous to one
another, or some of which are contiguous to one another and adjacent to
one side of a dedicated public road, and the balance of which are
contiguous to one another and adjacent to the opposite side of the same
dedicated public road, the Township shall require a Zoning Certificate
for:
1. Agriculture uses on lots of one (1) acre or less;
2. Setbacks, heights and sizes of buildings or structures incident
to the use of land for agricultural purposes on lots
greater than one acre but not greater than five (5) acres.
3. Dairying and animal and poultry husbandry on lots greater
than one acre but not greater than five (5) acres when at
least 35% of the lots in the subdivision are developed
with at least one building, structure, or improvement that
is subject to real property taxation or that is subject to
the tax on manufactured and mobile homes under
Section 4503.06 of the ORC. After 35% of the lots are so
developed, dairying and animal and poultry husbandry
shall be considered a nonconforming use of land and
buildings or structures pursuant to Section 519.19 of the
ORC.
D. Review Procedure
1. Step 1 – Application
a. The applicant shall submit two (2) copies of the application to the
Township Zoning Administrator prior to submitting for a Miami
County Building Permit.
b. The application shall include all such forms, maps, and information, as
may be prescribed for that purpose by the Bethel Township
Zoning Department to assure the fullest practicable presentation
of the facts for the permanent record. A list of minimum submittal
requirements may be adopted by the Board of Township
Trustees.
c. Payment of all required fees as established in the Bethel Township fee
schedule.
2. Step 2 – Review
The Township Zoning Administrator shall review the application for
conformance with the provisions of this Zoning Resolution.
3. Step 3 – Decision
a. Within three (3) business days of the application (Step 1), the
Township Zoning Administrator shall approve and issue the
Zoning Certificate or deny the application and in so doing state,
in writing, the reasons for the action taken.
b. Upon approval, the Zoning Administrator shall return one, signed copy
of the application and maintain the second copy of the
application for Township records.
c. If the application is denied, the applicant may submit a revised
application and sketch plan for review in accordance with the
review procedure, or the applicant may appeal the decision to
the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with Section 2.05 A.
1., Administrative Review, of this Zoning Resolution.
E. Review Criteria
All applications for a Zoning Certificate shall demonstrate conformity with the
applicable provisions of this Zoning Resolution.
F. Expiration
1. If the work described in the Zoning Certificate has not begun within twelve (12)
months from the date of issuance, the Zoning Certificate shall expire,
and written notice thereof shall be given to the person(s) affected.
2. If the work described in any Zoning Certificate has not been substantially
completed within one (1) year from the date of issuance, the Zoning
Certificate shall expire and written notice thereof shall be given to the
person(s) affected, together with notice that further work as described in
the canceled Zoning Certificate shall not proceed unless and until a new
Zoning Certificate is obtained or an extension is granted by the Zoning
Commission for good cause shown by the applicant.
3. Upon expiration of a Zoning Certificate, a new Zoning Certificate application,
including all applicable fees, shall be required. Failure to complete
construction within a reasonable period of time may cause an expiration
of the Zoning Certificate.
Section 2.08 Nonconformities
In the interest of the promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare, Bethel
Township realizes that it is necessary to regulate legal nonconforming uses and parcels
of land.
A. General Provisions
Nonconformities must comply with the following general provisions:
1. Any nonconforming use, building, structure, site, lot or sign lawfully existing on
the effective date of this Zoning Resolution, or subsequent amendment,
may be continued except as provided herein and so long as it remains
otherwise lawful.
2. No nonconformity shall be enlarged, expanded, or extended unless such
alteration is in full compliance with all requirements of this Zoning
Resolution. However, nothing in this Section shall be deemed to prevent
the strengthening or restoration to a safe condition of a structure in
accordance with an order of a public official who is charged with
protecting the public safety and who could declare such structure to
require repair or restoration in accordance with applicable codes or
regulations regulating the safe condition of structures in Bethel
Township.
3. No nonconformity shall be moved in all or part for any distance, to any other
location on the same or on any other lot unless the entire structure and
use shall thereafter conform to the regulations of the zoning district in
which it is located after being moved.
4. No use, structure, building or sign which is accessory to a principal
nonconforming use or structure shall continue after such principal use or
structure has ceased or has been terminated under the provisions of this
Zoning Resolution unless it shall thereafter conform to all regulations of
this Zoning Resolution.
5. In all enforcement proceedings, the person who claims the benefit of
nonconformity shall have the burden to prove that they lawfully existed
on the effective date of this Zoning Resolution.
6. Nothing contained in this Section shall require any changes to be made in
plans, construction, or designated use of any building, structure or use
for which an application for a building permit was filed prior to the
effective date of this Zoning Resolution or any amendment which would
make the use nonconforming.
B. Regulation of Nonconforming Uses
Nonconforming uses shall be subject to the following regulations:
1. Right to continue
A nonconforming use lawfully established prior to the effective date of
this Zoning Resolution, or prior to any subsequent amendment which
creates such nonconformity, may be continued and maintained unless
the nonconforming use is abandoned for a period of six (6) months or
more. The right to continue the nonconforming use continues even
though there is a change of ownership or change of occupant or change
of management where there is no change in the operation of the
nonconformity. The Board of Zoning Appeals is authorized to modify a
nonconforming use if the Board of Zoning Appeals determines that the
modification of the nonconforming use would promote the public health,
safety and welfare of the neighborhood in which the nonconformity exists
through improvement of property values, avoidance of blighting
influences, reduction of traffic, lowering of noise, improvement of the
maintenance of the nonconforming structure, or enhancement of
services necessary by the occupants of nearby properties.
2. Termination of nonconforming uses
A nonconforming use shall terminate if it has ceased to operate for a
period of six (6) months or more or in the event that any building or
structure that is devoted in all or part to a nonconforming use is
destroyed by any means to an extent more than fifty (50) percent of the
appraised value based on the county tax duplicate for the subject
property prior to the time of damage of such structure, exclusive of
foundations. In the event the nonconforming use is terminated by means
of destruction of the structure as described in this section, the owner may
either demolish the rest of the structure and clear the lot or remodel the
structure for a use that does conform to the zoning of the district in which
the structure is located.
3. Termination of non-structural nonconforming use
Any nonconforming use of land that does not involve any building or
structure may be continued for a period of two (2) years after the
enactment of this ordinance or any amendment to it that creates the
nonconformity, at the end of which period such nonconforming use shall
cease or be changed to a conforming use.
C. Nonconforming Structures and Buildings
A nonconforming structure or building shall not be modified in any manner which
increases the degree of nonconformity unless it is to bring the structure or
building fully into compliance with all the provisions of this Zoning Resolution,
except as otherwise specified in this Section.
1. Nonconformity with residential development regulations
Any residential structure or building that is nonconforming in regard to
minimum side or rear yard width may be expanded provided such
expansion does not increase the degree of nonconformity along a
particular lot line or violates any other provision of this Zoning
Resolution. The Zoning Administrator/Enforcing Officer shall determine
that the expansion is necessary to avoid hardship on the owner or
occupant, to promote property values in the neighborhood, or to avoid
blighting influences in the neighborhood.
2. Termination by failure to restore damaged structures
In the event that any nonconforming structure or building is destroyed by
any means to the extent of more than fifty (50) percent of the assessed
value as shown on the tax duplicate prior to the time of damage of such
structure, exclusive of foundation, shall not be rebuilt, restored or
reoccupied for any use unless it conforms to all regulations of this Zoning
Resolution, the building code and any other applicable codes. The owner
shall have the option of either clearing the lot of the damaged structure
or building or restoring the structure or building for a use that conforms
with the regulations of this Resolution.
When such a nonconforming structure or building is damaged or
destroyed to the extent of fifty (50) percent or less of the assessed value
as shown on the tax duplicate prior to the time of damage, no repairs or
rebuilding shall be permitted except in conformity with this Section and
other applicable regulations of this Zoning Resolution and the following
conditions:
A zoning certificate in regard to the restoration or reconstruction shall be
applied for no later than six (6) months after the destruction, and
rebuilding or restoration shall be completed within two (2) years.
Such restoration shall not cause a new nonconformity, nor shall it
increase the degree of nonconformance or noncompliance
existing prior to the damage or destruction.
D. Nonconforming Sites
Nonconforming items on a site shall not be modified, expanded or altered in any
manner which increases the degree of nonconformity unless brought fully in
conformance with all the provisions of this Zoning Resolution except as otherwise
specified in this section.
1. Nonconforming Bufferyards
In the event that the nonconformity is a result of non-compliance with the
bufferyards required by this Zoning Resolution, and when the land area
of the subject property and location of existing structures precludes
provision of the required bufferyards, the nonconformity shall, as a precondition
to issuance of a permit, be required to comply fully with
conditions determined by the Zoning Administrator/Enforcing Officer that
will accomplish substantially the same effect as would be accomplished if
the nonconforming site did comply to the buffering standards of this code
as provided in Article 38, Landscape and Buffer Regulations.
2. Nonconforming Landscaping and Screening
In the event that a site or structure is nonconforming as a result of the
landscaping and screening requirements of this Zoning Resolution, the
following standards shall be met:
All required vehicular use area perimeter screening and screening for
service and storage areas shall be provided for all new or
additional parking, service or storage areas being added to the
structure or site.
When the land area of the subject property and location of existing
structures precludes provision of the required landscaping and
screening, the nonconformity shall, as a pre-condition to the
issuance of a permit, be required to comply fully with conditions
determined by the Zoning Administrator/ Enforcing Officer that
will accomplish substantially the same effect as would be
accomplished if the nonconforming use did comply to the
landscaping and screening standards of this Zoning Code as
provided in Article 38, Landscape and Buffer Regulations.
3. Nonconforming Parking.
Where an existing structure or site is nonconforming with regard to offstreet
parking and loading, a new permitted use may be substituted, or
an existing permitted use may be expanded if the following conditions
are met:
a. The requirements of the code for off-street parking and loading shall
be met for the existing structure, as well as for any expansion.
b. If the Zoning Administrator/Enforcing Officer finds that the constraints
of physical features or size of the site preclude meeting the
requirements of subsection (3.a.) above, then, where the new or
expanded use is required by this Zoning Resolution to have a
greater number of spaces than the existing use, then the number
of new parking and loading spaces required to be provided shall
be the difference between those required for the new or
expanded use and those that would be required for the existing
use.
4. Nonconforming Street Access
Where an existing nonconforming site is nonconforming in regard to
street access, the site shall be brought into conformity with the provisions
of this Zoning Resolution for street access or shall be brought as close to
conformity as the physical circumstances make possible through the
following devices:
Elimination of multiple curb cuts on individual street frontages of the site;
a. Elimination of access from non-residential uses to residential streets;
b. Combination of access points with those of adjoining sites; or
c. Realignment of access points to meet standards set forth elsewhere in
this Zoning Resolution or other applicable code.
The Zoning Administrator/Enforcing Officer shall determine the
application of this Subsection in accordance with the standards and
criteria set forth in this Section.
5. Nonconforming Vehicular Use Areas
A non-conforming vehicular use area, including any off-street parking
and driveway for a single-family use, shall not be modified in any manner
which increases the surface area of the vehicular use area unless the
surface pavement is brought fully into compliance with all the provisions
of this Zoning Resolution and the following:
Vehicular use areas, nonconforming due to curbing, shall be curbed in
accordance with the provisions of this Zoning Code upon the following:
Whenever a nonconforming vehicular use area is expanded, the edge of
the expanded pavement area shall be separated from adjoining,
non-paved surfaces with curbing in accordance with the
provisions of this Zoning Resolution, except as may be otherwise
specified in this Zoning Resolution.
At such time a nonconforming vehicular use area is eventually expanded
in area equal to twenty-five (25) percent of the area of the initial
nonconforming portion, then the entire nonconforming section
shall be curbed in accordance with the provisions of this Zoning
Resolution.
Whenever a nonconforming vehicular use area is modified to
accommodate required bufferyards and landscaping in
accordance with Article 38, Landscape and Buffer Regulations,
the edges where pavement is removed shall be curbed in
accordance with the provisions of this Zoning Regulations,
except as may be otherwise specified in this Zoning Regulations.
The edges of portion of a nonconforming vehicular use area that are
reconstructed shall be curbed in accordance with this Zoning
Resolution. The term “reconstructed” shall, as a minimum,
include the removal of the surface pavement and its subsequent
replacement.
E. Nonconforming Lots of Record
A nonconforming lot of record may be used for the development of a single family
residential use in any district in which such use is permitted. Where the lot of
record is smaller than the minimum lot size for the district in which the lot is
located, development shall occur by determining, as a percentage, how much
smaller the nonconforming lot of record is smaller than the minimum lot size and
proportionally applying that percentage to the side and rear setback
requirements. For example, if the subject lot is twenty-five (25) percent smaller
than the minimum required for the lot, up to a twenty-five (25) percent reduction
in the setbacks may be permitted upon approval by the Zoning
Administrator/Enforcement Officer. The front yard setback shall not be reduced.
All other development standards and regulations shall conform to all the
standards of the zoning district in which the lot is located.
F. Nonconforming Signs
Nonconforming signs are subject to the provisions contained in Article 36, Sign
Regulations.
G. Nonconformity Due to Lack of a Permit or Certificate
For any nonconformity which is nonconforming only because of the absence of
the appropriate permit or certificate, the nonconformity shall not be enlarged,
altered or extended to occupy a greater land area without first securing the
issuance of the required permit or certificate. The nonconformity shall be deemed
to be conforming upon the issuance of the permit or certificate. Any
nonconforming use which is designated as a conditional use in the district
wherein it is located shall remain a nonconforming use until such conditional use
permit or certificate has been obtained. If a permit or certificate is not obtained
within thirty (30) days after an order is issued by the Zoning
Administrator/Enforcement Officer, Bethel Township shall pursue such means as
it deems necessary to achieve compliance with this Zoning Resolution.
Section 2.09 Amendments
The Zoning Resolution text or map may be amended according to the provisions of this
Section:
A. Powers of Township Trustees
Whenever the public necessity, convenience, general welfare or good zoning
practice requires, the Township Trustees may, by resolution, after receipt of a
recommendation thereon from the Zoning Commission and subject to the
procedures provided by law, amend, supplement or change the regulations,
district boundaries or classifications of property now or hereafter established by
this Zoning Resolution or amendments hereof. The Zoning Commission shall
submit its recommendations regarding all applications or proposals for
amendments or supplements to the Township Trustees for action.
B. Initiation
Amendments to this Zoning Resolution or map may be initiated in one of the
following ways:
1. By referral of a proposed amendment to the Zoning Commission by the
Trustees;
2. By adoption of a motion by the Zoning Commission; or
3. By the filing of an application by at least one (1) owner of record within the
area proposed or affected by such amendment.
C. Application
An application for an amendment, if filed by property owners pursuant to
subsection (B) hereof, shall be transmitted to the Zoning Administrator and shall
contain, at a minimum, the following information where applicable:
1. The applicant's name, address, e-mail address (if applicable), and telephone
number;
2. The proposed amendment to the text or map of this Zoning Resolution;
3. An accurate legal description of the property involved;
4. Existing and proposed uses and districts;
5. A map, drawn to scale, showing property lines, ownership, street addresses
when known, streets and existing and proposed zoning. The map shall
also depict all land within 200 feet of the boundaries of the area to be
zoned and such other items as may be required by the Zoning
Commission.
6. Any deed restrictions, easements, covenants and/or encumbrances to be
imposed to control the use, development and maintenance of the area to
be zoned;
7. A list of all property owners within 200 feet, contiguous to and directly across
the street from the parcel proposed to be rezoned and their addresses as
appearing on the County Auditor's current tax list. The requirement for
addresses may be waived when more than ten parcels are proposed to
be rezoned.
8. Estimates of the utility requirements of the area (including sewer, water and
electricity requirements) and potential traffic generation, if requested by
the Zoning Commission;
9. A statement as to how the proposed amendment relates to the
Comprehensive Land Use Plan and to neighboring properties;
10. The application shall be signed by the applicant, or the applicant's agent,
attesting to the truth and exactness of all information supplied by the
application, provided that an individual signing as the applicant's agent
shall furnish proof of his authority to act for the applicant; and
11. A fee as established by the Township Trustees.
D. Transmittal of Application to the Miami County Planning Commission
Upon the filing of an application by at least one (1) owner of property, the
proposed amendment or application shall be transmitted to the Miami County
Planning Commission for review. The commission provides a recommendation to
the Bethel Township Zoning Commission. This is only a recommendation.
E. Transmittal of Application to the Zoning Commission
Upon referral by the Township Trustees or the filing of an application by at least
one (1) owner of property, the proposed amendment or application shall be
transmitted to the Zoning Commission.
F. Recommendations by Zoning Commission
Within thirty (30) days after the first regular meeting of the Zoning Commission
after the receipt of the proposed amendment, the Zoning Commission shall
recommend to the Township Trustees that the amendment be approved as
requested or that the amendment be denied. A public hearing shall be held by
the Zoning Commission prior to its recommendation to the Township Trustees.
Notice of the time, place and purpose of such hearing shall be given by
publication at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the Township.
The publication shall be not less than ten (10) days prior to the hearing date.
In addition, where the proposed amendment is to effect a change in the Zoning
Map and ten (10) or fewer parcels are to be rezoned, written notice of the hearing
shall be mailed by the Zoning Administrator, by first-class mail, at least ten (10)
days prior to the hearing date, to the owners of all property within 500 feet of the
boundaries of the area to be rezoned. Failure of delivery of such notice shall not
invalidate the proceedings or findings of the Zoning Commission.
G. Action by the Township Trustees
No amendment shall be deemed to pass or take effect without the concurrence
of at least a majority vote of those present at the Township Trustees meeting.
If the Township Trustees do not grant a public hearing (Second Reading) for a
zone change or, if upon a public hearing a zone change is not passed by the
Trustees, the applicant, or any other person seeking the zone change in
reference to the same property, shall not be permitted to apply for a zone change
for at least six (6) months. If the applicant is refused the zone change upon
application after the expiration of the six (6) month period, no new application
from him or her shall be considered until the expiration of one (1) year from the
date of the second refusal.
H. Standards for Zoning Map Amendments
Only recommendations made by the Zoning Commission shall be considered for
map amendments. All recommendations by the Zoning Commission for Zoning
Map amendments shall be consistent with the Township’s adopted plans, goals,
and policies and with the intent of this Resolution.
Prior to making a recommendation on a proposed rezoning, the Zoning
Commission shall make a finding to determine if the following conditions exist.
Findings shall be made by the Zoning Commission on each of the following
matters based on the evidence presented.
1. The extent to which the proposed amendment and proposed use are in
compliance with and deviate from adopted plans, goals and policies.
2. The suitability of the property in question for the uses permitted under the
proposed zoning.
3. The adequacy of public facilities such as transportation, utilities, and other
required public services to serve the proposed use.
4. The effect of the proposed rezoning on surrounding uses.
5. The effect of the proposed rezoning on the economic viability of existing
developed and vacant land within the Township.
The Zoning Commission shall not recommend the adoption of a proposed
amendment unless it finds that the adoption of such an amendment is in the
public interest and not solely for the interest of the applicant.
Section 2.10 Conformance with Miami County Sanitary Engineer Standards
All sanitary sewer or on-site decentralized sanitary sewer systems serving two or more
parcels of land shall be submitted for review and approval by the Miami County Sanitary
Engineers Office prior to any Zoning Certificate being issued.
Such submissions and review shall occur during any site plan review process or Planned
Development review process in Bethel Township. On-site systems serving one parcel of
land and/or commercial and industrial projects shall be reviewed and approved by the
Miami County Health District and/or the State of Ohio EPA.
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 3 - Definitions – September 2018
ARTICLE 3
DEFINITIONS
Section 3.01 Interpretation of Definitions
For the purpose of this Zoning Resolution, certain terms and words are hereby defined. Words used in the
present tense shall include the future; the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the
singular. The word “shall” is mandatory.
The following words and terms, wherever they occur in this Zoning Resolution, shall be construed as
herein defined unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Words not defined in this Zoning Resolution
shall be interpreted in accordance with definitions in: The Zoning Dictionary by Lehman and Associates;
The Latest Illustrated Book of Development Definitions by Harvey S. Moskowitz; the applicable Fire
Code; the State Statutes; or the State Building Code. If a word or term is not defined as identified by the
protocol above, it shall have the meaning set forth in the latest editions of Webster’s New World College
Dictionary.
Section 3.02 Words and Terms Defined
A
Abutting – Having a common border with, or being separated from, such a common border by a right-ofway,
alley or easement.
Accessory Use or Building – See “Use or Building, Accessory”.
Adult Entertainment Facility – See “Sexually Oriented Business”:
Agriculture – The use of land for farming; ranching; aquaculture; apiculture; horticulture; viticulture;
animal husbandry, including, but not limited to, the care and raising of livestock, equine, and fur-bearing
animals; poultry husbandry and the production of poultry and poultry products; dairy production; the
production of field crops, tobacco, fruits, vegetables, nursery stock, ornamental shrubs, ornamental trees,
flowers, sod, or mushrooms; timber; pasturage; any combination of the foregoing; the processing, drying,
storage, and marketing of agricultural products when those activities are conducted in conjunction with,
but are secondary to, such husbandry or production. “Agriculture” shall also be limited by the definition
of “Agriculture” as per the O.R.C. Section 519.01.
Agricultural Business – Any establishment supporting local agricultural practices including, but not
limited to: feed mills, dairy supplies, poultry processing, creameries, auction yards, agricultural
veterinarians, seed sales, grain elevators, large farm implement sales and service, and agricultural
product processing facilities.
Agricultural Structure – Any building or item constructed or erected that requires location on the
ground that is used for agricultural purposes (e.g. Barn, Silo, Water Trough, etc.).
Alley – Any dedicated public way affording a secondary means of access to abutting property and not
intended for general traffic circulation.
Alteration – Any change, addition, or modification in construction or type of occupancy or any change in
the structural members of a building, such as walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, the
consummated act of which may be referred to herein as "altered" or "reconstructed".
Amusement Park – A business, primarily outdoors, that may include structures and buildings, where
there are various devices for entertainment, including rides, booths for the conduct of games or sale of
items, buildings for shows and entertainment, restaurants and souvenir sales.
Animal Hospital – See “Veterinarian Clinic”.
Apartment – A suite of rooms or a room in a multi-family building arranged and intended as a place of
residence for a single family or for a group of individuals living together as a single housekeeping unit
herein defined.
Assisted Living Facility – An extended care facility in an establishment that specializes in providing
necessary care and services to the frail elderly and/or special needs population, who require assistance
in caring for themselves.
Auto Wash Facility – The use of a tract of land, building, or portion thereof, for the manual or automatic
washing and cleaning of passenger vehicles, recreational vehicles or other light duty equipment, for
profit.
Automobile, Mobile Home, Recreational Vehicle, Boat, Truck, Trailer and Farm Implement Sales
and Service - A lot or building for the display and temporary storage, for sale, of new or used motor
vehicles including RV’s, trucks, motorcycles, and farm equipment and implements, mobile homes or
boats, where repair or service work is incidental to the operation of new vehicle sales.
Automobile Filling Station – See “Convenience Store.
Automobile Repair Garage - A business conducting general repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of
engines, transmissions, mufflers, motor vehicles or trailers, including but not limited to: body work, frame
work, welding and painting.
Automobile Wrecking, Junk or Salvage Yard – See “Junk Yard”.
B
Bar or Tavern – An establishment serving alcoholic beverages or spirituous liquors in which the
principal business is the sale of such beverages at retail for consumption on the premises and where food
may be available for consumption on the premises.
Bank – See “Financial Institution”.
Basement – That portion of a building having one-half or more of its floor to ceiling height above the
average level of the adjoining ground and with a floor-to-ceiling height of not less than six and one-half
feet.
Bed and Breakfast Establishments - A one family dwelling whose premises are permanently occupied
by a family that offers overnight accommodations and breakfast to transient guests for compensation.
Billboard – A sign that directs attention to a business, commodity, service, or entertainment conducted,
sold, or offered at a location other than the property, building or structure on which the sign is located.
Block –The property abutting one side of a street and lying between the two nearest intersecting streets,
(crossing or terminating), unsubdivided acreage, river or live stream or between any of the foregoing and
any other barrier to the continuity of development or corporate limits of a municipality.
Board of Zoning Appeals – The Board of Zoning Appeals (BZA) of Bethel Township, Miami County,
Ohio.
Building – Any structure, either temporary or permanent, having a roof supported by columns or walls,
and intended for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, chattel, or property of any kind.
Building Height – The vertical distance measured from the front finished grade to the highest point of the
coping of a flat roof, to the deck line of a mansard roof, or to the average height of the highest gable of a
pitch, hip or gambrel roof.
Building Services and Supplies – An indoor or outdoor establishment where lumber and other building
materials such as, but not limited to, brick, tile, cement, insulation, roofing materials, and the like are sold
at retail.
Building Setback Line – A line, parallel to the street, and touching that part of a building closest to the
street. The “building setback line” shall constitute the largest encroachment of the building (e.g. overhang
or eave), rather than the foundation.
C
Carport – A covered automobile/motor vehicle parking space not completely enclosed by walls or doors.
A carport shall be subject to all the provisions described in this resolution for an accessory building.
Carry-Out or Drive Through Facility – A place of business or portion thereof, from which persons can
conduct the major portion of their transactions without leaving their motor vehicles.
Cemetery – A place for burying or interment of human remains.
Cemetery, Pet - A place for burying or interment of domesticated animals.
Child Care - Any place recognized by Ohio Revised Code Section 5104.01 in which supervision is
provided for preschool or school age children.
Clinic – An establishment where human patients, who are not lodged overnight, are admitted for
examination and treatment by a group of physicians, dentists or other licensed medical practitioners.
Club, Fraternal – A non-profit organization of persons for special, common purposes or for the
promulgation of sports, arts, sciences, literature, politics or the like. Clubs shall exclude places of worship
or groups organized solely or primarily to render a service carried on as a commercial or profit-making
enterprise.
Commercial Entertainment - A facility for any profit-making activity which provides services related to
the entertainment field within an enclosed building. Examples include: theaters, motion picture theaters,
bowling alleys, pool and billiard halls and similar entertainment activities. Commercial entertainment
shall not include sexually oriented businesses.
Commercial Recreation - Land or facilities that are operated as a business and which are open to the
general public for a fee, the primary purpose of which is to provide the general public with an amusing or
entertaining activity. Commercial recreation facilities may include, but are not limited to water parks,
skating rinks, billiard parlors, driving ranges, and batting cages.
Conditional Use - See “Use, Conditional”.
Conditional Use Permit – A permit issued by the Board of Appeals to allow certain specific
developments that would not otherwise be allowed in that particular zoning district where the land is
located, if certain conditions are met.
Condominium – An individually owned dwelling unit in a larger building or group of buildings.
Conservation Development – A form of development that is characterized by rural residential uses,
providing large open space areas, reduction of site disturbance, and the protection of rural views through
the careful placement of dwellings.
Constructed – See “Erected”.
Convalescent (Also Nursing Home) – An establishment which specializes in providing necessary
services to those unable to care for themselves by reason of advanced age, chronic illness or infirmity.
Convenience Store – A business that customarily provides prepackaged food products, and beverages
for consumption off premises, newspapers, magazines, groceries or other small-scale retail items. A
convenience store may include a car wash, the sales of automotive fuels and lubricants if permitted by
the Township Board of Zoning Appeals.
County Commission – Means the Board of County Commissioners of Miami County, Ohio.
D
Density – The number of dwelling units per acre of land.
Density, Allowable – The ratio of dwelling units per gross site area.
District – A portion of the unincorporated area of the Township within which certain regulations and
requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this Resolution.
Domestic Sale – A sale conducted on any portion of the property which offers more than two items of
personal property for sale to the general public, to include but not to be limited to, garage sales, patio
sales, yard sales, carport sales, basement sales, porch sales, driveway sales, rummage sales and the
like.
Drive-In or Drive Through – A business establishment so developed that its retail or service character is
dependent on providing a driveway approach or parking spaces for motor vehicles so as to serve patrons
while in the motor vehicle.
Dwelling – A building or portion thereof, designed for occupancy for residential purposes and having
sleeping, kitchen and bathroom facilities for one household, family or individual. A dwelling unit may
include an Industrialized Unit but shall not include a Manufactured Home unless it meets the additional
requirements as identified in “Dwelling, Manufactured Home, Permanently Sited”.
Dwelling, One-Family – A building designed for and occupied exclusively by one (1) family.
Dwelling, Two-Family – A building designed for occupancy by two (2) families living independent of
each other.
Dwelling, Manufactured Home – A building or unit of closed construction fabricated offsite,
constructed in conformance with HUD Code of 1974 with a permanent label or tag certifying compliance
with all applicable federal construction and safety standards.
Dwelling, Manufactured Home, Permanently Sited – A permanently sited manufactured home is a is
considered a single-family dwelling if it meets all the additional criteria:
A. The structure is affixed to a permanent foundation and is connected to appropriate utilities.
B. The structure, excluding any addition, has a minimum width of 22 feet.
C. The structure has a minimum length of 22 feet.
D. Excluding garages, porches, and attachments, the manufactured home has a minimum living area of
900 square feet.
E. The manufactured home has a minimum 6-inch eave overhang including appropriate guttering.
F. The manufactured home was manufactured after 1/1/95.
G. The manufactured home is not located in a manufactured home park.
Dwelling, Mobile Home – A closed construction building unit fabricated off site that is more than 35
body feet in length and more than 320 sq. ft., built on a permanent chassis transportable in one or more
sections that does not qualify as a manufactured home or industrialized unit. All mobile homes are pre-
HUD code (pre-1974). This definition is to include any prefabricated unit or units designed for use as a
dwelling that may not conform in all respects to State and County building codes for dwellings.
Dwelling, Multiple-Family – A building, or a portion thereof, designed for occupancy by three (3) or
more families living independently of each other.
Dwelling, Row House or Town House – A two (2) story row of three (3) or more attached one (1)
family dwellings, each unit of which extends from the basement to the roof.
E
Easement - A grant by a property owner for use of a parcel of land by the public or any person for any
specific purpose or for purposes of access, constructing and maintaining utilities, including: sanitary
sewers, water mains, electric lines, telephone lines, cable television lines, other transmission lines, storm
sewer, storm drainage ways, gas lines or other service utilities.
Erected – Includes built, constructed, altered, reconstructed, moved upon, or any physical operations on
the premises which are required for the construction. Excavation, fill, drainage, and the like shall be
considered a part of erection.
Essential Services – The erection, construction, alteration or maintenance by public utilities or units of
government of underground, surface, or overhead gas, electrical, telephone, cellular and wireless towers,
telegraph, fiber optic, steam, fuel or water transmission or distribution systems, collection, supply, or
disposal systems, including towers, poles, wires, mains, drains, sewers, pipes, conduits, cables, fire alarm
and police call boxes, traffic signals, hydrants and similar accessories in connection therewith, including
only governmental buildings which are necessary for the furnishing of adequate service for the general
health, safety or welfare.
Established – Includes any of the following:
A. The opening or commencement of any business as a new business;
B. The conversion of any existing business to any other business;
C. The addition of any business to any other existing business; or
D. The relocation of any business.
Events – An event is an activity or gathering which meets any of the following criteria:
1. Use of or impact/encroachment on any city street, sidewalk, alley or other
right-of-way area (which includes any indirect impact that will affect the flow
of typical vehicular or pedestrian traffic).
2. Is likely to draw a crowd to a venue not properly suited and has the potential
to require special accommodations, regulations, traffic control devices or
public service personnel.
3. Presence or participation of any for-profit or non-profit vendor that intends to
make a sale, advertise for sale, solicit sales, offer for sale, distribute
business/organizational information, or provides a service or offer/advertise
to provide a service.
4. Including, but not limited to, weddings and receptions, car show, motorcycle shows, club gatherings,
church gatherings, school gatherings, concerts, and seasonal parties.
Excavation – Is any breaking of ground except tilling, common household gardening, and ground care.
F
Family – A person or group of persons occupying a dwelling and living as a single housekeeping unit,
whether or not related to each other by birth or marriage as distinguished from a group occupying a bed
and breakfast establishment, motel or hotel as defined herein.
Farm – All of the contiguous neighboring or associated land operated as a single unit on which bona fide
farming is carried on directly by the owner-operator, manager, or tenant farmer by his own labor or with
the assistance of members of his household or hired employees; provided further, farms may be
considered as including establishments operated as bona fide greenhouses, nurseries, vineyards,
orchards, chicken hatcheries, poultry farms, and apiaries. No farm shall be operated for the disposal of
garbage, sewage or sewage by-product, rubbish, offal, or rendering plants.
Farm, Mega (Concentrated Animal Feeding Operation (CAFO)) – A livestock, dairy or poultry farm
defined as a facility that confines animals for at least 45 days in a 12-month period and there is no grass
or other vegetation in the confinement area during the normal growing season and meets one of the
following definitions:
Large CAFO – An operation is a large CAFO if it has at least:
A. 700 mature dairy cows,
B. 1,000 beef cattle or heifers,
C. 2,500 swine weighing more than 55 pounds,
D. 10,000 swine weighing less than 55 pounds,
E. 30,000 ducks (other than liquid manure systems),
F. 5,000 ducks (liquid manure handling systems),
G. 30,000 chickens (liquid manure handling systems),
H. 125,000 chickens except layers (other than a liquid manure system),
I. 82,000 laying hens (other than liquid manure systems),
J. 1,000 veal calves,
K. 500 horses,
L. 10,000 sheep or lambs, or
M. 55,000 turkeys.
Medium CAFO – An operation is a medium CAFO if a man-made ditch or pipe carries manure or
wastewater from the operation to surface water, or the animals come into contact with surface water
running through the area where they are confined, and the operation has at least:
A. 200 mature dairy cows,
B. 300 beef cattle or heifers,
C. 750 swine weighing more than 55 pounds,
D. 3,000 swine weighing less than 55 pounds,
E. 10,000 ducks (other than liquid manure handling systems),
F. 1,500 ducks (liquid manure handling system),
G. 9,000 chickens (liquid manure handling system),
H. 37,500 chickens except layers (other than liquid manure handling systems),
I. 25,000 layers (other than liquid manure handling systems),
J. 300 veal calves,
K. 150 horses,
L. 3,000 sheep or lambs, or
M. 16,500 turkeys.
Farm Market – A building located on a farm, which building is used by the owner-operator, or lessee
operator of such farm for the sale of (1) produce and plants raised on such farm, (2) produce and plants
raised on other farms operated by such owner or lessee, and (3) produce and plants raised elsewhere but
which produce and plants are offered for sale as a replacement of and to the extent of a crop shortage,
due to natural causes such as weather, lack of plant development and disease, on such farm or other
farms operated by such owner or lessee.
Fence – An artificially constructed barrier of wood, masonry, stone, wire, metal, or other manufactured
material, or combination of materials, erected to enclose, screen, or separate areas.
Filling – The depositing or dumping of any matter onto or into depressed or low-lying areas to create
usable land for development.
Financial Institution - A building, property or activity where the principal use or purpose of which is the
provision of financial services including, but not limited to financial planning and investment services,
banks, credit unions, savings and loan institutions, lending establishments and mortgage companies that
are FDIC or NCUA insured.
Floodplain - Those areas designated in the 100-year floodplain by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency as “areas of special flood-related erosion hazard” or “area of special flood hazard” on any Flood
Hazard Boundary Map issued by the Administrator of the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) or the locally appointed administrator of FEMA’s programs.
Floor Area, Gross – For the purposes of computing the minimum allowable gross floor area in a
residential dwelling unit, the sum of the horizontal areas of each story of the building shall be measured
from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the center line of a party line wall. This floor area
measurement is exclusive of basements, unfinished attics, attached garages, breezeways, and enclosed
and unenclosed porches except finished basement areas designed and used for dwelling or business
purposes.
Floor Area, Net – The sum of that area used for or intended to be used for the sale of merchandise or
services or for use to serve patrons, clients, or customers. Such floor area, which is used or intended to
be used principally for the storage or processing of merchandise, such as hallways, stairways, and
elevator shafts, or for utilities or sanitary facilities, shall be excluded from this computation of "Floor
Area". Measurements of useable floor area shall be the sum of the horizontal areas of the several floors of
the building, measured from the interior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of a party wall.
Frontage – Horizontal distance between side lot lines parallel to the front lot line measured at the depth
of the minimum front yard required for the zoning district in which it is located.
Funeral Home – An establishment engaged in undertaking services such as preparing the dead for
burial, arranging and managing the display of the deceased and providing rituals connected therewith
before burial or cremation.
G
Garage, Parking – A space, structure, or series of structures for the temporary storage or parking of
motor vehicles.
Garage, Private – An accessory building, or portion of a main building, designed or used solely for the
storage of motor vehicles, boats and similar vehicles owned or used by the occupants of the building to
which it is accessory.
Garage, Service – Any building or structure used for the storage or care of motor vehicles or where any
such vehicles are equipped for operation, repaired, or kept for remuneration, hire, or sale.
Grade (Ground Level) – The average level of the finished ground at the center of all walls of a building.
Greenhouse, Commercial – A building largely constructed of glass or other transparent or translucent
material in which the temperature and humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of plants for the
subsequent sale.
H
Heavy Manufacturing – See “Manufacturing, Heavy”.
Home Occupation – An accessory, customary or incidental occupation or activity operated for gain, in
its entirety, by the person or persons residing within a dwelling. Such occupation or activity shall be
incidental to and secondary to the residential occupancy, shall not change the residential and/or
agricultural character of the property, shall not involve any alteration or construction not customarily
accessory to the residential structure, shall not utilize an area in excess of 200 square feet, shall not
create any objectionable external evidence of the operation of the home occupation except for one
unanimated, non-illuminated name plate having an area of not more than one (1) square foot.
Hospital – An institution providing inpatient and outpatient medical and surgical care or diagnosis and
treatment for sick or injured persons including beds for overnight care, laboratories, training facilities, and
other necessary accessory facilities.
Hotel – A building in which overnight lodging is provided to the public for compensation and which may
include additional accessory services such as restaurants, meeting rooms, lounges, conference rooms
and personal fitness facilities.
I
Impervious Surface (Lot Coverage) - Any hard-surfaced material that does not readily absorb storm
water into the ground located directly below the material including building footprints, parking,
driveways, sidewalks, patios, or any compacted areas.
Impervious Surface Ratio - The measure of intensity of impervious surfaces, determined by dividing the
total of all impervious surfaces on a site by the gross area of the site.
Industrialized Unit – A building unit of closed construction built pursuant to Ohio Basic Building Code
that is substantially self-sufficient as a unit or part of a greater structure that requires transportation to a
site. This includes units installed as independent units, installed as a part of a group of units or
incorporated with standard construction methods to form a completed structural entity. Industrialized Unit
does not include a manufactured home or a mobile home.
Inspector - The Zoning Administrator of Bethel Township appointed by the Board of Township Trustees,
to enforce the provisions and regulations of this Zoning Resolution.
J
Junk Yard (Salvage Yard) – An open area where waste, used or second-hand materials are bought and
sold, exchanged, stored, baled, packaged, disassembled, or handled including but not limited to scrap
iron and other metals, paper, rags, rubber tires, and bottles. A "Junk Yard" includes automobile wrecking
yards and areas for storage, keeping, or abandonment of junk unless established entirely within enclosed
buildings. Where the use of the land involves two (2) or more unhoused inoperative or unlicensed (where
applicable) vehicles, such condition shall be considered prima facie evidence of the existence of a
junkyard.
K
Kennel – The keeping of dogs, cats or other household pets whether for sale, boarding, or breeding for
profit or which are not kept for personal use and enjoyment, on any lot or premises or contiguous lots
under common ownership. Kennel shall also mean the keeping on or in any lot, group of commonly
owned contiguous lots, or building of 3 or more dogs, cats or other household pets which are over the age
of 6 months.
L
Landscaping - The alteration of the natural terrain by the planting of trees, grass, shrubs and installation
of ground cover indigenous to Zone 6 of the United States Department of Agriculture Plant Hardiness
Zone Map.
Light Manufacturing – See “Manufacturing, Light”.
Loading Space – An off-street space on the same lot with a building or group of buildings for the
temporary parking of a commercial vehicle while loading and unloading merchandise or materials.
Lot – A parcel of land occupied by a use or occupied or to be occupied by a main building or a group of
such buildings or utilized for the principal use and uses accessory thereto together with such open spaces
as are required under the provisions of this Resolution.
Lot, Corner – A lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection or upon two (2) parts of the
same street, and in either case, forming an interior angle of less than one hundred and thirty-five (135)
degrees.
Lot, Flag – A lot that does not meet the minimum frontage requirements and where access to the public
road is by a narrow, private right-of-way, easement, or driveway.
Lot, Interior – Any lot other than a corner lot.
Lot, Through – Any interior lot having frontages on two more or less parallel streets as distinguished
from a corner lot. In the case of a row of double frontage lots, each side of each lot adjacent to a street
shall be considered frontage, and front yards shall be provided as required.
Lot Area – The total horizontal area within the lot lines of the lot.
Lot Coverage – The part or percent of the lot occupied by buildings including accessory buildings.
Lot Lines – The lines bounding a lot as defined herein.
A. Front Lot Line: In the case of an interior lot, is that line separating said lot from the right-of-way
sideline of a street or roadway. In the case of a corner lot, or double frontage lot, is that line separating
said lot from either right-of-way sideline.
B. Rear Lot Line: Is that lot line opposite the front lot line. In the case of a lot pointed at the rear, the rear
lot line shall be an imaginary line parallel to the front lot line, not less than ten (10) feet long, lying
farthest from the front lot line and wholly within the lot. In the case of a corner lot, the rear lot line
is opposite the front lot line.
C. Side Lot Line: Is any lot line other than the front lot line or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot
from a street is a side street lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an
interior side lot line.
Lot Measurements –
A. Width: The horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at the two points where the
building setback line intersects the side lot lines.
B. Depth: The distance between the mid-point of straight lines connecting the foremost points of the side
lot lines in front and the rearmost points of the side lot lines in the rear.
Lot of Record – A parcel of land, the dimensions of which is shown on a document or map on file with
the Miami County Recorder.
M
Main Building – A building in which the principal use of the lot upon which it is situated is conducted.
Main Use – The principal use to which the premises are devoted and the principal purpose for which the
premises exist.
Major Thoroughfare – An arterial street which is intended to serve as a large volume traffic way and
which has an existing or proposed right-of-way width of at least eighty (80) feet as shown in the Official
Thoroughfare Plan of Miami County, Ohio.
Major Thoroughfare Plan – The Official Thoroughfare Plan of Miami County, as adopted by the
County Planning Commission, of the major highways and streets on file in the office of the County
Recorder, including all amendments and supplements subsequently adopted.
Manufacturing, Heavy – A use engaged in the processing and manufacturing of materials or products
predominately from extracted or raw materials, or a use engaged in storage of, or manufacturing
processes using flammable or explosive materials, or storage or manufacturing processes that potentially
involve hazardous or commonly recognized offensive conditions which would generate objectionable or
hazardous elements such as: heat, smoke, odor, vibration, water pollution, electromagnetic disturbances,
radiation, noise or dust.
Manufacturing, Light – A use engaged in the assembling, altering, converting, fabricating, finishing,
processing or treatment of a product utilizing a relatively clean and quiet process which does not include
or generate objectionable or hazardous elements off site such as smoke, odor, vibration, water pollution
or dust and which is operating and storing products and materials in a completely enclosed structure.
Master Plan – See “Strategic Plan”.
Medical and Dental Office – See “Office, Medical and Dental”.
Medical Marijuana – Medicinal marijuana is legal in Ohio under ORC 3796. Cultivation is classified as
“medical manufacturing” and is allowed in I-1 and I-2 zoning districts. Processing, laboratories and
dispensaries are allowed in applicable zoning districts.
Mezzanine – An intermediate floor in any story occupying not more than two-thirds (2/3) of the floor
area of the room in which it is located.
Mobile Home – See “Dwelling, Mobile Home”
Modular Home – See “Dwelling, Industrialized Unit”.
Motel – A series of attached, semi-detached, or detached rental units containing a bedroom, bathroom,
and closet space that are accessed from the outside of the unit. Units shall provide for overnight lodging,
are offered to the public for compensation, and shall cater primarily to the public traveling by motor
vehicle.
Motor Freight Terminal – See “Truck Transfer Terminal”.
Multiple Tenant Building – A building, managed as one entity, containing two or more retail, personal
service, professional service, office or industrial uses that are permitted in the district the multi-tenant use
is located.
N
New Urbanism – Characteristics used to describe an area that includes walkability, mixed uses, mixed
housing types, increased density, etc. in a compact development.
Nonconforming Building or Structure – A building, structure or portion thereof lawfully existing at the
effective date of this Resolution or amendments thereto that does not conform to the provisions of the
Resolution in the district in which it is located.
Nonconforming Use – Is a use, which lawfully occupied a building or land at the effective date of this
Resolution or amendments thereto, and that does not conform to the use regulations of the district in
which it is located.
Nonconformity – Any use, structure, site, lot of record, or sign lawfully established prior to the effective
date of this Resolution which would not be permitted by, or is not in full compliance with, the regulations
in this Zoning Resolution or any subsequent amendments.
Nonconforming Site – Any site legally established prior to the effective date of this Zoning Resolution
which does not fully comply with the standards imposed by this Resolution or any subsequent
amendments.
Nonconforming Lot of Record – Any recorded lot, which at the time it was recorded with the Miami
County Recorder’s Office, fully complied with all then existing Zoning and Subdivision regulations but
which does not fully comply with the lot requirements of this Zoning Resolution or of any other
ordinance or regulation of Bethel Township and subsequent amendments to this Zoning Resolution or
other ordinances.
Nonconforming Sign – Any sign legally established prior to the effective date of this Zoning Code which
is not fully in compliance with the regulations of this Zoning Code or subsequent amendments to this
Zoning Code.
Nude, Nudity or State of Nudity – A live person exhibiting: (1) specified anatomical areas, or (2) a state
of dress which fails to opaquely and fully cover specified anatomical areas.
Nursery, Plant –
A. Wholesale: Is a space including accessory building or structure for the growing or storage of live trees,
shrubs or plant materials not offered for retail sale on the premises, including products used for
gardening or landscaping.
B. Retail: Is a space, including accessory building or structure or combination thereof, for the sale and/or
storage of live trees, shrubs, or plants often used for gardening or landscaping.
Nursery School - An establishment providing for the care, supervision, and protection of children on a
daily basis for compensation.
O
Off Street Parking Lot – A permanently surfaced parcel of land devoted to unenclosed parking spaces
including adequate drives and aisles for maneuvering and proper access for entrance and exit.
Office, Medical and Dental – A building or portion where patients who are not lodged overnight are
admitted for examination, testing, diagnosis and/or treatment by a physician, group of physicians,
licensed medical practitioners, including urgent care facilities, or dentist for medical or dental work.
Office, Administrative, Business and Professional – A building or portion of a building wherein
services are performed involving predominately administrative, professional or clerical operations which
carries on no retail trade and maintains no stock of goods for sale.
Open Space – That part of a lot, including courts or yards which is open and unobstructed from its lowest
level to the sky and which is accessible to all tenants living on the lot.
Open Space, Common – That area dedicated to the public or commonly owned and/or available to all
the residents of a development.
Outdoor Display - An area of designated size outside of an enclosed building used for the sample
display of merchandise, goods, wares or tangible property normally sold, rented or leased within the
business on the property where the merchandise is sold, rented or leased.
Outdoor Storage - The keeping, outside of an enclosed building or structure, of personal or business
property, goods, wares, or merchandise which are not located in that specific area for customer viewing
or immediate sale, in the same place for a period of more than seventy-two (72) hours.
Overlay District – A zoning district that modifies the basic underlying zoning district(s) in some specific
manner including, but not limited to uses, design guidelines, setbacks, building heights, etc.
P
Paint and Body Shop – Facility which provides collision repair services, including body frame
straightening and repair, replacement of damaged parts, and painting for motor vehicles.
Parking Lot - A permanently surfaced parcel of land devoted to unenclosed parking spaces.
Parking Space – A dedicated area for the parking of a motor vehicle within a public or private parking
lot.
Personal Service - Any business activity that caters to customers personal needs and which may include
the incidental sale of products. Personal services may include barber shops, beauty shops, dry cleaners,
health clubs, pet grooming and tanning spas. Personal services shall not include adult entertainment or
sexually oriented businesses.
Planned Unit Development – Land under unified control which is planned and developed as a whole
according to comprehensive and detailed plans, including streets, utilities, lots or building sites, and
design principles for all buildings as intended to be located, constructed, used, and related to each other
and for other uses and improvements on the land as related to buildings. Development may be a single
operation or a programmed series of development operations, including all lands and buildings, with a
program for provision, operation, and maintenance of such areas, improvements, and facilities necessary
for common use by the occupants of the development.
Planning Commission – Means the Planning Commission of Miami County, Ohio.
Portable Storage Unit – Means any enclosed unit of durable construction or material, not to exceed
eight (8) feet in width by eight (8) feet in height by sixteen (16) feet long, designed for permanent or
temporary storage, which can be transported by vehicle and left on site or are delivered to site, filled by
the owner or renter, and stored off site (See Section 30.37, Portable Storage Unit).
Professional service – Any office or place of business which engage in providing to the general public
services of a professional nature, such as, but not limited to, legal, engineering, medical, dental,
accounting, real estate agencies, architectural, contractors, tradesmen, exterminators, landscape
architectural services, learning centers and other similar professions including therapeutic massage and
chiropractors.
Public Utility – Any person, firm or corporation, company, governmental department, board or
commission duly authorized to furnish under federal, state, or local regulations to the public: natural gas,
steam, electricity, sewage disposal, telegraph, telephone, cellular or wireless towers (unless meeting the
requirements of Section 519.211 of the ORC), transportation, cable, or water.
Q
No definitions for “Q”.
R
Recreation, Non-Commercial – An outdoor area providing active or passive uses where no fee is
charged for admission or use. Non-commercial recreation may include, but is not limited to: greenway
networks, pedestrian and bicycle paths (excluding sidewalks), athletic fields, open spaces, parks and
playgrounds.
Recreational Vehicle –
A. A vehicular portable structure designed and constructed to be used as temporary dwelling for travel,
recreational, and vacation uses and being classed as follows:
1. Travel Trailer: a non-self-propelled vehicle and includes a tent type fold out camping trailer as
defined in 4517.01 of the Ohio Revised Code.
2. Motor Home: a self-propelled recreational vehicle constructed with permanently installed
facilities for cold storage, cooking and consuming of food, and for sleeping.
3. Truck Camper: a non-self-propelled recreational vehicle without wheels for road use and
designed to be placed upon and attached to a motor vehicle. Truck campers do not
include truck covers, which consist of walls and roof but do not have floors and facilities
for using same as dwelling.
B. Part of a group including, but not limited to boats, boat trailers, snowmobiles, wet bikes, etc.
Recycling Center or Facility – A lot or parcel of land, with or without buildings, upon which used
materials are separated and processed for shipment to another facility for eventual reuse in new
products. Recycling centers or facilities shall not include junk yards.
Recycling Collection Point – An accessory or incidental use that serves as a neighborhood drop of
point for the temporary storage of recyclable materials.
Research and Development Facility – An establishment where scientific research, investigation,
prototype development and process development, testing or experimentation is conducted, but not
including the manufacturing or sale of products, except as incidental and accessory to the main purpose
of the laboratory.
Residential Facility - A facility that provides resident services to a group of individuals of whom one (1)
or more are unrelated. These individuals may be mentally challenged, handicapped, aged or disabled,
are undergoing rehabilitation, and are provided services to meet their needs. This category includes uses
licensed, supervised, or under contract by any Federal, State, County, or other political subdivision.
Residential facilities include, but are not limited to, the following listed categories:
A. Adult Family Home - A residential facility that provides accommodations to three (3) to five (5)
unrelated adults and supervision and personal care services to at least three (3) of these adults
pursuant to Title 37 of the Ohio Revised Code.
B. Adult Group Home - A residential facility that provides accommodations to six (6) to sixteen (16)
unrelated adults and provides supervision and personal care services to at least three (3) of the
unrelated adults pursuant to Title 37 of the Ohio Revised Code.
C. Family Home - A residential facility that provides room and board, personal care, habilitation services
and supervision in a family setting for at least six (6) but not more than eight (8) mentally retarded
or developmentally disabled persons pursuant to Title 51 of the Ohio Revised Code.
D. Family Foster Home - A private residence in which children are receiving care apart from their
parents,
guardian, or legal custodian by an individual for hire, gain or reward for non-secure care,
supervision, or training twenty-four (24) hours a day pursuant to Title 51 of the Ohio Revised
Code. Family foster home does not include babysitting care provided for a child in the home of a
person other than the parents, guardian or legal custodian of the child.
E. Foster Family Home - A residential facility that provides room and board, personal care, habilitation
services and supervision in a family setting for not more than five (5) mentally retarded or
developmentally disabled persons pursuant to Title 51 of the Ohio Revised Code.
F. Foster Home - Foster home means a family home in which any child is receiving care apart from the
child’s parents for care, supervision or training pursuant to Title 51 of the Ohio Revised Code.
G. Group Home - Group home means a residential facility that provides room and board, personal care,
habilitation services, and supervision in a family setting for at least nine (9) but not more than
sixteen (16) mentally retarded or developmentally disabled persons pursuant to Title 51 of the
Ohio Revised Code.
H. Semi-Independent Living Home - Semi-independent living home means a residential facility for a
mentally retarded or developmentally disabled person where, according to the person's individual
habilitation plan, the person demonstrates skills that would enable the person to function for
specified periods of time without supervision. Such skills include, but are not limited to, home
management, community mobility, personal hygiene, interpersonal relationship skills, and selfpreservation
pursuant to Title 51 of the Ohio Revised Code.
Restaurant – A business establishment, with or without table service, within which food is prepared and
offered for sale and consumption on or off the premises, to the customer, in a ready to consume state in
individual servings.
Restaurant, Fast Food – A business establishment whose principal business is the sale of rapidly
prepared food, directly to the consumer in a ready to consume state for consumption either within the
restaurant or off-premises, in an average preparation time of 240 seconds or less.
Retail Business – A business selling goods, wares or merchandise, directly to the ultimate consumer, for
direct consumption and not for resale. A retail business use includes, but is not be limited to such uses
as, supermarkets; stores that sell electronics, hardware, apparel, footwear, appliances, furniture,
beverages, food, supermarkets, department stores, and discount stores. Retail businesses shall not
include sexually oriented businesses.
Retail Business, Neighborhood – A retail business use servicing the local needs of the immediate
surrounding community such as: gas station, convenience store, local restaurant, etc.
Right-of-Way - A strip of land acquired by reservation, dedication, forced dedication, prescription or
condemnation and intended to be occupied or occupied by a road, public sidewalk, crosswalk, railroad,
electric distribution or transmission line, telephone line, oil or gas pipeline, water line, sanitary or storm
sewer and other similar uses.
S
Satellite Dish – A parabolic or dish shaped antenna or other similar type apparatus or device that is
designed for the purpose of receiving radio waves.
School, Elementary, Junior High, High – A public or private facility that provides a curriculum of
elementary or secondary academic instruction.
School, Vocational, College, University, Business or Training Center - A public or private
postsecondary facility, with an academic curricula, including uses, structures, and/or facilities sanctioned
by, ancillary to or necessary for the operation of such institution. This includes, but is not limited to,
dormitories, food sales, retail sales, indoor and/or outdoor recreation facilities, offices, printing, museums,
and professional service (affiliated with the college or university, vocational, business or training center).
School, Nursery – An educational establishment providing for the care, supervision, and protection of
children on a daily basis for compensation.
Self-Storage Building (and Storage Yard) – A building containing individual, compartmentalized and
controlled access stalls, rooms or lockers or property that is leased, rented or owned by different
individuals for the storage of individual possessions or personal property.
Setback - The required distance the largest extremity of a building or structure (overhang or eave) must
be located from a lot line, easement, right-of way, adjacent building or other feature as indicated in this
Resolution.
Sexually Oriented Business – Any business defined as the follows:
A. Adult Arcade. An establishment where, for any form of consideration, one or more still or motion
picture projectors, slide projectors, or similar machines, or other imaging producing machines, or other
visual representations, for viewing by five or fewer persons each, are regularly used to show
films, motion pictures, video cassettes, digital video discs, slides, or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of “Specified Sexual
Activities” or “Specified Anatomical Areas”.
B. Adult Bookstore, Adult Novelty Store or Adult Video Store. A commercial establishment which has at
least 50% of its stock in trade or derives at least 50% of revenues or devotes at least 50% of its
interior business or advertising to the sale or rental for any form of consideration, of any one or
more of the following:
1. Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures,
video cassettes, slides, digital video discs, or other visual representations which are
characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas”
2. Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia, which are designed for use or marketed primarily for
stimulation of human genital organs or for sadomasochistic use or abuse of themselves
or others.
3. An establishment may have other principal business purposes that does not involve the
offering for sale, rental or viewing of materials depicting or describing “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas,” and still be categorized as an adult bookstore,
adult novelty store, or adult video store. Such other business purposes will not serve to
exempt such establishments for being categorized as an adult bookstore, adult novelty
store or adult video store if the above definition is met.
C. Adult Cabaret. A nightclub, bar, restaurant, bottle club, juice bar, or similar commercial establishment,
whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, which regularly features: (a) a person or persons
who appear nude or semi-nude or in a state of nudity or semi-nudity; (b) live performances which
are characterized by the exposure of “specified anatomical area” or “specified sexual activities”,
or; (c) films, motion pictures, video cassettes, digital video discs, or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction of “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas.”
D. Adult Movie. A motel, hotel, or similar commercial establishment which offers public
accommodation, for any form of consideration, which provides patrons with closed-circuit television
transmissions, films, motion pictures with close-circuit televisions transmissions, films, motion pictures,
video cassettes, digital video discs, slides or other photographic reproductions which are characterized
by the depiction of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas” and which
advertises the availability of this sexually oriented material by means of a sign visible from the
public right-of-way, or by means of any off-premises advertising including, but not limited to,
newspapers, magazines, pamphlets or leaflets, radio or television.
E. Adult Motion Picture Theater. A commercial establishment where films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, digital video discs, slides or similar photographic reproductions which are
characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas” are regularly shown for any form of consideration.
F. Adult Theater. A theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which, for any
form of consideration, regularly features a person or persons who appear in a state of nudity or
semi-nudity or live performances which are characterized by exposure of “specified anatomical
areas” or by “specified sexual activities” and which is not customarily open to the general public
during such theaters because it excludes minors by reason of age.
G. Massage Parlor. Any place where for any form of consideration or gratuity, massage, alcohol rub,
administration of fomentation's, electric or magnetic treatments, or any other treatment or
manipulation of the human body which occurs as a part of or in connection with “specified sexual
activities” is offered, or where any person providing such treatment, manipulation, or service
related thereto, exposes his or her “specified anatomical areas.” The definition of massage parlor
shall not include: the practice of massage in any licensed hospital, nor by a license hospital, nor
by a licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor, or osteopath, nor by any nurse or technician
working under the supervision of a licensed physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath, nor by
trainers for any amateur, semi-professional or professional athlete or athletic team or school,
athletic program, nor barber shops or beauty salons in which massages are administered only to
the scalp, the face, the neck or shoulder, nor by any other individual license by the state to
perform massages.
H. Semi-Nude Model Studio. Any place where a person or persons regularly appear in a state of nudity or
semi-nudity or displays “specified anatomical areas” for money or any form of consideration to be
observed, sketched, drawn, painted, sculptured, photographed, or similarly depicted for other
reasons. Reference above to nudity should not be construed or interpreted to permit nudity or a
state of nudity in a semi-nude model studio. Semi-nude model studio shall not include any school,
college, or university licensed by the state.
I. Sexual Encounter Establishment. A business or commercial establishment, that as one of its principal
business purposes, offers for any form of consideration: (1) a place where two or more persons
may congregate, associate, or consort for the purpose of “specified sexual activities” or the
exposure of “specified anatomical areas,” or (2) activities between male and female persons
and/or persons of the same sex when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or seminudity.
A sexual encounter establishment shall not include an establishment where a medical
practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the state
engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy.
J. Striptease Parlor/Escort Agency. A person or business association that furnishes, offers to furnish, or
advertises to furnish, for hire, striptease performances, or the appearance of a person or persons
in a state of nudity or semi-nudity for another person or persons.
Sign – Any medium, including its structure, words, letters, figures, numerals, phrases, sentences,
emblems, devices, designs, trade names, or trademarks by which anything is made known and which are
used to advertise or promote an individual, firm, association, corporation, profession, business,
commodity, or product and which is visible from any public street or highway.
Sign, Changeable Copy – A sign so designed that characters, letters or illustrations can be changed
without altering the permanent surface of the sign.
Sign, Directional – A sign which informs the public of designated use areas or regulations such as
“entrance/exit”, parking and aisle signs.
Sign, Ground: A detached sign which is solely supported by one or more poles, uprights, or braces in or
upon the ground.
Sign, Marquee – A sign fastened or painted on a canopy, awning or permanent construction that projects
from a wall of a building, usually above the entrance.
Sign, Name Plate - A small sign that announces limited information such as the name of the occupant of
a premise. For the purposes of this Resolution, a Name Plate Sign shall not be considered as advertising.
Sign, Portable - A changeable copy sign supported by a mobile frame that is not fixed on the ground or
any structure and that is easily moved from site to site.
Sign, Projecting - A sign that typically projects perpendicular to the building face that is wholly or partly
dependent on a building for support and that projects more than twelve (12) inches from the building.
Sign, Wall: A sign which is attached directly to the wall of a building and which extends no more than
twelve (12) inches from the wall.
Sign, Window: A sign either painted on or attached to the interior surface of a window so that the
information can readily be seen from the exterior of the building.
Sign Area - The gross square footage of the sign face area which is normally visible from any one (1)
direction. Sign cabinet supporting structures, which by size or which have been designed to attract
attention, shall be considered part of the sign square footage.
Specified Anatomical Areas – Includes any of the following:
A. Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, public region, anus, or areolas or nipple
of female breast; or
B. Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered.
Specified Sexual Activities – Includes any of the following:
A. The fondling or other intentional touching of human genitals, pubic region, anus or female breast.
B. Sex acts, normal or perverted, whether actual or simulated, including: vaginal intercourse, fellatio,
cunnilingus, bestiality, anal intercourse, oral copulation, or sodomy.
C. Masturbation, or the masturbation of another, whether actual or simulated.
D. Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or excretory functions as part
of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in the above subsection (1) through (4).
Stable – A shelter that is used for the boarding and care of horses.
Strategic Plan – A compilation of policy statements, goals, standards and maps for guiding the physical,
social, and economic development, both private and public, of Bethel Township, adopted by the
Township, and as may be amended from time to time.
Story – That part of a building, except a mezzanine as defined herein, included between the surface of
one floor and the surface of the next floor, or if there is no floor above, then the ceiling next above. If the
floor level directly above a basement is more than six (6) feet above grade, such basement shall be
considered a story.
Street – A dedicated public thoroughfare or roadway, which affords the principal means of access to
abutting property.
Structure – Anything constructed or erected which requires permanent location on or in the ground or
attachment to something having location on or in the ground.
Swimming Pool –A permanent structure constructed or placed below ground or above ground which is
designed with side walls in excess of thirty-six (36) inches in depth and is suitable or utilized for
swimming or wading.
T
Temporary Building – A building or structure without any foundation or footings and that is removed
when the designated time period, activity, or use for which the temporary building was erected has
ceased.
Tent – Any structure used for living or sleeping purposes or for sheltering a public gathering; constructed
wholly or in part from canvas, tarpaulin, or other similar materials.
Towing Service – An establishment that provides for the removal and temporary storage of vehicles but
that does not include disposal, permanent disassembly, salvage or accessory storage of inoperable
vehicles.
Traditional Neighborhood – A residential neighborhood characterized by varying sized lots, open
private and public yards and the preservation of natural features.
Trailer Court (Mobile Home Park) – Any plot of ground upon which two or more mobile or
manufactured homes, occupied for dwelling or sleeping purposes, may be located.
Truck Transfer Terminal – Land and buildings used as a relay station for the transfer of a load from one
truck or truck trailer to another, or from one party to another, which can accommodate the simultaneous
loading or unloading of four (4) or more trucks.
U
Undue Hardship - A hardship, by reason of exceptional shape of a lot, exceptional topographic
conditions, or other exceptional physical conditions of a parcel of land. Economic considerations alone
shall not constitute an undue hardship if any reasonable use for the property exists under the terms of the
Zoning Resolution.
Use – The purpose for which land, structure or a building is arranged, designed, or intended or for which
land or a building is or may be occupied.
Use or Building, Accessory – A use or building on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily
incident and subordinate to, those of the main use or building.
Use, Conditional – A use that is permitted in a district only if a conditional use permit is expressly
authorized by the Board of Zoning Appeals in accordance with the provisions in this Zoning Resolution.
Use, Permitted – A public or private use which conforms with the purposes, objectives, requirements,
regulations and performance standards of the particular District in which the use is located.
Use, Principal – The primary or main use of a lot.
V
Variance – A modification of the literal provisions of the Zoning Resolution granted when the strict
enforcement of the Zoning Resolution would cause undue hardship owing to circumstances unique to the
individual property on which the variance is granted.
Vehicle – Any device that is used in the public or private transportation of one or more persons, is used in
the transportation of goods over public or private property or roadways, or is used in a commercial or
agricultural enterprise. A device that is designed to be pushed, pulled or towed by any self-propelled
vehicle shall be considered a vehicle for the purpose of this Resolution.
Vehicle, Collector’s – Any motor vehicle or agricultural tractor or traction engine that is of special
interest, that has a fair market value of one hundred dollars or more, whether operable or not, and that is
owned, operated, collected, preserved, restored, maintained, or used essentially as a collector's item,
leisure pursuit, or investment, but not as the owner's principal means of transportation. "Licensed
collector's vehicle" means a collector's vehicle, other than an agricultural tractor or traction engine, that
displays current, valid license tags issued under section 4503.45 of the Ohio Revised Code, or a similar
type of motor vehicle that displays current, valid license tags issued under substantially equivalent
provisions in the laws of other states.
Vehicle, Motor – Any vehicle, including mobile homes and recreational vehicles, that is propelled or
drawn by power other than muscular power or power collected from overhead electric trolley wires.
Veterinarian Clinic - A place, licensed by the State of Ohio, used for the care, grooming, diagnosis and
treatment of sick, ailing, infirm or injured animals, those who are in need of medical or surgical attention,
and which may include overnight accommodations on the premises for treatment, observation and/or
recuperation.
W
Warehouse – A completely enclosed facility used for the storage, sorting, loading and unloading of
goods and materials.
Wetland – Those areas subject to regulation as “wetlands” by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency,
the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency.
Wholesale Distributor – An establishment primarily engaged in selling merchandise to retailers and not
to the direct consumer, including associated showrooms and warehousing; to industrial, commercial,
institutions, or professional business users; to other wholesalers; or acting as agents or brokers and
buying merchandise for, or selling merchandise to, such individuals or companies.
Wireless Telecommunication Facility – Any freestanding structure or any structure to be attached to a
building or other structure that meets all of the following criteria:
A. The freestanding or attached structure is proposed to be constructed on or after October 31, 1996.
B. The freestanding or attached structure is proposed to be owned or principally used by a public utility
engaged in the provision of telecommunications services.
C. The freestanding or attached structure is proposed to be located in an unincorporated area of a
township, in an area zoned for residential use.
D. The freestanding structure is proposed to top at a height that is greater than either the maximum
allowable height of residential structures within the zoned area as set forth in the applicable
zoning regulations, or the maximum allowable height of such a freestanding structure as set forth
in any applicable zoning regulations in effect immediately prior to October 31, 1996, or as those
regulations subsequently are amended.
E. The attached structure is proposed to top at a height that is greater than either the height of the
building or other structure to which it is to be attached, or the maximum allowable height of such
an attached structure as set forth in any applicable zoning regulations in effect immediately prior
to October 31, 1996, or as those regulations subsequently are amended.
F. The freestanding or attached structure is proposed to have attached to it radio frequency transmission
or reception equipment.
X
No definitions for “X”.
Y
Yard – The open spaces on the same lot with a building, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground
upward, except as otherwise provided in this Resolution as defined herein.
A. Front Yard: Is an open space extending the full width of the lot, the depth of which is the minimum
horizontal distance between the front lot line and the nearest point of the main building.
B. Rear Yard: Is an open space extending the full width of the lot the depth of which is the minimum
horizontal distance between the rear lot line and the nearest point of the main building.
C. Side Yard: Is an open space between a main building and the side lot line extending from the front
yard to the rear yard, the width of which is the horizontal distance from the nearest point of the
main building.
Z
Zoning Administrator/Personnel - The Zoning official of Bethel Township appointed by the Board of
Township Trustees, to enforce the provisions and regulations of this Zoning Resolution.
Zoning Amendment - A change of the zoning map or zoning text authorized by the Township, either in
the allowable uses within a District, in the boundaries of a District or in a change to the Resolution text.
Zoning Certificate - A document issued by the Zoning Administrator authorizing buildings, structures or
uses which are consistent with the terms of this Zoning Resolution and for the purpose of carrying out and
enforcing its provisions.
Zoning Commission – Means the Zoning Commission of Bethel Township, Miami County, Ohio.
Zoning Map - The map or maps incorporated into this Resolution as a part thereof, designating the
Zoning Districts of Bethel Township.
Article 4 – District Establishment Bethel Township Zoning Resolution – September 2018
ARTICLE 4
DISTRICT ESTABLISHMENT
Section 4.01 Purpose
Bethel Township, Ohio, is hereby divided into the following Zoning Districts, as identified in Section 4.02,
wherein regulations are uniform for each class or type of building or structure or use throughout each
Zoning District in order to:
A. Classify, regulate, and restrict the location of residences, commercial establishments,
industries, institutional, recreation and other land uses, and the location of
buildings designed for specified uses.
B. Regulate and limit the height of buildings and structures.
C. Regulate the percentages of lot areas which may be covered by impervious surfaces.
D. Establish setback lines, sizes of yards and other open spaces surrounding such
buildings.
E. Regulate the density of population of the Township.
F. Implement the goals, objectives and policies of the Bethel Township Strategic Plan.
Section 4.02 Division of Township into Districts
In order to carry out the intent and purpose of this Resolution, Bethel Township is hereby divided into the
following districts:
R-1AAA Single Family Residence District
B-1 General Business District
B-2 Office/Residential District
B-3 Neighborhood Business District
NUO New Urbanism Overlay District
I-1 Light Industrial District
I-2 Heavy Industrial District
F-1 Flood Plain District
A-1 Domestic Agriculture District
A-2 General Agriculture District
Section 4.03 Official Zoning Map
The boundaries of the zoning districts listed above in Section 4.02 are shown on the "Zoning Map of
Bethel Township". This map together with all explanatory data thereon, including all changes thereof as
hereinafter provided, shall be incorporated and made a part of this Resolution.
The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the Bethel Township Trustees. This is to
certify that this is the official zoning map referred to in the Zoning Resolution of Bethel Township, Miami
County, Ohio (including date of adoption). If, in accordance with the provisions of this Resolution,
changes are made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the official zoning map, such
changes shall be made on a copy of the official zoning map within five (5) normal working days after the
effective date of said approved amendment together with an attached entry on the official zoning map as
follows:
"On (date), by official action of the Board of Trustees, the following change (s) are made" (brief
description with reference number to Township proceedings).
The official map and one (1) copy are to be maintained and kept up to date. The official map is to be on
display in the Township House, accessible to the public. The official map and attached entries shall
control whenever there is an apparent conflict between the district boundaries as shown on the official
map and the descriptions found in the text of this resolution or any other resolution. The official map and
attached entries shall be final authority as to the current zoning status of lands, buildings, and other
structures in the Township. A certified copy of the official zoning map is at the recorder's office in the
Safety Building, Troy, Ohio.
Section 4.04 Uncertainty of District Boundaries
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of the various districts as shown on the Zoning
Map, the following rules shall apply:
A. Boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets, highways, or alleys
shall be construed to follow such centerlines.
B. Boundaries indicated, as approximately following platted lot lines shall be construed as
following such lot lines.
C. Boundaries indicated, as approximately following municipal limits shall be construed as
following municipal limits.
D. Boundaries indicated as following shore lines shall be construed to follow such shore lines
and, in the event of change in the shore line, shall be construed as moving with the actual
shore line; boundaries indicated as approximately following the center line of streams,
rivers, canals, lakes, or other bodies of water shall be construed to follow such lines.
E. Boundaries indicated as parallel to or extensions of features indicated in subsections A
through E above shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the Official
Zoning Map and/or the copy is determined by the scale of the Map.
Where physical or cultural features existing on ground are at variance with those shown on the
Official Zoning Map and/or the copy or in other circumstances not covered by subsections A
through F above, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall interpret the district boundaries.
Section 4.05 Extension of District Boundaries
Whenever any street, alley or other public way is vacated by official action, the Zoning District(s) adjoining
each side of such street, alley or other public way will be automatically extended to the center of such
vacation, and all area included in the vacation will be subject to all applicable regulations of the extended
Districts.
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 5 – “R-1AAA” Residence District – September 2018
ARTICLE 5
“R-1AAA” RESIDENCE DISTRICT
Section 5.01 Purpose
The purpose of the “R-1AAA” Residence District is to encourage the retention of the rural nature and
character of Bethel Township through agricultural and low density residential uses, and their accessory
uses, in areas where sanitary sewer is not available.
Section 5.02 Principal Permitted Uses
The following uses are permitted in the “R-1AAA” Residence District:
Residential Uses Public and Semi-Public
Uses
Non-Residential Uses
• One Single Family Dwelling
• Public and Parochial
Elementary, Junior and
Senior High Schools
• Agriculture
Section 5.03 Accessory Permitted Uses
The following uses are permitted as accessory uses in the “R-1AAA” Residence District:
• Buildings or Uses Customarily and Incidental to the Permitted Principal Use;
• Home Occupations;
• Signs.
Accessory uses located within the principal structure shall not occupy more than twenty-five (25) percent
of the building or structure.
Section 5.04 Conditional Permitted Uses
The following uses are permitted as conditional uses in the “R-1AAA” Residence District:
Residential Uses Public and Semi-Public
Uses
Non-Residential Uses
• Bed and Breakfast Establishment
• Multi-Family Dwellings
• Residential Facilities
• Secondary One Family Dwelling
• Non-Commercial Parks
and Recreation
• Public Community
Center, Park, Playground
• Public, Semi Public and
Government Buildings
• Religious Place of
Worship
• Golf Course (Excluding
Driving Ranges and
Miniature Golf)
Section 5.05 Lot Development Standards
The following development standards shall apply to lots located within the “R-1AAA” Residence District:
Minimum Lot Area and Allowable Density Residential
• On Site Septic* - 2 Acres Single Family
Dwelling
• Decentralized System* – 1 Acre Single
Family Dwelling (1 dwelling unit per acre)
• Sewer System – 31,250 square feet
(1.4 dwelling units per acre)
Non-Residential
• 1 Acre
Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage • 35% Single Family Dwellings
• For Accessory Buildings See Article
30.05 For Maximum Gross Floor Area
• 45% All Other Uses
Minimum Lot Width and Frontage • 175 Feet (Contiguous)
Minimum Corner Lot Width • 150 Feet
Minimum Lot Depth • 125 Feet
Minimum Front Yard Setback • 50 Feet
• If three or more dwellings are within
500 feet, then the average front yard
setback shall be observed.
Minimum Side Yard Setback • 20 Feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback • 50 Feet
Maximum Building Height • 35 Feet; Excluding Agricultural
Buildings and Structures
• 26 Feet at Peak Accessory Structures.
If the accessory building is taller than the
residence, it must be placed to the rear
and at least twenty (20) feet from the
residence.
Minimum Floor Area for Residential Uses • 1,500 Square Feet per Dwelling Unit
*See Section 2.09, Conformance with Miami County Sanitary Engineer Standards
Section 5.06 Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements
Off-Street parking requirements shall be as regulated in Article 35.
Section 5.07 Signage Requirements
Signage requirements shall be as regulated in Article 36.
Section 5.08 Landscape and Buffer Requirements
Landscape and Buffer requirements shall be as regulated in Article 38.
Section 5.09 Accessory Buildings, Fencing and Other Requirements
Requirements are found in Article 30.
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 7 – “B-2” Office/Residential District 
ARTICLE 7
“B-2” OFFICE / RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT
Section 7.01 Purpose
The purpose of the “B-2” Office / Residential District is to encourage the development and
retention of higher density one family dwellings and office type uses that primarily serve as a
transition between intensive land uses and less intensive land uses.
Section 7.02 Principal Permitted Uses
The following uses are permitted in the “B-2” Office / Residential District:
Residential Uses Public and Semi-
Public Uses
Non-Residential
Uses
• One Single Family Dwelling
• Public and Parochial
Elementary, Junior
and Senior High
Schools
• Public Community
Center, Park,
Playground
• Public, Semi Public
and Government
Buildings
• Agriculture
• Medical and Dental
Office
• Nursery School or
Child Care
• Professional
Services
Section 7.03 Accessory Permitted Uses
The following uses are permitted as accessory uses in the “B-2” Office / Residential District:
• Buildings or Uses Customarily and Incidental to the Permitted Principal Use;
• Signs;
• Drive Through Facility Associated with Principally Permitted Use;
Accessory uses located within the principal structure shall not occupy more than twenty-five (25)
percent of the building or structure.
Section 7.04 Conditional Permitted Uses
The following uses are permitted as conditional uses in the “B-2” Office / Residential District:
Residential Uses Public and Semi-
Public Uses
Non-Residential
Uses
• Convalescent, Nursing Home or
Assisted Living Facility
• Residential Facilities
• Secondary One Family Dwelling
• Non-Commercial
Parks and Recreation
• Public and Private
Vocational Center,
College or University
• Religious Place of
Worship
• Bar or Tavern
• Banks, Loan Offices
and other Financial
Institutions
• Building Services
and Supplies
• Carry-Out or Drive
Through Facilities
• Clubs, Lodges and
Similar
Establishments
• Commercial
Greenhouse
• Commercial
Recreation Facilities
• Funeral Home and
Mortuary
Establishment
• Greenhouses
• Home Occupation
• Hospitals
• Medical and Dental
Laboratories
• Motel and Hotel
• Multiple Tenant
Building
• Office Buildings for
Administrative and
Professional
• Parking Lot and
Parking Structure
• Restaurant
• Restaurant, Fast
Food
• Temporary Uses
and Seasonal Sales
Lot
• Retail Business
• Veterinary Office for
Domestic Pets
Section 7.05 Lot Development Standards
The following development standards shall apply to lots located within the “B-2” Office /
Residential District:
Minimum Lot Area and Allowable Density Residential
• On Site Septic* - 2 Acres Single
Family Dwelling (0.5 dwelling
units per acre)
• Decentralized System* – 32,670
Single Family (1.3 dwelling units
per acre)
• Sewer System – 12,000 Square
Feet Single Family Dwelling (4
dwelling units per acre)
Non-Residential
• 2 Acres All Other Uses
Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage • 70%
Minimum Lot Width and Frontage • 175 Feet Single Family
Residential
• 200 Feet All Other Uses and
Lots Greater than 1 Acre in Size
Minimum Corner Lot Width • 175 Feet One Family Residential
(Contiguous)
• 200 Feet All Other Uses
(Contiguous)
Minimum Lot Depth • 120 Feet
Minimum Front Yard Setback • 25 Feet
Minimum Side Yard Setback • 20 Feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback • 30 Feet
Maximum Building Height • 45 Feet; Excluding Agricultural
Buildings and Structures
• 26 Feet at Peak Accessory
Structures.
Minimum Floor Area for Residential Uses • 1,500 Square Feet
*See Section 2.09, Conformance with Miami County Sanitary Engineer Standards
Section 7.06 Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements
Off-Street parking requirements shall be as regulated in Article 35.
Section 7.07 Signage Requirements
Signage requirements shall be as regulated in Article 36.
Section 7.08 Landscape and Buffer Requirements
Landscape and Buffer requirements shall be as regulated in Article 38.
Section 7.09 Accessory Buildings, Fencing and Other Requirements
Requirements are found in Article 30.
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 8 – “B-3” Neighborhood Business District –
September 2018
ARTICLE 8
“B-3” NEIGHBORHOOD BUSINESS DISTRICT
Section 8.01 Purpose
The purpose of the “B-3” Neighborhood Business District is to encourage businesses and services
that are completely enclosed in buildings and that are small in size; that provide convenience goods
and services to residents and to identify businesses which can be located close to residential
properties without being detrimental to the residential neighborhood.
Section 8.02 Principal Permitted Uses
The following uses are permitted in the “B-3” Neighborhood Business District:
Residential Uses Public and Semi-
Public Uses
Non-Residential
Uses
• None
• Public and
Parochial
Elementary, Junior
and Senior High
Schools
• Public Community
Center, Park,
Playground
• Public, Semi
Public and
Government
Buildings
• Agricultural Uses
• Banks, loan
offices, and other
financial institutions
• Medical and
dental laboratories
• Nursery School or
Child Care
• Personal Services
• Retail Business
less than 5,000
square feet in floor
area.
Section 8.03 Accessory Permitted Uses
The following uses are permitted as accessory uses in the “B-3” Neighborhood Business District:
• Buildings or Uses Customarily and Incidental to the Permitted Principal Use;
• Signs;
• Drive Through Facility Associated with Principally Permitted Use;
Accessory uses located within the principal structure shall not occupy more than twenty-five (25)
percent of the building or structure.
Section 8.04 Conditional Permitted Uses
The following uses are permitted as conditional uses in the “B-3” Neighborhood Business District:
Residential Uses Public and Semi-
Public Uses
Non-Residential
Uses
• One Single Family Dwelling
• Non-Commercial
Parks and
Recreation
• Clubs, Lodges,
and Similar
Establishments
• Commercial
Entertainment
(Excluding Sexually
Oriented Business)
• Commercial
Greenhouse
• Commercial
Recreational
Facilities
• Convenience
Store
• Medical and
Dental Office
• Motel or Hotel
• Multiple Tenant
Building
• Nursery School or
Child Care
• Office Buildings for
Administrative and
Professional
• Parking Lot and
Parking Structure
• Professional
Services
• Restaurant
• Restaurant, Fast
Food
• Temporary Uses
and Seasonal Sales
Lot
• Veterinary Office
for Domestic Pets
Section 8.05 Lot Development Standards
The following development standards shall apply to lots located within the “B-3” Neighborhood
Business District:
Minimum Lot Area and Allowable Density Residential
• On Site Septic* - 2 Acres One
Single Family Dwelling (0.5
dwellings per acre)
• Decentralized System* –
32,670 Square Feet One
Single Family (1.33 dwellings
per acre)
• Sewer System – 12,000
Square Feet One Single
Family Dwelling (4 dwellings
per acre)
Non-Residential
• 2 Acres
Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage • 25% One Family Dwellings
• 40% All Other Uses
Minimum Lot Width and Frontage • 175 Feet (Contiguous)
• 200 Feet All Other Uses and
Lots Greater than 1 Acre in
Size (Contiguous)
Minimum Front Yard Setback • 20 Feet
• If three or more dwellings are
within 500 feet, then the
average front yard setback
shall be observed.
Minimum Side Yard Setback • 20 Feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback • 30 Feet
Maximum Building Height • 45 Feet; Excluding
Agricultural Buildings and
Structures
• 26 Feet at Peak for
Accessory Buildings
Minimum Floor Area for Residential Uses • 1,500 Square Feet
*See Section 2.09, Conformance with Miami County Sanitary Engineer Standards
Section 8.06 Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements
Off-Street parking requirements shall be as regulated in Article 35.
Section 8.07 Signage Requirements
Signage requirements shall be as regulated in Article 36.
Section 8.08 Landscape and Buffer Requirements
Landscape and Buffer requirements shall be as regulated in Article 38.
Section 8.09 Accessory Buildings, Fencing and Other Requirements
Requirements are found in Article 30.
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 9 – “B-1” General Business District –
September 2018
ARTICLE 9
“B-1” GENERAL BUSINESS DISTRICT
Section 9.01 Purpose
The purpose of the “B-1” General Business District is to encourage places for
businesses and offices which serve Township and regional markets; provide goods and
services to other businesses, as well as consumers; provide services to automobiles;
and serve the traveling public.
Section 9.02 Principal Permitted Uses
The following uses are permitted in the “B-1” General Business District:
Residential Uses Public and Semi-
Public Uses
Non-Residential
Uses
• None
• None
• Agricultural Uses
• Automobile Wash
Facility
• Banks, Loan
Offices, and other
Financial
Institutions
• Bar/Tavern
• Building Services
and Supplies
• Carry Out or
Drive-Through
Facility
• Clubs, Lodges,
and Similar
Establishments
• Commercial
Entertainment
(Excluding Sexually
Oriented
Businesses)
• Commercial
Greenhouse
• Commercial
Recreation
Facilities
• Convenience
Store
• Events
• Farm Implement
and Lawn and
Garden Equipment
Sales and Service
• Funeral Home and
Mortuary
Establishment
• Greenhouses
• Hospitals
• Medical and
Dental Laboratories
• Medical and
Dental Offices
• Motel or Hotel
• Office Buildings
for Administrative,
Business, and
Professional
• Personal Services
• Professional
Services
• Restaurant
• Restaurant, Fast
Food
• Retail Business
• Utility Trailer
Sales and Rental
• Veterinary Office
for Domestic Pets
Section 9.03 Accessory Permitted Uses
The following uses are permitted as accessory uses in the “B-1” General Business
District:
• Buildings or Uses Customarily and Incidental to the Permitted Principal Use;
• Signs;
• Drive Through Facility Associated with Principally Permitted Use
• Accessory uses located within the principal structure shall not occupy more than
twenty-five (25) percent of the building or structure.
Section 9.04 Conditional Permitted Uses
The following uses are permitted as conditional uses in the “B-1” General Business
District:
Residential Uses Public and Semi-
Public Uses
Non-Residential
Uses
• None
• Non-Commercial
Parks and
Recreation
• Public and Semi-
Public Buildings
• Public and Private
Vocational Center,
College, or
University
• Automobile,
Recreational
Vehicle, Boat Sales
• Building and
Trades,
Contractor’s Yard,
Utility Storage Yard
• Kennels and
Animal Hospitals
• Multiple Tenant
Building
• Paint and Body
Shop in
Conjunction with
Sale of
Automobiles and
Recreational
Vehicles
• Parking Lot and
Parking Structure
• Research and
Development
• Temporary Uses
and Seasonal
Sales Lot
• Trailer Rental and
Sales
Section 9.05 Lot Development Standards
The following development standards shall apply to lots located within the “B-1” General
Business District:
Minimum Lot Area • 2 Acres
Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage • 85%
Minimum Lot Width and Frontage • 200 Feet (Contiguous)
Minimum Front Yard Setback • 25 Feet
Minimum Side Yard Setback • 20 Feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback • 25 Feet
Maximum Building Height • 45 Feet; Excluding
Agricultural Buildings and
Structures
• 26 Feet at Peak for
Accessory Buildings
*See Section 2.09, Conformance with Miami County Sanitary Engineer
Standards
Section 9.06 Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements
Off-Street parking requirements shall be as regulated in Article 35.
Section 9.07 Signage Requirements
Signage requirements shall be as regulated in Article 36.
Section 9.08 Landscape and Buffer Requirements
Landscape and Buffer requirements shall be as regulated in Article 38.
Section 9.09 Accessory Buildings, Fencing and Other Requirements
Requirements are found in Article 30.
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 12 – “I-1” Light Industrial District –
September 2018
ARTICLE 12
“I-1” LIGHT INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Section 12.01 Purpose
The purpose of the “I-1” Light Industrial District is to provide appropriate places for
clean, low environmental impact industrial and manufacturing uses that are located
completely indoors, limit off-site impacts, outdoor storage and that provide adequate
landscaping and screening for buildings, structures and off-street parking areas.
Section 12.02 Principal Permitted Uses
The following uses are permitted as of right in the “I-1” Light Industrial District:
Residential Uses Public and Semi-
Public Uses
Non-Residential
Uses
• None
• Public Garages
• Agricultural Uses
• Automobile Filling
Station
• Automobile,
Recreational
Vehicle, Boat Sales
• Automobile,
Truck, and
Recreational
Vehicle Repair
• Building Services
and Supplies
• Building and
Trades,
Contractor’s Yards,
Utility Storage
Yards
• Commercial
Greenhouse
• Commercial
Storage of Boats,
Recreational
Vehicles, and/or
Construction
Equipment in an
Enclosed Building
• Crematorium
• Events
• Farm Implement
and Lawn and
Garden Equipment
Sales and Service
• Kennels and
Animal Hospitals
• Manufacturing,
Light
• Medical and
Dental Laboratories
• Research and
Development
• Trailer Rental and
Sales
• Warehouse
• Wholesale
Distributor
Section 12.03 Accessory Permitted Uses
The following uses are permitted as accessory uses in the “I-1” Light Industrial District:
• Buildings or Uses Customarily and Incidental to the Permitted Principal Use;
• Signs;
• Drive-Through Facility Associated with Principally Permitted Use;
• Retail Business
Accessory uses located within the principal structure shall not occupy more than twentyfive
(25) percent of the building or structure.
Section 12.04 Conditional Permitted Uses
The following uses are permitted as conditional uses in the “I-1” Light Industrial District:
Residential Uses Public and Semi-
Public Uses
Non-Residential
Uses
• None
• Non-Commercial
Parks and
Recreation
• Public and Semi-
Public Buildings
• Public and Private
Vocational Center,
College, or
University
• Agricultural
Business
• Commercial
Recreational
Facilities
• Motor Freight
Depot or Trucking
Transfer Terminal
• Multiple Tenant
Building
• Paint and Body
Shop
• Personal Services
• Professional
Services
• Retail Business
• Utility Trailer Sales
and Rental
• Self-Storage
Buildings and
Storage Yards,
Excluding Wrecking
and Dismantling of
Motor Vehicles
• Sexually Oriented
Businesses
• Temporary Uses
and Seasonal Sales
Lots
• Truck and Heavy
Equipment Service
• Vehicle Towing
Service, Equipment,
Towing Trucks,
and/or Storage Yard
• Wireless
Telecommunication
Facility and/or
Antenna
Section 12.05 Lot Development Standards
The following development standards shall apply to lots located within the “I-1” Light
Industrial District:
Minimum Lot Area • 2 Acres
Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage • 85%
Minimum Lot Width and Frontage • 200 Feet (Contiguous)
Minimum Front Yard Setback • 25 Feet
Minimum Side Yard Setback • 20 Feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback • 15 Feet
Maximum Building Height • 45 Feet; Excluding
Agricultural Buildings and
Structures
*See Section 2.09, Conformance with Miami County Sanitary Engineer
Standards
Section 12.06 Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements
Off-Street parking requirements shall be as regulated in Article 35.
Section 12.07 Signage Requirements
Signage requirements shall be as regulated in Article 36.
Section 12.08 Landscape and Buffer Requirements
Landscape and Buffer requirements shall be as regulated in Article 38.
Section 12.09 Accessory Buildings, Fencing and Other Requirements
Requirements are found in Article 30.
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 13 – “I-2” Heavy Industrial District –
September 2018
ARTICLE 13
“I-2” HEAVY INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT
Section 13.01 Purpose
The purpose of the “I-2” Heavy Industrial District is to provide appropriate places for
industrial and manufacturing uses that may occur outside of a building or structure and
that may have off-site impacts including but not limited to: noise, heat, glare and odor.
Section 13.02 Principal Permitted Uses
The following uses are permitted as of right in the “I-2” Heavy Industrial District:
Residential Uses Public and Semi-
Public Uses
Non-Residential
Uses
• None
• Public Garages
• Agricultural Uses
• Automobile Filling
Station
• Automobile,
Recreational,
Vehicle, Boat Sales
• Automobile,
Truck, and
Recreational
Vehicle Repair
• Automobile
Wrecking, Junk, or
Salvage Yard
• Building Services
and Supplies
• Building and
Trades,
Contractor’s Yard,
Utility Storage Yard
• Commercial
Greenhouse
• Commercial
Storage of Boats,
Recreational
Vehicles, and/or
Construction
Equipment in an
Enclosed Building
• Crematorium
• Events
• Farm Implement
and Lawn and
Garden Equipment
Sales and Service
• Kennels and
Animal Hospitals
• Manufacturing,
Light
• Motor Freight
Depot or Trucking
Transfer Terminal
• Paint and Body
Shop
• Research and
Development
• Trailer Rental and
Sales
Section 13.03 Accessory Permitted Uses
The following uses are permitted as accessory uses in the “I-2” Heavy Industrial District:
• Buildings or Uses Customarily and Incidental to the Permitted Principal Use;
• Signs;
• Drive Through Facility Associated with Principally Permitted Use;
• Retail Business;
Accessory uses located within the principal structure shall not occupy more than twentyfive
(25) percent of the building or structure.
Section 13.04 Conditional Permitted Uses
The following uses are permitted as conditional uses in the “I-2” Heavy Industrial
District:
Residential Uses Public and Semi-
Public Uses
Non-Residential
Uses
• None
• Non-Commercial
Parks and
Recreation
• Public and Semi-
Public Buildings
• Public and Private
Vocational Center,
College, or
University
• Agricultural
Business
• Multiple Tenant
Buildings
• Retail Business
• Self Storage
Buildings and
Storage Yards,
Excluding Wrecking
and Dismantling of
Motor Vehicles
• Sexually Oriented
Businesses
• Temporary Uses
and Seasonal Sales
Lots
• Wireless
Telecommunication
Facility and/or
Antenna
Section 13.05 Lot Development Standards
The following development standards shall apply to lots located within the “I-2” Heavy
Industrial District:
Minimum Lot Area • 5 Acres
Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage • 85%
Minimum Lot Width and Frontage • 200 Feet (Contiguous)
Minimum Front Yard Setback • 25 Feet
Minimum Side Yard Setback • 20 Feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback • 15 Feet
Maximum Building Height • 45 Feet; Excluding
Agricultural Buildings and
Structures
*See Section 2.09, Conformance with Miami County Sanitary Engineer
Standards
Section 13.06 Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements
Off-Street parking requirements shall be as regulated in Article 35.
Section 13.07 Signage Requirements
Signage requirements shall be as regulated in Article 36.
Section 13.08 Landscape and Buffer Requirements
Landscape and Buffer requirements shall be as regulated in Article 38.
Section 13.09 Accessory Buildings, Fencing and Other Requirements
Requirements are found in Article 30.
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 14 – “F-1” Flood Plain District –
September 2018
ARTICLE 14
“F-1” FLOOD PLAIN DISTRICT
Section 14.01 Purpose
The purpose of the “F-1” Flood Plain District is to secure the preservation of flood plain
in Bethel Township as established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA), the U. S. Army Corps of Engineers and the Miami Conservancy District in
order to protect the public health, safety and welfare. Where parcels are located within a
FEMA defined flood plain, compliance with the Miami County Flood Damage Reduction
Resolution is also required.
Section 14.02 Principal Permitted Uses
The following uses are permitted as of right in the “F-1” Flood Plain District:
Residential Uses Public and Semi-
Public Uses
Non-Residential
Uses
• None
• None
• Agricultural Uses
• Parking Lot and
Parking Structure
• Stables and
Riding Academy
Section 14.03 Accessory Permitted Uses
The following uses are permitted as accessory uses in the “F-1” Flood Plain District:
• Buildings or Uses Customarily and Incidental to the Permitted Principal Use;
• Home Occupation;
• Signs
Accessory uses located within the principal structure shall not occupy more than twentyfive
(25) percent of the building or structure.
Section 14.04 Conditional Permitted Uses
The following uses are permitted as conditional uses in the “F-1” Flood Plain District:
Residential Uses Public and Semi-
Public Uses
Non-Residential
Uses
• One Single Family Dwelling
• Non-commercial
Parks and
Recreation
• Public Community
Center, Park,
Playground
• Public and Semi-
Public Buildings
• Airport Landing
Field
• Golf Course
(excluding
miniature golf)
• Temporary Uses
and Seasonal Sales
Lots
Section 14.05 Lot Development Standards
The following development standards shall apply to lots located within the “F-1” Flood
Plain District:
Minimum Lot Area • 2 Acres
Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage • 10%
Minimum Lot Width and Frontage • 200 Feet (Contiguous)
Minimum Front Yard Setback • 50 Feet
Minimum Side Yard Setback • 20 Feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback • 50 Feet
Maximum Building Height • 45 Feet; Excluding
Agricultural Buildings and
Structures
• 26 Feet at Peak Accessory
Structures.
Minimum Floor Area for Residential Uses • 1,500 Square Feet
*See Section 2.09, Conformance with Miami County Sanitary Engineer
Standards
Section 14.06 Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements
Off-Street parking requirements shall be as regulated in Article 35.
Section 14.07 Signage Requirements
Signage requirements shall be as regulated in Article 36.
Section 14.08 Landscape and Buffer Requirements
Landscape and Buffer requirements shall be as regulated in Article 38.
Section 14.09 Accessory Buildings, Fencing and Other Requirements
Requirements are found in Article 30.
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 15 – “A-1” Domestic Agricultural
District – September 2018
ARTICLE 15
“A-1” DOMESTIC AGRICULTURE DISTRICT
Section 15.01 Purpose
The purpose of the “A-1” Domestic Agriculture District is to encourage and permit the
existence of agricultural uses and to permit a degree of low density residential
development.
Section 15.02 Principal Permitted Uses
The following uses are permitted as of right in the “A-1” Domestic Agriculture District:
Residential Uses Public and Semi-
Public Uses
Non-Residential
Uses
• One Single Family Dwelling
• Public and
Parochial
Elementary, Junior,
and Senior High
Schools
• Agricultural Uses
• Stables and
Riding Academy
Section 15.03 Accessory Permitted Uses
The following uses are permitted as accessory uses in the “A-1” Domestic Agriculture
District:
• Buildings or Uses Customarily and Incidental to the Permitted Principal Use;
• Signs;
• Commercial Greenhouse
Accessory uses located within the principal structure shall not occupy more than twentyfive
(25) percent of the building or structure.
Section 15.04 Conditional Permitted Uses
The following uses are permitted as conditional uses in the “A-1” Domestic Agriculture
District:
Residential Uses Public and Semi-
Public Uses
Non-Residential
Uses
• Bed and Breakfast
Establishments
• Convalescent, Nursing Home, or
Assisted Living Facility
• Secondary One Family Dwelling
• Public Community
Center, Park,
Playground
• Public and Private
Vocational Center,
College, or University
Public and Semi-
Public Buildings
• Non-Commercial
Parks and Recreation
• Religious Places of
Worship
• Agricultural
Business
• Airport Landing
Field
• Cemetery
• Clubs, Lodges, and
Similar
Establishments
• Commercial
Greenhouse
• Commercial Storage
of Boats,
Recreational
Vehicles, and/or
Construction
Equipment in an
Enclosed Building
• Events
• Farm Implement
and Lawn and
Garden Equipment
Sales and Service
• Golf course
(excluding miniature
golf)
• Greenhouse
• Home Occupation
• Temporary Uses
and Seasonal Sales
Lots
• Veterinary Office for
Domestic Pets
• Wireless
Telecommunications
Facility and/or
Antenna
Section 15.05 Lot Development Standards
The following development standards shall apply to lots located within the “A-1”
Domestic Agriculture District:
Minimum Lot Area • 5 Acres
Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage • 20%
Minimum Lot Width and Frontage • 175 Feet (Contiguous)
Minimum Front Yard Setback • 50 Feet
Minimum Side Yard Setback • 20 Feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback • 50 Feet
Maximum Building Height • 45 Feet; Excluding
Agricultural Buildings and
Structures
• 26 Feet at Peak Accessory
Structures.
Minimum Floor Area for Residential Uses • 1,500 Square Feet
*See Section 2.09, Conformance with Miami County Sanitary Engineer
Standards
Section 15.06 Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements
Off-Street parking requirements shall be as regulated in Article 35.
Section 15.07 Signage Requirements
Signage requirements shall be as regulated in Article 36.
Section 15.08 Landscape and Buffer Requirements
Landscape and Buffer requirements shall be as regulated in Article 38.
Section 15.09 Accessory Buildings, Fencing and Other Requirements
Requirements are found in Article 30.
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 16 – “A-2” General Agricultural
District – September 2018
ARTICLE 16
“A-2” GENERAL AGRICULTURE DISTRICT
Section 16.01 Purpose
The purpose of the “A-2” General Agriculture District is to encourage the retention of,
and to protect land, suited for agricultural uses from the encroachment of incompatible
land uses.
Section 16.02 Principal Permitted Uses
The following uses are permitted as of right in the “A-2” General Agriculture District:
Residential Uses Public and Semi-
Public Uses
Non-Residential
Uses
• One Single Family Dwelling
• Public and
Parochial
Elementary, Junior,
and Senior High
Schools
• Public and Private
Vocational Center,
College, or
University Public
and Semi-Public
Buildings
• Agricultural Uses
• Agricultural
Business (If
enclosed)
• Kennels and
Animal Hospitals
• Stables and
Riding Academy
Section 16.03 Accessory Permitted Uses
The following uses are permitted as accessory uses in the “A-2” General Agriculture
District:
• Buildings or Uses Customarily and Incidental to the Permitted Principal
Use;
• Signs
Accessory uses located within the principal structure shall not occupy
more than twenty-five (25) percent of the building or structure.
Section 16.04 Conditional Permitted Uses
The following uses are permitted as conditional uses in the “A-2” General Agriculture
District:
Residential Uses Public and Semi-
Public Uses
Non-Residential
Uses
• Bed and Breakfast
Establishment
• Convalescent, Nursing Home,
or Assisted Living Facility
• Mobile Home Park
• Secondary Single-Family
Dwellings
• Religious Places
of Worship
• Airport Landing
Field
• Building Services
and Supplies
• Cemetery
• Clubs, Lodges,
and Similar
Establishments
• Non-Commercial
Parks and
Recreation
• Public Community
Center, Park,
Playground
• Agricultural
Business (if
outdoors)
• Commercial
Storage of Boats,
Recreational
Vehicles and/or
Construction
Equipment in an
Enclosed Building
• Events
• Farm Implement
and Lawn and
Garden Equipment
Sales and Service
• Golf Course
(excluding
miniature golf)
• Greenhouses
• Home Occupation
Temporary Uses
and Seasonal
Sales Lots
• Wireless
Telecommunication
Facility and/or
Antenna
• Commercial
Recreation
Facilities
Section 16.05 Lot Development Standards
The following development standards shall apply to lots located within the “A-2” General
Agriculture District:
Minimum Lot Area • 20 Acres
Maximum Impervious Surface Coverage • 20%
Minimum Lot Width and Frontage • 175 Feet (Contiguous)
Minimum Front Yard Setback • 50 Feet
Minimum Side Yard Setback • 20 Feet
Minimum Rear Yard Setback • 50 Feet
Maximum Building Height • 45 Feet; Excluding
Agricultural Buildings and
Structures
• 26 Feet at Peak Accessory
Structures.
Minimum Floor Area for Residential Uses • 1,500 Square Feet
*See Section 2.09, Conformance with Miami County Sanitary Engineer
Standards
Section 16.06 Minimum Off-Street Parking Requirements
Off-Street parking requirements shall be as regulated in Article 35.
Section 16.07 Signage Requirements
Signage requirements shall be as regulated in Article 36.
Section 16.08 Landscape and Buffer Requirements
Landscape and Buffer requirements shall be as regulated in Article 38.
Section 16.09 Accessory Buildings, Fencing and Other Requirements
Requirements are found in Article 30.
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 18 – Well Field Protection Overlay
12 June 2007
ARTICLE 18
“WP” WELL FIELD PROTECTION OVERLAY DISTRICT
Section 18.01 Purpose
The WP Well Field Protection Overlay District is designed to safeguard the public health,
safety and welfare of the customers of protected public water supplies by regulating the
land use and the storage, handling, use and/or production of regulated substances. The
area extent of the zone is described as the land area within Bethel Township, adjacent to
existing and proposed public wells, which lies within the one-year capture area, including
a 1,000-foot strip of land outside of the direct recharge area in locations where the direct
recharge area within the one-year capture area impinges on the aquifer boundary. The
intent of this designation is to protect the community's potable water supply against
contamination.
Section 18.02 Application of Article; Conflict of Laws
The provisions of this Article shall be applicable to all lands shown as being located
within the boundaries of the WP Well Field Protection Overlay District on the Zoning Map
and shall be supplemental to the regulations of the underlying zoning district. Where the
requirements of this Article are in conflict with the regulations of the underlying district,
the more restrictive regulations shall apply.
Section 18.03 Determination of Applicability
It shall be the responsibility of any person owning real property and/or owning or
operating a business within Bethel Township to make a determination of the applicability
of this Article as it pertains to the property and/or business, and failure to do so shall not
excuse any violations of this Article.
Section 18.04 Permitted Uses; Bulk and Yard Regulations
The permitted, conditional and prohibited uses, and the bulk and yard regulations, within
the WP Well Field Protection Overlay District, shall be those of the underlying zoning
district, except as specified in Section 18.05.
Section 18.05 Prohibited Uses
Sanitary land fills, land fills composed of demolition debris and dry wells are prohibited
uses in the WP Well Field Protection Overlay District.
Section 18.06 Conditional Uses
The requirements of this section shall be in addition to any applicable regulations in this
Article. The conditional uses within the WP Well Field Protection Overlay District shall be
those of the underlying zoning district, except as specified in Section 18.05.
18-1
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 18 – Well Field Protection Overlay
12 June 2007
Section 18.07 Mineral Extraction and Processing Uses
If the excavation, extraction, mining or processing of sand, gravel and limestone from the
earth for resale is permitted or conditionally permitted within the underlying zoning
district, approval of an excavation and facilities plan is required that includes, but is not
limited to:
A. An existing site plan with topographic detail at two-foot contour intervals, all
planimetric information, depth to ground water and flood plain characteristics
where applicable;
B. The proposed extent and depth of excavations;
C. The slope angle of excavation walls (any final slopes shall not exceed the angle
of repose for the remaining material);
D. Use and disposition of the spoil and/or overburden materials from the
excavations, including a landscaping and vegetation plan to stabilize any
disturbed material;
E. A surface drainage plan:
1. Drainage into on-site excavations from proximate off-site property is
prohibited unless the applicant provides a plan which otherwise protects
the excavations from off-site waterborne regulated substances.
2. The final on-site grading shall minimize all surface drainage into the
excavations.
F. A post-excavation and operation land use plan; and
G. A security plan (unauthorized access shall be strictly prohibited as long as any
excavation remain on site.)
Section 18.08 Ground Water Protection Standards
A. Use, storage, handling and/or production of regulated substances in conjunction
with permitted and conditional uses in this District shall be limited to:
1. Aggregate of regulated substances. The aggregate of regulated
substances in use, storage, handling and/or production may not exceed
twenty gallons or 160 pounds at any time.
2. Total use of regulated substances. The total use, storage, handling
and/or production of regulated substances may not exceed fifty gallons
or 400 pounds in any twelve-month period.
18-2
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 18 – Well Field Protection Overlay
12 June 2007
B. A limited exclusion from the provisions of subsection (a) hereof is authorized for
non-routine maintenance or repair of property or equipment. The use, storage,
handling and/or production of regulated substances under this exclusion shall be
limited to:
1. Aggregate regulated substances. The aggregate of regulated
substances in use, storage, handling and/or production may not exceed
fifty gallons or 400 pounds at any time.
2. Total use of regulated substances. The total use, storage, handling
and/or production of regulated substances may not exceed 100 gallons
or 800 pounds in any twelve-month period.
C. A limited exclusion from the provisions of subsection (a) hereof is authorized for
medical and research laboratory uses, provided, however, that regulated
substances shall be stored, handled or used in containers not to exceed five
gallons or forty pounds of each substance, and provided, further, that the
aggregate inventory of regulated substances shall not exceed 250 gallons or
2,000 pounds.
D. A limited exclusion from the provisions of subsection (a) hereof is authorized for
regulated substances which are cleaning agents, provided, however, that such
cleaning agents are packaged for personal or household use or are present in
the same form and concentration as a product packaged for use by the general
public, and provided, further, that the aggregate inventory of such cleaning
agents shall not exceed 100 gallons or 800 pounds at any time. In no case shall
regulated substances claimed under this exclusion include hydrocarbon or
halogenated hydrocarbon solvents.
E. With the exception of residential use of heating fuels in tanks having a capacity
equal to or less than 500 gallons, the underground storage of fuel and lubricants
for vehicle operations and fuel for building and/or process heating in conjunction
with permitted and conditional uses in this District shall be in secondarily
contained and monitored tanks. Such installations shall be subject to approval
by the Administrative Officer.
F. Notwithstanding other provisions of this Article, nonconforming uses in this
District presently utilizing underground storage tanks for fuel and lubricants for
vehicle operations and fuel for building and/or process heating shall be permitted
to replace existing tanks with those constructed as per the specifications of
subsection (e) hereof and not exceeding the capacity of existing tanks.
Replacement of underground tanks for regulated substances other than the
above noted fuels and lubricants are not permitted.
G. As part of the finding required under Section 18.03, Determination of
Applicability, the Zoning Administrator or his or her designee shall utilize the
hazard potential ranking system to assist in the determination of intensity of use
within this District. No substitutions of a nonconforming use shall be permitted
which result in an increase of the hazard potential ranking on a parcel within this
District.
18-3
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 18 – Well Field Protection Overlay
12 June 2007
Section 18.09 Hazard Potential Ranking System for Nonconforming Uses
Uses using, storing, handling and/or producing regulated substances in amounts equal to
or less than the requirements set forth in Section 18.08 are considered conforming uses
and this section does not apply. Any new use or change of use shall maintain the
conforming status of the property.
In order to assess the risk for groundwater contamination potential for nonconforming
uses, a hazard ranking has been developed for various activities categorized by their
standard industrial classification (SIC) code. This ranking is based on the kind of
materials commonly associated with each use looking only at the most critical hydrologic
factors.
Table 1 following the text of this section lists the site hazard potential by land use activity
on a scale of one to nine, with one being a low hazard and nine a very high hazard. This
rating is based on the intrinsic hazards posed by different land uses and is related to the
materials commonly used or stored on the site or the types and amounts of wastes
commonly discharged.
Table 2 lists the hazard potential determined on the basis of materials known to be used,
stored or disposed of at a specific site.
If the two tables referenced above indicate different site hazard potential ratings for the
SIC-coded land use activity and the materials found on-site, the higher of the two scores
is the rating for the site.
TABLE 1
CONTAMINANT HAZARD POTENTIAL RANKING CLASSIFIED BY SOURCE
SIC HAZARD POTENTIAL
NUMBER DESCRIPTION OF WASTE SOURCE INITIAL RATING
01 AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION – CROPS 1 – 2
02 AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION - LIVESTOCK
021 Livestock, except Dairy, Poultry and Animal
Specialties (5 for Feedlots)
024 Dairy Farms 4
025 Poultry and Eggs 4
027 Animal Specialties 2 - 4
029 General Farms, Primarily
Livestock 2
10 METAL MINING
101 Iron Ores 4
102 Copper Ores 6
103 Lead and Zinc Ores 5
104 Gold and Silver Ores 6
105 Bauxite and Other
Aluminum Ores 5
106 Ferroalloy Ores Except
Vanadium 5
108 Metal Mining Services 4
1092 Mercury Ore 6
18-4
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 18 – Well Field Protection Overlay
12 June 2007
1094 Uranium-Radium-Vanadium
Ores 7
1099 Metal Ores Not Elsewhere
Classified 5
11 ANTHRACITE MINING 7
12 BITUMINOUS COAL AND LIGNITE MINING 7
13 OIL AND GAS EXTRACTION
131 Crude Petroleum and
Natural Gas 7
132 Natural Gas Liquids 7
1381 Drilling Oil and Gas Wells 6
1382 Oil and Gas Field
Exploration Services 1
1389 Oil and Gas Field Services
Not Elsewhere Classified Variable,
Depending
On Activity
14 MINING AND QUARRYING OF NON-METALLIC
MINERALS, EXCEPT FUELS
141 Dimension Stone 2
142 Crushed and Broken Stone,
Including Riprap 2
144 Sand and Gravel 2
145 Clay, Ceramic, and
Refractory Minerals 2 - 5
147 Chemical and Fertilizer
Mineral Mining 4 - 7
148 Nonmetallic Minerals Services 1 - 7
149 Miscellaneous Nonmetallic
Minerals, Except Fuels 2 – 5
16 CONSTRUCT1ON OTHER THAN
BUILDING CONSTRUCTION
1629 Heavy Construction, Not
Elsewhere Classified (Dredging,
Especially in Salt Water) 4
20 FOOD AND KINDRED PRODUCTS
201 Meat Products 3
202 Dairy Products 2
203 Canned and Preserved Fruits
and Vegetables 4
204 Grain Mill Products 2
205 Bakery Products 2
206 Sugar and Confectionery Products 2
207 Fats and Oils 3
208 Beverages 2- 5
209 Misc. Food Preparation and
Kindred Products 2
18-5
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 18 – Well Field Protection Overlay
12 June 2007
22 TEXTLE MILL PRODUCTS, ALL EXCEPT
LISTINGS BELOW
223 Broad Woven Fabric Mills,
Wool (including dyeing and
finishing) 6
226 Dyeing and Finishing Textiles,
Except Wool Fabrics and
Knit Goods 6
2295 Coated Fabrics Not Rubberized 6
24 LUMBER AND WOOD PRODUCTS,
EXCEPT FURNITURE
241 Logging Camps and Logging
Contractors 2
242 Sawmills and Planing Mills 2
2435 Hardwood Veneer and Plywood 4
2436 Softwood Veneer and Plywood 4
2439 Structural Wood Members,
Not Elsewhere Classified
(laminated wood-glue) 3
2491 Wood Preserving 5
2492 Particle Board 4
2499 Wood Products, Not Elsewhere
Classified 2 – 5
26 PAPER AND ALLIED PRODUCTS
261 Pulp Mills 6
262 Paper Mills Except Building
Paper Mills 6
263 Paperboard Mills 6
28 CHEMICALS AND ALLED PRODUCTS
2812 Alkalis and Chlorine 7 - 9
2813 Industrial Gases -
2816 Inorganic Pigments 3 - 8
2819 Industrial Inorganic Chemicals
Not Elsewhere Classified 3 - 9
2821 Plastic Materials, Synthetic
Resins, and Nonvulcanizable
Elastomers 6 - 8
2822 Synthetic Rubber
(Vulcanizable Elastomers) 6 - 8
2823 Cellulose Man-Made Fibers 6 - 8
2824 Synthetic Organic Fibers,
Except Cellulosic 6 - 8
2831 Biological Products 6 - 9
2832 Medicinal Chemicals and
Botanical Products 3 - 8
2834 Pharmaceutical Preparations 6 - 9
2841 Soap and Other Detergents,
Except Specialty Cleaners 4 - 6
2842 Specialty Cleaning, Polishing,
and Sanitation Preparation 3 - 8
18-6
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 18 – Well Field Protection Overlay
12 June 2007
2843 Surface Active Agents,
Finishing Agents, Sulfonated
Oils and Assistants 6 - 8
2844 Perfumes, Cosmetics, and
Other Toilet Preparations 3 - 6
2851 Paints, Varnishes, Lacquers,
Enamels, and Allied Products 5 - 8
2861 Gum and Wood Chemicals 5 - 8
2865 Cyclic (coal tar) Crudes, and
Cyclic Intermediates, Dyes and
Organic Pigments (Lakes and
Toners) 6 - 9
2869 Industrial Organic Chemicals
Not Elsewhere Listed 3 - 9
2873 Nitrogenous Fertilizers 7 - 8
2874 Phosphatic Fertilizer 7 - 8
2875 Fertilizer Mixing Only 5
2879 Pesticides and Agricultural
Chemicals, Not Elsewhere
Listed 5 - 9
2891 Adhesives and Sealants 5 - 8
2892 Explosives 6 - 9
2893 Printing Ink 2 - 5
2895 Carbon Black 1- 3
2899 Chemicals and Chemical
Preparations, Not Elsewhere
Listed 3 – 9
29 PETROLEUM REFINING AND RELATED INDUSTRES
291 Petroleum Refining 8
295 Paving and Roofing
Materials 7
299 Misc. Petroleum and Coal
Products 7
30 RUBBER AND MISCELLANEOUS PLASTICS PRODUCTS
301 Tires and Inner Tubes 6
302 Rubber and Plastic Footwear 6
303 Reclaimed Rubber 6
304 Rubber and Plastic Hose
and Belting 4
306 Fabricated Rubber Products,
Not Elsewhere Classified 4
31 LEATHER AND LEATHER PRODUCTS
311 Leather Tanning and Finishing 8
(Remaining Three-Digit Codes) 1 - 3
18-7
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 18 – Well Field Protection Overlay
12 June 2007
32 STONE, CLAY, GLASS, AND CONCRETE PRODUCTS
321 Flat Glass 4
322 Glass and Glassware,
Pressed or Blown 4
324 Cement, Hydraulic 3
3274 Lime 3
3291 Abrasive Products 3
3292 Asbestos 3
3293 Gaskets, Packing, and
Sealing Devices 3
32 PRIMARY METAL INDUSTRES
(Except as Noted Below) 3
3212 Blast Furnaces, Steel Works
and, Rolling and Finishing
Mills 6
323 Primary Smelting and
Refining of Nonferrous Metals 7
34 FABRICATED METAL PRODUCTS, EXCEPT MACHINERY
AND TRANSPORTATION EQUIPMENT
(Except as Noted Below) 5
347 Coating, Engraving, and
Allied Services 8
3482 Small Arms Ammunition 7
3483 Ammunition, Except for Small
Arms, Not Elsewhere Classified 7
3489 Ordnance and Accessories,
Not Elsewhere Classified 7
349 Misc. Fabricated Metal
Products 3 – 6
35 MACHINERY, EXCEPT ELECTRICAL 5 – 7
36 ELECTRICAL AND ELECTRONIC MACHINERY, EQUIPMENT
AND SUPPLIES (Except as Noted Below)
3691 Storage Batteries 8
3692 Primary Batteries, Dry and Wet 8
37 TRANSPORTATION EQUIPMENT 5 – 8
38 MEASURING, ANALYZING, AND
CONTROLLING INSTRUMENTS;
PHOTOGRAPHIC, MEDICAL, AND
OPTICAL GOODS; WATCHES AND
CLOCKS (Except as Noted Below) 4 - 6
386 Photographic Equipment and Supplies 7
39 MISCELLANEOUS MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES 3 – 7
18-8
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 18 – Well Field Protection Overlay
12 June 2007
49 ELECTRIC, GAS, AND SANITARY SERVICES
491 Electric Service 3 - 5
492 Gas Production and Distribution 3
494 Water Supply 2
4952 Sewage Systems 2 - 5
4953 Refuse Systems (Landfills) 5 - 9
496 Steam Supply 2 - 4
TABLE 2
CONTAMINANT HAZARD POTENTIAL RANKING CLASSIFIED BY TYPE
HAZARD POTENTIAL ID *
DESCRIPTION INITIAL READING NUMBER
SOLIDS
Ferrous Metals 1-4 1100
Non-Ferrous Metals 1-7 1200
Resins, Plastics, and Rubbers 2 1300
Wood and Paper Materials (except as
noted below) 2 1400
Bark 4 1401
Textiles and Related Fibers 2 1500
Inert Materials (except as noted below) 2 1600
Sulfide Mineral-Bearing Mine
Tailings 6 1601
Slag and Other Combustion Residues 5 1602
Rubble, Construction, and Demolition
Mixed Waste 3 1603
Animal Processing Wastes (except as noted
below) 2-4 1700
Processed Skins, Hides, and
Leathers 6 1701
Dairy Wastes 4 1702
Live Animal Wastes-Raw Manures
(Feedlots) 5 1703
Composts of Animal Waste 2-4 1704
Dead Animals 5 1705
Edible Fruit and Vegetable Remains
Putrescibles 2-3 1800
LIQUIDS
Organic Chemicals (must be chemically
classified) 2000
Aliphatic (Fatty) Acids 3-5 2001
Aromatic (Benzene) Acids 7-8 2002
Resin Acids - 2003
Alcohols 5-7 2004
Aliphatic Hydrocarbons
(petroleum derivatives) 4-6 2005
Aromatic Hydrocarbons (benzene
derivatives) 6-8 2006
Sulfonated Hydrocarbons 7-8 2007
Halogenated Hydrocarbons 7-9 2008
Alkaloids 7-9 2009
18-9
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 18 – Well Field Protection Overlay
12 June 2007
Aliphatic Amines and Their Salts 1-4 2010
Anilines 6-8 2011
Pyridines 2-6 2012
Phenols 7-9 2013
Aldehydes 6-8 2014
Ketones 6-8 2015
Organic Sulfur Compounds
(Sulfides, Mercaptans) 7-9 2016
Organometallic Compounds 7-9 2017
Cyanides 7-9 2018
Thiocyanides 2-6 2019
Sterols 2020
Sugars and Cellulose 1-4 2021
Esters 6-8 2022
Inorganic Chemicals (must be
chemically classified) 2100
Mineral and Metal Acids 5-8 2101
Mineral and Metal Bases 5-8 2102
Metal Salts, Including Heavy 6-9 2103
Oxides 5-8 2104
Sulfides 5-8 2105
Carbon or Graphite 1-3 2106
Other Chemical Process Wastes not
Previously Listed (must be chemically
classified) 2200
Inks 2-5 2201
Dyes 3-8 2202
Paints 5-8 2203
Adhesives 5-8 2204
Pharmaceutical Wastes 6-9 2205
Petrochemical Wastes 7-9 2206
Metal Treatment Wastes 7-9 2207
Solvents 6-9 2208
Agricultural Chemicals (Pesticides
Herbicides, Fungicides, etc.) 7-9 2209
Waxes and Tars 4-7 2210
Fermentation and Culture Wastes 2-5 2211
Oils, Including Gasoline, Fuel 5-8 2212
Soaps and Detergents 4-6 2213
Other Organic or Inorganic
Chemicals, includes Radioactive
Wastes 4-8 2300
Conventional Treatment Process Municipal
Sludges
From Biological Sewage Treatment 4-8 2301
From Water Treatment and
Conditioning Plants
(must be chemically classified) 2-5 2302
*ID Number is for identification of waste types in the Reporting Form.
1. Classification based on material in Environmental Protection Agency Publication, 670-2-75-024, pp.79-85, prepared by Arthur
D. Little, Inc., and published in 1975.
2. For individual material ranking, refer to solubility-toxicity tables prepared by Versar, Inc., for the Environmental Protection
Agency (source: MDNR, June l980).
Source: WMSRDC. A Pollutant Nature Sampling Plan for Groundwater Contamination in Region 14 (Muskegon, Mich.: West
Michigan Shoreline Regional Development Commission, November 1980).
18-1 0
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 18 – Well Field Protection Overlay
12 June 2007
18-11
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 20 – Planned Development
26 June 2014
20-1
ARTICLE 20
“PD” PLANNED DEVELOPMENT
Section 20.01 Purpose
The purpose of the PD Planned Development District is to:
A. Allow for flexibility in the zoning requirements where the result will be a higher quality
development;
B. Provide for and locate suitable recreational facilities, open space, and other common
facilities, while preserving the existing rural landscape to the greatest extent possible;
C. Encourage sound planning principles in the arrangement of buildings, the
preservation of open space, the utilization of topography and other site features;
D. Obtain creative and coordinated designs in harmony with surrounding uses and allow
procedures supplemental to those applicable in other use districts to establish under
which development plans particularly designed to meet the objectives of this Article;
and
E. Allow for creative development that conforms to the goals and objectives set for in
the Bethel Township’s Current Land Use Plan.
Section 20.02 Types of Planned Developments
The following are the types of planned developments permitted within Bethel Township,
pending approval by the Zoning Commission and the Board of Township Trustees:
“PD-R" Planned Development Residential
“PD-RM” Planned Development Residential Multi-family
“PD-RC” Planned Development Residential Conservation
“PD-O” Planned Development Office
"PD-OR" Planned Development Office Residential
“PD-B” Planned Development Business
"PD-I" Planned Development Industrial
"PD-T" Planned Development Transition
“PD-MU” Planned Development Mixed Use
Section 20.03 Permitted Uses
Permitted uses in a PD District shall be as follows:
A. All uses in a PD District are subject to the approval of a preliminary development plan
and final development plan by the Zoning Commission and the Board of Township
Trustees pursuant to Subsection 20.03 through 20.10
B. Table 20.1 illustrates the permitted uses within each PD District.
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 20 – Planned Development
26 June 2014
20-2
Table 20.1 Planned Development Permitted Uses
Permitted Uses
Planned Development District
PD-R PD-RM PD-RC PD-O PD-OR PD-B PD-I PD-T PD-MU
Permitted Uses in the R-1AAA Districts P P P P P P
Permitted Uses in the B-1, B-2 and B-3 Districts P P P P P P
Permitted Uses in the I-1 and I-2 Districts P P P
Permitted Uses in the A-1 and A-2 Districts P P P P
C. Uses not specifically listed as permitted by these districts in Table 20.1 may be
permitted if the Zoning Commission and/or Board of Trustees determine the uses
to be of the same general character as the above permitted uses.
Section 20.04 Standards for Approval of Planned Developments
Approval of an application for a Planned Development shall be based on the specific
case, based on the particular evidence presented, which support conclusions that:
A. The proposed development is consistent in all respects with the purpose and
intent of this Zoning Resolution.
B. The proposed development is in conformity with the Bethel Township’s current
land use plan.
D. The proposed development advances the general welfare of the community and
the immediate vicinity and will have a beneficial effect which could not be
achieved as well under other zoning districts.
E. The proposed development can be substantially completed within the time
specified in the schedule of development submitted by the developer.
F. Appropriate arrangements with the applicant have been made which will ensure
the completion of the public improvements and reservation of common open
space as indicated on the preliminary development plan and final development
plan. If deemed necessary by the Board of Township Trustees during the
preliminary development plan process, this may require that the Board of
Township Trustees hold bond to ensure the successful and proper completion.
G. Each individual phase of the development can exist as an independent unit that
is capable of creating an environment of sustained desirability and stability, or
that adequate assurance will be provided that such objective can be obtained.
H. The site will be accessible from public thoroughfares adequate to carry the traffic,
which will be imposed upon them by the proposed development, and the streets
and driveways on the site of the proposed development or occupants of the
proposed development.
I. The proposed development will not impose an undue burden on public services
and facilities, including fire and police protection.
J. The location and arrangement of structures, parking areas, walks, lighting and
appurtenant facilities will be compatible with the surrounding land uses, and any
part of a Planned Development not used for structures, access ways, parking
and loading areas will be landscaped or otherwise improved.
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 20 – Planned Development
26 June 2014
20-3
K. The minimum common open space area(s) have been designated and are to be
duly transferred to a legally established Homeowner’s Association or will be
accepted by Bethel Township or another public or quasi-public agency in Miami
County or the State of Ohio.
L. That any part of the Planned Development not used for structures, parking and
loading areas, or streets, shall be landscaped or otherwise improved; or if
approved by the Zoning Commission, left in its natural state.
M. The preliminary development and final development plans have been
appropriately transferred to all other agencies and departments charged with the
responsibility of review.
Section 20.05 Planned Development Procedures
The following process and procedures shall be used when seeking approval of a Planned
Development which shall include a pre-application meeting, preliminary development
plan and a final development plan.
A. Initiation
The owner or owners or agents of a tract of land may request a Planned
Development in accordance with this Resolution.
In cases where there is multiple property owners involved in the Planned
Development, the application shall include a “consent to rezone” letter from all
property owners. Additionally, there shall be a single contact or agent for the
property owners who will be responsible for contact with the Township.
B. Procedure
1. Step 1 – Pre-application Conference
a. The applicant shall meet with the Bethel Township Zoning
Department to discuss the initial concepts of the Planned
Development and general compliance with applicable provisions
of this Resolution prior to the submission of the application.
b. During this time, an applicant may also request a preliminary,
informal meeting with the County Engineer, County Sanitary
Engineer, the County Planning Director, and the Township
Administrator.
c. Discussions that occur during a pre-application conference or a
preliminary meeting with Township or County staff are not
binding on the Township and do not constitute official
assurances or representations by Bethel Township or its officials
regarding any aspects of the plan(s) or application(s) discussed.
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 20 – Planned Development
26 June 2014
20-4
2. Step 2 – Application
a. Following the pre-application conference with the Bethel
Township Zoning Department, the applicant shall submit an
application for a zoning map amendment and preliminary
development plan to the Township Zoning Department.
b. The application shall include all such forms, maps, and
information, as may be prescribed for that purpose by the Zoning
Department to assure the fullest practicable presentation of the
facts for the permanent record. A list of minimum requirements
may be adopted by the Board of Township Trustees.
c. Each such application shall be signed by at least one (1) of the
owners, or the owners authorized agent of the property within the
area proposed to be reclassified, attesting to the truth and
correctness of all facts and information presented with the
applications.
d. All applications shall be submitted with the required fees as
established in the Bethel Township fee schedule.
e. The applicant shall submit the preliminary development plan
simultaneously with the application for a zoning map
amendment.
f. Three (3) print copies and one electronic copy of the preliminary
development plan submission shall be in a form as prescribed by
the Zoning Commission. A list of minimum submittal
requirements may be adopted by the Board of Township
Trustees.
g. Preliminary development plans shall include the following as a
minimum:
1. Approximate areas and arrangement of the proposed
uses and the relationship of abutting land uses and zone
districts;
2. The proposed general location of vehicular circulation;
3. The proposed treatment of existing topography, drainage
ways and tree cover;
4. The location of schools, parks, community amenities or
facilities, if any;
5. Anticipated time schedule of projected development, if
the total landholding is to be developed in stages, or if
construction is to extend beyond a 2 year time period;
6. In the case of a PD-R, PD-RM, PD-OR, PD-T, and PDMU
District, the preliminary development plan shall also
include the proposed type of unit, density level, and
proposed area setbacks of each residential area, and
the type, general location and approximate acreage of
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 20 – Planned Development
26 June 2014
20-5
the common open space. All other miscellaneous and
accessory uses shall also be included;
7. In the case of PD-O, PD-B, PD-I, PD-T, and PD-MU the
preliminary development plan shall identify the principal
and accessory types of uses that are to be included in
the proposed development, including their approximate
location, size, and intensity. The proposed type, general
location and approximate acreage of common open
space shall also be included; and
8. Any other information required by the Zoning
Commission.
3. Step 3 – Referral to the Miami County Planning Commission
a. Within 10 days after the application (Step 1) and submission of
the preliminary development plan (Step 2), the Zoning
Commission shall transmit a copy thereto to the Miami County
Planning Commission to be placed on the first available agenda.
b. The Miami County Planning Commission shall recommend the
approval, approval with modifications, or denial of the proposed
map amendment and preliminary development plan, and shall
submit such recommendation to the Zoning Commission.
c. Such recommendation shall be considered at the public hearing
held by the Zoning Commission on such proposed amendment
and preliminary development plan.
4. Step 4 – Public Hearing with the Zoning Commission
a. Upon the filing of an application and preliminary development
plan for any PD District amendment (Steps 1 and 2), the Zoning
Commission shall set a date for a public hearing regarding the
proposed amendment and preliminary development plan.
b. The public hearing shall not be less than 20 or more than 40
days from the date of the recommendation of the Miami County
Planning Commission.
c. Notification shall be given in accordance with the ORC.
5. Step 5 – Recommendation by the Zoning Commission
Within 30 days of the Zoning Commission’s public hearing (Step 4), the
Zoning Commission shall recommend the approval, approval with
modifications, or denial of the proposed amendment and preliminary
development plan, and submit such recommendation together with such
application, preliminary development plan, and recommendation of the
Miami County Planning Commission to the Board of Township Trustees.
6. Step 6 – Public Hearing with the Board of Township Trustees
a. Upon receipt of the recommendation from the Zoning
Commission (Step 5), the Board of Township Trustees shall set
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 20 – Planned Development
26 June 2014
20-6
a time for a public hearing on such proposed amendment and
preliminary development plan.
b. The date of the public hearing shall not be more than 30 days
from the date of the receipt of such recommendation from the
Zoning Commission.
c. Notification shall be given in accordance with the ORC.
7. Step 7 – Decision on Map Amendment and Preliminary Development
Plan
a. Within 20 days after its public hearing (Step 6), the Board of
Trustees shall either adopt or deny the recommendations of the
Zoning Commission, or adopt some modification thereof.
b. If the amendment is denied, the applicant may appeal the
decision to the Court of Common Pleas.
c. Approval of the preliminary development plan shall include
density, intensities, land uses and their inter-relationship, design
standards, and building location. Location of buildings (if
applicable) and uses may be altered slightly due to engineering
feasibility which is to be determined in the subsequent
preparation of the detailed Final Development Plans.
d. Following approval of the PD District map amendment and
preliminary development plan, and after the subsequent
referendum period has ended, the Official Zoning Map shall be
changed to reflect this amendment.
8. Step 8 – Submission of a Final Development Plan
a. Once the PD District and preliminary development plan been
approved by the Board of Township Trustees, the applicant shall
proceed with the preparation of the detailed final development
plan(s) in whole or in phases.
b. Three (3) copies and one electronic copy of the final
development plan submission shall be submitted in a form as
prescribed by the Zoning Commission. A list of minimum
submittal requirements may be adopted by the Board of
Township Trustees.
c. The detailed final development plan shall be consistent with the
contents of the approved preliminary development plan, and be
prepared by a professional urban planner, engineer, architect or
landscape architect.
d. If applicable, a final development plan shall include all necessary
legal documentation relating to the incorporation of a
Homeowner's Association for the purpose of maintaining the
specified common open space within the planned development.
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 20 – Planned Development
26 June 2014
20-7
9. Step 9 – Public Meeting with the Zoning Commission
a. The Bethel Township Zoning Department shall study the final
development plan and confer with other agencies having
jurisdiction as appropriate in the case, to determine general
acceptability of the proposal submitted. Staff shall submit written
recommendations to the Zoning Commission and the applicant
prior to the public meeting held by the Zoning Commission.
b. Upon receipt of the detailed final development plan and
recommendations of staff, the Zoning Commission shall, at a
public meeting of the Zoning Commission, study and review the
detailed final development plan(s) on the basis that all
requirements have been satisfied, and the conditions specified
have been met.
c. Upon submittal of the Final Development Plan the staff shall
place the application on the next regularly scheduled Zoning
Commission agenda.
d. Notification shall be given in accordance with the ORC.
10. Step 10 – Decision by the Zoning Commission
a. Within 30 days of the Zoning Commission’s public meeting (Step
9), the Zoning Commission shall decide to approve, approve with
modifications, or deny the final development plan(s).
11. Step 11 – Public Hearing with the Board of Township Trustees
a. Upon receipt of the recommendation from the Zoning Commission
(Step 10), the Board of Township Trustees shall set a time for a
public hearing on such proposed amendment and final development
plan.
b. The date of the public hearing shall not be more than 30 days from
the date of the receipt of such recommendation from the Zoning
Commission.
c. If the final development plan(s) is denied, the applicant may appeal
the decision to Miami County Court of Common Pleas.
d. Notification shall be given in accordance with the ORC.
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 20 – Planned Development
26 June 2014
20-8
Section 20.06 Time Limits
A. The final development plan(s) shall be submitted within one (1) year of approval
of the preliminary development plan or the approval of the preliminary
development plan will expire and the plan will be deemed null and void.
B. Upon expiration of the preliminary development plan, the property shall still be
zoned as a planned development with a voided preliminary development plan.
The property owner or agent may submit an application and new final
development plan for consideration pursuant to this Article or an application for a
zoning map amendment.
C. Upon the expiration of the preliminary development plan, the Board of Township
Trustees or the Zoning Commission may initiate a zoning map amendment.
D. The Zoning Commission may authorize and extension of these time limits if good
cause is shown for the delay of the final development plan submission.
E. For phased developments, the Zoning Commission and Board of Township
Trustees may approve a phased final development plan schedule as part of the
preliminary development plan approval. In such case, the approved time frames
shall establish when the approved preliminary plan shall expire.
Section 20.07 Effect of a Final Development Plan
A. The approved final development plan shall be kept on record in the Bethel
Township Zoning Department together with all resolutions, applications, plats,
plans, and other information regarding the development.
B. The Resolutions prepared by the Zoning Commission and Board of Township
Trustees serve as the official record for the permitted uses and activities which
are approved for the planned development landholding.
C. The use of the planned development landholding or the location, erection,
construction, reconstruction, enlargement, or change of any building or structure
in a manner which is not consistent with the final development plan shall be
considered a violation of this Resolution and subject to the procedures and
penalties specified in this Article.
Section 20.08 Required Conditions for the Issuance of a Zoning Certificate
No Zoning Certificate shall be issued for any property in a PD District and no
construction, except preliminary excavation, shall begin until a valid final development
plan is in effect for that phase or property. The Final Development Plan becomes valid
upon approval of a Resolution by the Bethel Township Trustees.
Section 20.09 Modifications to Planned Developments
An approved Preliminary Development Plan or Final Development Plan may be amended
by following the procedures described in this Section.
A. Minor Adjustments. The Zoning Administrator may authorize minor adjustments
in the Final Development Plan which become necessary because of field
conditions, detailed engineering data, topography or critical design criteria
pertaining to drives, curb cuts, retaining walls, swimming pools, tennis courts,
fences, walls, building locations, and building configurations, parking area
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 20 – Planned Development
26 June 2014
20-9
locations or other similar project particulars. These minor adjustments may be
permitted, provided that they do not increase density, decrease the number of
parking spaces or allow buildings closer to Lot lines, and appear necessary in
light of technical or engineering considerations.
B. Major Adjustments. Major adjustments to any Preliminary and/or Final
Development Plan that substantially alter the concept or intent of the approved
Preliminary and/or Final Development Plan, may be approved only by the Zoning
Commission and the Board of Township Trustees upon a petition to amend the
Preliminary Development Plan and/or Final Development Plan, pursuant to the
procedures for Preliminary Development Plan Approval or Final Development
Plan Approval, as the case may be, set forth in this Article.
Section 20.10 Design Standards for Planned Developments
The following design standards shall apply as minimums for all Planned Developments:
A. The minimum acreage for Planned Districts is as follows:
Table 20.2 – Minimum Acreage for Planned Districts
PD District Minimum Acreage
PD-R 10 Acres
PD-RM 10 Acres
PD-RC 10 Acres
PD-O 2 Acres
PD-OR 5 Acres
PD-B 2 Acres
PD-I 2 Acres
PD-MU 10 Acres
PD-T 2 Acres
B. Design standards for area, lot coverage, density, yard requirements, parking,
landscaping, and screening for a proposed PD District shall be established in the
PD Preliminary development plan by the Zoning Commission and Board of
Township Trustees.
C. Exceptions and variations from the standards provided by the based zoning
districts of this Resolution (e.g., R-1AAA, B-1, etc.) may, and should be granted
by the Zoning Commission and Board of Township Trustees when it is
determined that due to certain design elements, natural features, and public
amenities, the exceptions are warranted.
D. Standards for public infrastructure improvements shall be governed by the
applicable regulations of the agency with jurisdiction that is charged with the
responsibility for review and approval.
E. There shall be reserved, within the tract(s) to be developed, a minimum
percentage of land area of the entire tract(s) for use as common open space.
The Zoning Commission and Board of Trustees may require additional open
space as warranted by the individual development plan. This minimum
percentage of land shall be as follows:
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 20 – Planned Development
26 June 2014
20-1 0
Table 20.3 – Planned Development Open Space Requirements
PD District Minimum Open Space Requirement
PD-R 30%
PD-RM 40%
PD-RC 50%
PD-OR 30%
PD-O 30%
PD-B 20%
PD-I 20%
PD-T 20%
PD-MU 30%
1. Required common open space shall not consist of isolated or fragmented
pieces of land which will serve no collective purpose or which will present
maintenance difficulties if maintenance is required.
2. Required common open space may include: woodlands, stream
corridors, pedestrian walkways other than sidewalks, parkland,
unimproved open areas, bridle paths, drainage ways and detention
basins, swimming pools, clubhouses, tennis courts, golf courses, and
other lands of essentially open or undisturbed or improved character,
exclusive of off-street parking areas and street right-of-ways.
3. Ownership of common open space in a PD-R, PD-RM, PD-RC, and PDOR
shall be transferred by the developer to a legally established
homeowners association, private ownership, or if accepted, to the Board
of Township Trustees, or other public or quasi-public agency.
4. Common open space that includes a clubhouse, golf course or other
recreational facilities may remain in private ownership, subject to size
and special conditions applied by the Zoning Commission and Board of
Township Trustees.
5. Common open space in a PD-O, PD-B, PD-I, PD-T, or PD-MU may also
be dedicated to the Township or other public or quasi-public agency
pursuant to the above requirements or remain in private ownership,
provided public easement, as determined necessary by the Zoning
Commission and Board of Trustees, is granted and officially recorded on
the plat.
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 30 – Supplemental Regulations –
September 2018
ARTICLE 30
SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
Section 30.01 General Regulations
Except as herein provided no building or structure shall be erected, converted,
enlarged, reconstructed or moved except or unless:
A. For a purpose permitted in the district in which the building or land is located.
B. In conformance with the height or bulk limits established herein for the district in
which the building or use is located.
C. In conformance with the yard and lot regulations of the district in which the building or
use is located.
D. In conformance with the off-street parking and off-street loading space regulations of
the district in which the building or use is located.
E. Such building or structure is located on a lot as herein defined and, in no case, shall
there be more than one main building on a lot except as specifically provided
hereinafter.
F. In conformance with the regulations of the Miami County Planning Commission and
the Township Zoning Department, or their designated party, in their administration of the
flood plain regulations issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Section 30.02 Yards Required for Corner and Through Lots
A. In any district, the side yard of a corner lot that abuts the side street shall have the
same setback requirements as the front yards.
B. A rear yard shall be provided parallel to and opposite from the front yard.
C. On through lots the front yard requirements shall apply to all street frontages.
Section 30.03 Corner Lot Accessory Buildings
In no case shall a corner lot accessory building project beyond the building to which it is
accessory, be closer than ten (10) feet to a common lot line nor be located closer than
five (5) feet to the rear lot line of the lot on which it is to be located.
Section 30.04 Lots Adjoining Alleys
In calculating the area of a lot that adjoins an alley, for the purpose of applying lot area
requirements of this Resolution, one-half (1/2) the width of such alley abutting the lot
shall be considered as part of such lot.
Section 30.05 Accessory Buildings and Structures
An accessory building or structure which is not part of the main building shall not occupy
more than thirty (30) percent of the required rear or side yard.
A. Accessory buildings, structures and uses include, but are not limited to:
1. A private detached garage.
2. A private stable.
3. The keeping of animals as pets.
4. Temporary buildings or trailers for uses incidental to construction work. Such
temporary buildings or trailers shall be removed upon the completion or abandonment
of the construction work.
5. A swimming pool, bathhouse, tennis court, and/or other recreational facilities
designed for the use of the occupants of the dwelling and their guests. Such facilities
shall comply with the following conditions and requirements:
a. The facility shall not be located in any front yard and shall be no closer than
ten (10) feet from the required side yard lot line or rear yard lot line.
b. The facilities shall be located on the same zoning lot as the principal building,
structure or use that it is serving.
c. In addition, to the above, the following shall also apply to swimming pools. For
the purpose of these regulations, “swimming pool” shall include all permanent
above and in ground structures and temporary or portable pools with a depth
twenty-four (24) inches or greater.
1. A zoning application shall be completed that includes a site plan
identifying the location of the pool and all surrounding structures and lot
lines. The distances of the swimming pool from such structures and lot
lines shall be clearly identified.
2. The swimming pool, or the entire property on which it is located, shall
be walled or fenced to prevent uncontrolled access from the street or from
adjacent properties. The fence or wall shall not be less than four (4) feet in
height and maintained in good condition with a self-locking gate. An
automatic pool cover will still require a fence.
3. The swimming pool shall be located at least six (6) feet from any
structure, underground septic system access and at least ten (10) feet
from overhead electric lines.
4. All applicable building permits, electrical permits and health permits
shall be obtained.
5. The pool is intended and is to be used solely for the enjoyment of the
occupants of the principal use of the property on which it is located.
B. In any residential zone, no garage or other accessory building shall be erected within
the front yard.
C. In any zone, no truck trailer bodies, Portable On Demand Storage Units (PODS),
cargo containers, old tanks, railroad cars, plastic barrels, or similar type container shall
be considered as an accessory structure or storage building.
D. No garage or accessory building shall be constructed in the required side yard
setback.
E. All accessory buildings 200 square feet or less shall not require a zoning certificate,
but shall be included when figuring the total square footage requirements for a lot.
F. Each accessory building shall be located no closer than ten (10) feet from another
such accessory buildings.
G. Maximum Gross Floor Area, Setback and Number Permitted for Accessory Buildings
ACREAGE # OF
ACCESSORY
BUILDINGS
PERMITTED
MAX. SQ. FT.
FOR
ACCESSORY ON
LOT
SETBACK
.183-.275 2 672 SQ. FT. Side 10’ /Rear 5’
.276-.716 2 900 SQ. FT. Side 10’ /Rear 5’
.717-1.5 2 1400 SQ. FT. Side 10’ /Rear 5’
1.5-3.0 2 2000 SQ. FT. Side 10’ /Rear 5’
3.001-4.99 2 2600 SQ. FT. Side 10’ /Rear 5’
5.0-10 2 3200 SQ. FT. Side 10’ /Rear 5’
10+ Unlimited Unlimited Side 10’ /Rear 5’
Section 30.06 Fences, Walls and Hedges
Fences and walls are permitted in all Districts, subject to the following conditions:
A. Exemptions
Agricultural fences shall be exempt from the following regulations but shall comply with
the standards and regulations in the Ohio Revised Code for agricultural fencing.
B. Location
1. No fence, wall, or hedge shall be closer to any public street than the right-of-way.
2. The property owner shall assume responsibility for determining the legal, proper
placement of the fence, wall or hedge upon his/her property.
C. Height
1. Side and rear yard fences, walls, and hedges shall not exceed six (6) feet in height
for residential uses and shall not exceed four (4) feet in height in the front yard.
2. Side and rear yard fences, walls, and hedges shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height
for non-residential uses and shall not exceed six (6) feet in height in the front yard.
D. Materials
1. Fences shall not contain an electric charge.
2. Barbed wire, razor wire, or any other type of anti-climbing wire shall only be used in
the non-residential areas and then only when approved by the Zoning Commission as
part of an approved plan or in other areas by the Board of Zoning Appeals as a
Conditional Use.
3. Materials used for fences shall be of traditional fencing materials (wrought iron, chain
link, pressure treated lumber, cedar, redwood, PVC, etc.) and shall be constructed of
weather resistant materials or treated so that they are weather resistant.
4. The finished or most decorative side of the fence shall face away from the property
erecting the fence.
5. All fences located within the front yard shall not be of opaque design must allow for
visibility of the front yard area.
E. Maintenance
The fence, wall or hedge and the property surrounding both sides of the fence, wall or
hedge shall be properly maintained at all times.
F. Certificate Not Required
Fences and walls shall not require a Zoning Certificate.
G. Sight distance requirements
No fence, wall, or hedge planting shall interfere with visibility from a driveway. The
Zoning Administrator/Enforcing Officer is hereby empowered to cause all such
obstructions to be moved in the interest of the public safety.
Section 30.07 Removal of Soil, Sand or Other Materials
The use of land for the removal of topsoil, sand or other material, other than materials
from basement excavations, is not permitted in any zone unless otherwise provided.
When permitted as a conditional use, a bond or letter of credit will be required to assure
that such removal will not cause stagnant water to collect or leave the surface of the
land in an unstable condition, unfit for the growing of turf, or for other land uses
permitted in the district in which such removal occurs.
Section 30.08 Essential Services
Essential services shall be allowed in any district insofar as permitted, authorized, or
regulated by law or other Resolutions. Buildings required by a public utility in
conjunction with an essential service may be permitted in any district when approved by
the Board of Zoning Appeals. In granting such permission, the Board of Zoning Appeals
shall consider the location, size, use, and effect such building will have upon adjacent
land and buildings.
Section 30.09 External Effects
No land, building, or structure in any district shall be used or occupied in any manner so
as to be unsightly or create any dangerous, injurious, noxious, or otherwise
objectionable vibration; smoke, dust, fumes, odor, or other forms of air pollution; heat,
cold, or dampness; electrical or electronic disturbances; nuclear radiation; or any other
condition detrimental to persons or property not located on the premises on which such
building, structure or use is located. Such uses, when lawfully permitted under the
provisions of this Resolution, shall be operated in a manner so as to ensure that the
property rights of all other parcels of land will not be adversely affected to the extent of
reducing the enjoyment of property rights thereon.
A. Air pollution. Air pollution shall be subject to the requirements and regulations
established by the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency and the Regional Air Pollution
Control Agency and of the Miami County, Ohio Combined General Health District.
B. Erosion. No erosion, other than by natural causes, shall be permitted which will carry
objectionable substances onto neighboring properties.
C. Fire and explosion hazards. Adequate safety devices shall be provided where there
are activities involving storage of flammable or explosive materials in facilities that
require fire inspections. Adequate safety devices shall be provided against the hazards
of fire and explosion and adequate firefighting and fire suppression equipment and
devices, standard in the industry shall be provided.
D. Fissionable, radioactivity or electrical disturbance: No activities shall be permitted
which utilize fissionable or radioactive materials if their use results at any time in the
release or emission of any fissionable or radioactive material into the atmosphere, the
ground, or sewerage systems. Activities shall not be permitted which emit electrical
disturbance affecting the operation at any point of any equipment other than that of the
creator of such disturbances.
E. Glare and heat: Any operation producing intense light or heat, such as high
temperature processes like combustion or welding, shall be performed within an
enclosed building and shall not be visible beyond any lot line bounding the premises.
Welding that is required for exterior construction of a structure shall be exempt from
these regulations.
Section 30.10 Outdoor Lighting
In order to reduce light pollution, all areas containing outdoor lighting, including but not
limited to floodlighting, security lighting, canopy or parking lot lighting shall be as
follows:
A. Lights shall be fully shielded so as to prevent the visibility of the light bulb from
adjacent properties.
B. Compliance shall be achieved by utilizing fixture shielding, directional control
designed into fixtures, fixture location, fixture height, fixture aim or a combination of
these or other factors to mitigate light glare and trespass.
C. Light fixtures mounted on or under canopies or bays shall be of full cut off design,
unless indirect lighting is used whereby light is directed upward and then reflected down
from the ceiling of the structure.
D. Lights shall not be mounted on the top or sides of a canopy or bay.
E. Any lawful lighting fixtures located within the Township at the effective date of this
Resolution which does not conform to the provisions of this Section may continue,
provided the lighting remains in conformance with the provisions of this Section.
F. Nothing in this Section shall relieve the owner or beneficial user of legal
nonconforming lighting, or the owner of the property on which the legal nonconforming
lighting is located, from the provisions of this Section regarding safety, maintenance,
and repair. Normal maintenance, including replacing light bulbs, cleaning, or routine
repair of legal nonconforming light fixtures, shall not be deemed to be a condition which
triggers a loss of lawful status described below, unless such maintenance increases the
nonconforming aspects of the lighting.
G. Legal nonconforming status shall terminate under the following conditions:
1. If a light fixture is no longer used for a period of six (6) months it shall be
deemed abandoned and shall not thereafter be reestablished; or
2. If a lighting fixture is structurally altered such that its nonconforming aspects
increase; or
3. If a lighting fixture is relocated, replaced, or moved in any way; or the lighting
fixture is damaged and the cost of repair exceeds fifty (50) percent of its
replacement value.
Upon the event of any of the aforementioned, the lighting fixture(s) shall be
immediately brought into compliance with this Section, or the lighting fixture(s)
shall be removed.
H. Lighting found by the Township to create public hazard can be ordered removed or
altered at any time.
Section 30.11 Outdoor Storage and Waste Disposal
Every use shall be operated in accordance with the following provisions:
A. No highly flammable or explosive liquids, solids or gases shall be stored in bulk
except in an “I-1” Light or “I-2” Heavy Industrial District. Tanks or drums of fuel directly
connected with heating devices or appliances located on the same lot are excluded
from this provision provided that such devices, drums or tanks are in safe, working order
and are approved by the applicable Department or Agency charged with inspection and
approval.
B. No materials or wastes shall be deposited, stored, or disposed upon a lot in such
form or manner as to allow such materials or wastes to be transferred off the lot by
wind, flood, or natural causes or forces.
C. All materials or wastes which might cause fumes or dust, or which constitute a fire or
health hazard, or which may be edible or attractive to rodents or insects shall not be
stored outdoors except in closed containers constructed of an impervious material.
Section 30.12 Projections Into Required Yards
Projections into required yards shall comply with the following requirements unless
approval has been granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals:
A. Chimneys, flues, sills, pilasters, cornices, eaves, gutters, roof overhangs, and other
similar features may project into a required side yard a maximum of twenty-four (24)
inches.
B. Uncovered handicap ramps may project into the required front yard a maximum of
twenty (20) feet. No handicap ramp may be constructed closer than 5 feet from any
street Right of Way line.
C. No building or structure may be constructed, placed or project into a required front
yard.
D. No building or structure may project into a required side yard except that, where a
single lot under one ownership legally existed in a residential district at the time of
passage of this Resolution, and such lot is of insufficient width to meet the side yard
requirements of this Resolution, the Board of Appeals may grant a minimum variance to
permit the construction of a one-family residence.
E. An open, unenclosed porch may project into a required front yard for a distance not
exceeding six (6) feet.
Section 30.13 Exceptions to Height Limitations
Chimneys, domes, spires, necessary mechanical appurtenant, and radio and television
towers may exceed district height limitations, provided:
A. Public, semi-public, or public service buildings, hospitals, institutions, or schools,
where permitted, may be erected to a height not exceeding ninety (90) feet when the
required side and rear yards are each increased by one (1) foot for each one (1) foot of
additional building height above the height regulations for the district in which the
building is located.
B. Commercial radio and television towers shall be located centrally on a continuous
parcel having a dimension at least equal to the height of the tower measured from the
center of the base of the tower to all points on each property.
C. Unless exempted by Federal regulations, radio towers for licensed amateur radio
stations which exceed the allowable height of structures in the residentially zoned
districts shall be limited in height from their base to the distance from the base to the
nearest property line.
Section 30.14 Temporary Uses
In any district, subject to the conditions stated below, the Zoning
Administrator/Enforcing Officer may issue a permit for the following temporary uses. A
fee as established by Resolution by the Township Trustees shall be paid for the
specified time so stated.
A. Temporary office buildings, or yard for construction material or equipment, provided
such use is adjacent to the construction site. Each permit shall be valid for one (1) year
and may be renewed by the Zoning Commission if conditions warrant such renewal.
B. A temporary office incidental and necessary to real estate sales and rentals. Each
permit shall be valid for a period of two (2) years and may be renewed by the Zoning
Commission for two (2) additional years if conditions warrant such renewal. In no
instance shall a temporary office be located in a structure used for human habitation.
C. Building and yard locations shall be subject to such conditions and safeguards, as
the Zoning Administrator/Enforcing Officer may deem necessary to preserve the
character of the surrounding area.
D. Tents or gathering areas under tents that are subject to regulation by the Ohio Basic
Building Code.
E. Temporary signs in accordance with Article 36, Sign Regulations.
F. All temporary venders are subject to temporary use permits issued by the Zoning
Administrator/Enforcing Officer. No request hereunder will be accepted for consideration
within the F-1, Flood Plain District, unless the applicant has furnished a valid written
favorable recommendation thereto by the Miami Conservancy District and complies with
the Flood Damage Prevention Regulations of Miami County, Ohio.
Section 30.15 Major Street Setbacks
Any building or structure shall hereafter be constructed in accordance with the required
front yard setback in the district in which it is to be located, measured from the required
right-of-way line of a proposed or existing arterial or collector street designated as such
on the official Thoroughfare Plan.
Section 30.16 Mobile Homes and Recreation Vehicles
This Section shall apply to all existing mobile homes that were located prior to the
adoption of this Zoning Resolution.
A. No person shall occupy a recreational vehicle as a residence in any district as a
temporary or permanent residence.
B. No person shall occupy a mobile home as a residence outside an approved and
licensed mobile home park or trailer court except as provided in the A-2 General
Agricultural District.
C. No mobile or manufactured home may be stored or parked in any district other than:
1. An approved and licensed mobile home park or trailer court, or
2. B-1 General Business, I-1 Light Industrial and I-2 Heavy Industrial.
D. No recreational vehicle or boat may be stored in any required front yard or in front of
the front building line of the building, whichever is farthest from the right of way, of any
residential district.
E. No recreational vehicle or boat may be parked in any required front yard or in front of
the front building line of the building, whichever is farthest from the right of way, of any
residential district for a period of more than 72 consecutive hours.
F. No recreational vehicle or boat shall have a permanent connection to electric, water,
gas or sewer facilities in any residential district.
Section 30.17 Modular and Manufactured Homes
Modular or manufactured homes will be permitted if such dwelling meets the minimum
square footage requirements of the district where the home is to be located and if
placed on a permanent foundation and made part of the real estate.
Section 30.18 Driveway Entrance Structures
Entrance structures for driveways shall be permitted in any district. Entrance structures
must have the approval of the Bethel Township Planning and Zoning Department and
must not restrict visibility of entrance to the roadway. Minimum open space between
structures shall be twelve (12) feet.
Section 30.19 Lot Required
Every building shall be located on a lot. There shall be not more than one (1) principal
building on one lot containing the principal use for that lot, except as provided below:
A. There may be more than one (1) principal building on a lot in the Planned Unit
Development District when approved as part of that specific process.
B. There may be more than one (1) principal use building in a Business or Industrial
District, provided that the required yard setbacks are provided around the group of
buildings with approval from the Zoning Commission and if all applicable separation
requirements are met with respect to fire and safety.
C. There may be more than one (1) principal building on a lot for multi-family, hotel, or
motel purposes if the required yard setbacks are maintained around the group of
buildings and the buildings are separated by a horizontal distance that is at least equal
to the height of the highest building with approval from the Zoning Commission and if all
applicable separation requirements are met with respect to fire and safety.
Section 30.20 Agricultural Uses Permitted
Nothing contained in this Resolution shall prohibit the use of any land for agricultural
purposes or the construction or use of buildings or structures incidental to the use for
agricultural purposes of the land on which such buildings and structures are located.
Furthermore, no Zoning Certificate shall be required for any such agricultural use,
building or structure as exempted by the Ohio Revised Code, Section 519.
Section 30.21 Existing Lots of Record
Nothing contained in this Resolution shall require any change in the plans, construction,
size or designated use of a building for which a valid permit has been issued or lawful
approval given before the effective date of this Resolution provided, however,
construction under such permit or approval shall have been started within six (6) months
and the ground story framework including structural parts of the second floor, shall have
been completed within one (1) year and the entire building completed within two (2)
years after the effective date of this Resolution.
Section 30.22 Public Utilities
Nothing contained in this Resolution shall prevent the location, erection, construction,
reconstruction, change, alteration, maintenance, removal, use or enlargement of any
building or structure of any public utility or railroad, whether publicly or privately owned,
or the use of land by any public utility or railroad for the operation of its business.
Section 30.23 Cemeteries
Any cemetery established after the effective date of this Resolution must contain no less
than twenty (20) acres. Grounds must be landscaped so as to be an asset to the District
in which it is located and shall be properly maintained as per the Ohio Revised Code.
Section 30.24 Drive-In and Drive Through Service
Business establishments, which by their nature create lines of customers waiting to be
served in motor vehicles, shall provide off-street waiting areas at least twenty (20) feet
in length for each vehicle and at least ten (10) feet in lane width with a minimum of the
following:
A. Drive through or drive-in facilities shall provide sufficient stacking length for at least
five (5) vehicles in each drive through or drive-in lane.
B. Any establishment providing for gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel sales shall
provide no less than two (2) waiting areas for each accessible side of a motor vehicle
fuel pump island. Pumps shall not be located closer than fifteen (15) feet to any right-ofway
line or within fifteen (15) feet of a clear visibility area at a corner lot as defined in
this Resolution.
C. Such waiting areas shall not obstruct off-street parking spaces, driveways or
circulation areas.
D. Waiting spaces shall be situated in such a manner that vehicles using the drive
through or drive-in facilities are traveling in a continuous forward motion.
E. A bypass lane shall be required to permit unimpeded circulation around a drive
through lane. A bypass lane shall not include parking spaces.
Section 30.25 Required Trash Areas
All business, industrial and multi-family residential uses that provide trash and/or
garbage collection areas shall:
A. Have such areas enclosed on at least three (3) sides by a solid wall or fence
adequate in height to screen the containers if such area is not within an enclosed
building or structure. Such enclosure shall be of materials or be painted in such a
manner as to deemphasize the structure.
B. Adequate vehicular access to and from such area or areas for the collection of trash
and/or garbage shall be required.
C. A six (6) inch raised curb shall be located one (1) foot from the interior walls of the
enclosure to prevent the dumpster or refuse container from damaging the walls of the
enclosure.
D. When visible from the public right-of-way, the enclosure shall be provided with a gate
to fully screen the containers.
Section 30.26 Junk Storage
The accumulation and/or storage of junk vehicles, disabled or inoperative machinery
and equipment, dismantled parts of vehicles, machinery or equipment, discarded
appliances and furnishings, other junk and debris, shall be prohibited except when
stored within a completely enclosed structure.
Section 30.27 Auxiliary Uses Permitted in Residential Districts
Many work-related activities, particularly those of the self-employed, can be compatible
with and not detract from the primary use of a Residential District. This Section
establishes regulations that permit such activities and shall govern them in a manner
that the residential characteristics of the district shall be retained.
A. Home Occupations
1. The home occupation use shall be incidental and secondary to the residential
use of the premises and shall not alter the appearance of the residence or cause
the property to differ from its residential character in any manner. This shall
include the addition of a separate entrance.
2. The individual primarily responsible for the home occupation and all
employees must be family members residing on the premises.
3. There shall be no outward indication or display of occupational activity other
than a non-illuminated name plate of not more than one (1) square foot.
4. No additional points of access to any street, road, or highway shall be
constructed specifically to accommodate a home occupation.
5. No home occupation shall create excessive traffic volume as based on what is
normally found in a residential neighborhood.
6. Direct retail or wholesale sales and/or stocking of products, parts, supplies,
materials or any kind of merchandise are prohibited except for those products
produced or parts, supplies and materials used in production or in a service of a
home occupation.
7. Vehicles, other than passenger cars, used in the operation of home
occupations or used in the operation of and as transportation to and from
nonresidential occupations, shall be limited to pickup trucks and vans of one (1)
ton capacity or less except for those that are stored in a private garage.
8. Any equipment or process used in a home occupation that creates excessive
noise, vibration, glare, or any environmental emissions or effluents detrimental to
the health, safety, and general welfare of the District or causes any audible or
visual interference with radio or television reception or electric line voltage
fluctuations off of the subject property is prohibited.
9. Hours that a home occupation may be open to the public shall be limited to
those between 8:00 A.M. and 8:00 P.M.
10. A home occupation shall comply with all Federal, State, County, and
Township regulations that are pertinent to its operation in addition to those
contained in this Section.
11. The home occupation shall be conducted wholly within habitable rooms of the
dwelling and shall not exceed two hundred (200) square feet of the total area of
all habitable rooms of the dwelling.
12. Exterior storage, including storage in accessory buildings, of equipment,
parts supplies, materials, products, merchandise, inventory and generated waste
is prohibited.
13. Display of goods or products shall not be visible from outside of the dwelling.
B. Hobby
So long as any equipment or process used in a hobby does not create excessive noise,
vibration, glare, or any environmental emissions or effluents detrimental to the health,
safety and general welfare of the District or cause any audible or visual interference with
radio or television reception or electric line voltage fluctuations off the premises and the
hobby does not change the residential characteristics of the premises, the hobby may
be practiced without restrictions except for pertinent regulations listed elsewhere in this
Resolution.
C. Yard Sales, Equipment and Vehicle Sales
Yard sales, equipment and vehicle sales shall be regulated as follows:
1. All merchandise offered for sale must be the personal property of the resident
holding the sale and must have been purchased by or purchased for and used by
the resident.
2. Multiple family sales of two or more District residents may be held on the
property of one of the participants.
3. The sale of consignment merchandise or merchandise that has been
expressly purchased for resale is prohibited.
4. A resident may hold no more than two (2) yard sales per year with each sale
lasting over a time period of not more than seventy-two (72) consecutive hours.
5. Merchandise may be displayed only when the sale is in active progress and
remaining unsold merchandise must be removed immediately at the conclusion
of the sale and stored indoors except for those items normally stored outdoors
(vehicles, boats, etc.).
6. Directional and/or advertising signs must be in compliance with other
Resolution regulations governing signs and must be removed immediately after
the conclusion of a sale (See Section 36.08, Domestic Advertising Signs).
7. The sales of equipment, motor or recreational vehicles on private property
shall be limited to the sale of five (5) vehicles a year, per adult living on premises,
without an Ohio automobile dealer’s license. No more than one (1) vehicle shall
be for sale at one time.
8. Motor or recreational vehicles shall not be parked in the public right-of-way
when being sold.
Section 30.28 Storage of Commercial Vehicles on Residential Property
Any vehicle stored on residential property for a period of more than seven
consecutive days and having lettering indicating an occupational use of any kind, must
be parked within an enclosed building, garage, or parked behind the front building line
of the residence.
Section 30.29 Landfills, Dumps, Mining and Extraction of Minerals or Raw
Materials
The Board of Zoning Appeals may attach such conditions and safeguards as it deems
necessary to protect neighboring properties or Districts from fire hazards or smoke,
noise, odor, dust or any other detrimental or obnoxious effects incidental to such
operation of a landfill, dump, mine or mineral extraction operation. In addition, the Board
of Zoning Appeals shall require a written agreement, from the owners of such operation
to the effect that, upon termination of such operation, the land involved shall be
reclaimed to as near its original state as practical in the opinion of the Board of Zoning
Appeals.
Section 30.30 Visibility Across Corner Lots
In any District on any corner lot, no opaque fence, structure or planting higher than four
(4) feet, shall be erected or maintained within a triangle twenty (20) feet from the
intersection of the right-of-way lines which may interfere with traffic visibility across the
corner.
Section 30.31 Outdoor Bulk Storage and Display in Commercial and Industrial
The following regulations shall apply to outdoor bulk storage or displays:
A. The outdoor storage or display of bulk goods including seasonal items such as
firewood and mulch shall be controlled by the following regulations:
1. The outdoor storage or display of merchandise, inventory or materials shall not
interfere with parking or the safe and unobstructed use of vehicular or pedestrian
access ways or walkways or block any natural drainage.
2. The outdoor storage of merchandise, inventory or materials shall not be
located in any required yard area within the lot nor shall it be visible from the
public right-of-way.
3. The outdoor storage or display of merchandise, inventory or materials shall not
include the use of banners, pennants or strings of pennants.
4. Outdoor storage areas shall be required to be fully screened with an opaque
fence or wall not to exceed eight (8) feet in height. Such fence shall be
constructed out of a material that is similar in nature to the principal structure on
the lot or painted in similar color of the principal structure on the lot.
5. All permitted outdoor storage or display shall be maintained in a neat and
orderly fashion.
6. Only a sample of materials, to properly identify the materials for sale on the
premises, shall be permitted as part of the outdoor display.
7. Outdoor storage or display locations shall be approved by the Zoning
Administrator upon the application of the record owner of the property.
B. Applications for outdoor storage or display areas shall be on a form provided by the
Zoning Administrator and shall be submitted with a site plan depicting the location of the
said storage or display areas with supporting documentation indicating the impact of the
storage or display area on the property as a whole. The Zoning Administrator may
request the specific review and approval of the Zoning Commission of any application.
The review and approval of the Zoning Commission may also be requested by any
applicant whose application has been rejected or modified by the Zoning Administrator,
which request must be made in writing and must be made within ten (10) days of such
rejection or modification.
Section 30.32 Sexually Oriented Businesses
A Sexually Oriented Business is a conditional use within the “I-1” Light Industrial District.
A conditional use for such facilities shall not be approved unless the following minimum
conditions are complied with:
A. Minimum location requirements
No Sexually Oriented Business shall be established within 1,000 feet of:
1. Any residentially zoned property.
2. Any public, private, governmental or commercial library, school, teaching
facility, park, recreational facility, religious place of worship, child day care facility,
day care facility, playground or swimming pool.
3. Any PUD utilized in whole or in part for residential purposes.
B. Prohibited public display
No advertisements, displays or other promotional materials shall be shown or exhibited
so as to be visible to the public from pedestrian sidewalks or walkways, or from other
public or semi-public areas.
C. Public view to be prevented
All building openings, entries, windows, etc. for adult entertainment establishments shall
be located, covered, or serviced in such a manner as to prevent a view into the interior
from any public or semi-public areas, sidewalk or street. The building shall be oriented
so as to minimize any possibility of viewing the interior from any public or semi-public
areas.
D. External audio and visual impact
No screens, loudspeakers or sound equipment shall be used for motion picture theaters
(enclosed or drive-in) that can be seen or discerned by the public from public or semipublic
areas.
In granting any such conditional use, the Board of Zoning Appeals may prescribe
additional conditions it deems necessary in the public interest. However, no conditional
use shall be approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals unless it finds that the use for
which such approval is sought is not likely to be dangerous or detrimental to nearby
properties, that the use will not be contrary to any program of conservation or
improvement, either residential or nonresidential, or be contrary to the public health,
safety, morals and general welfare of the Township.
Section 30.33 Wireless Telecommunication Facilities, Towers and Antennas
Prior to approving a permit for the location, construction, reconstruction, modification,
enlargement or repairs of a telecommunication tower, antennas and service building
when located in a residential district, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall find that the
applicant has satisfied all of the following regulations listed below and is in full
conformance of Section 519.211 of the Ohio Revised Code:
A. A site plan, (scale of one (1) inch equal twenty (20) feet) shall be submitted with the
permit application and shall indicate all uses adjacent to the proposed facility as well as
the proposed layout of the property.
B. The applicant shall prove that the proposed antenna cannot be collocated on any
other telecommunication tower or located on a building or other structure in the area to
be served.
C. Proof shall be provided to the Board of Zoning Appeals by the applicant that the
proposal has been approved by all Federal and State agencies, with jurisdiction, such
as but not limited to ODOT Office of Aviation, FAA and FCC.
D. All new towers shall be of the monopole design and constructed to withstand an
eighty (80) mile per hour wind.
E. Maximum tower height including antenna shall be two hundred (200) feet.
F. A wireless telecommunication facility is permitted as a primary use on a lot subject to
the following:
1. Minimum lot area – forty thousand (40,000) square feet.
2. Front building line – minimum of fifty (50) feet from the right-of-way line.
3. Side and rear building lines – minimum of forty (40) feet from side and rear lot
lines.
G. The equipment shelter shall be a single floor structure and its size not to exceed
three hundred (300) square feet. If more than one shelter is needed, due to perhaps
collocation, total area of equipment shelters cannot exceed six hundred (600) square
feet.
H. An eight (8) foot tall security fence shall completely surround the tower and
equipment shelter. A landscape buffer screen of evergreens shall be planted around the
outside perimeter of the security fence. Remaining open areas shall be planted with
grass. All plantings are to be maintained in good condition by the property owner.
I. The tower shall be painted a non-contrasting gray or earth tones minimizing its
visibility, unless otherwise required by the FCC or FAA.
J. No advertising is permitted anywhere on the facility. Identification and no trespassing
signage shall be permissible and shall include an emergency telephone number.
K. Where an antenna is attached to an existing structure, its height shall not exceed that
of the structure by more than twenty (20) feet or twenty (20) percent of the structure
height, whichever is greater. If the equipment shelter is not located on or attached to the
structure, the shelter shall comply with the regulations listed above in paragraphs F and
G. The shelter shall not in any way interfere with parking or vehicular circulation of the
principal use on the site.
L. Towers shall not be lighted except as required by the FAA.
M. Security lighting may be installed on the equipment shelter but shall not exceed the
height of the building if it has a flat roof or the eves of a peaked roof.
N. All weather service access shall be installed to accommodate fire and emergency
equipment.
O. Upon written approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals, a conditional permit shall be
issued by the Zoning Administrator. To show intent to continue operation, the permit
shall be renewed annually by application to the Zoning Administrator by the applicant. If
finding that the permit holder is in compliance with the permit conditions, the Zoning
Administrator shall issue a renewal. If conditions have not been met by the applicant,
action will be taken to revoke the original permit (See paragraph R of this Section).
Zoning Certificate and renewal permit fees shall be set by the Board of Township
Trustees.
P. Within thirty (30) days of ceasing operation of a telecommunication facility, the permit
holder shall give notice of such ceasing of operation to the Zoning Administrator.
Facilities shall be removed within twelve (12) months of ceasing operation. Sale or
renting of facilities to another telecommunication system may be permissible subject to
the procedure set forth above in paragraph O.
Q. A Zoning Certificate issued under this Section is revocable and shall be revoked after
notice and hearing by the Board of Zoning Appeals, if any condition of the permit has
been violated and not fully remedied.
Section 30.34 Bed and Breakfast Establishment
Prior to awarding an applicant a conditional use permit for a Bed and Breakfast
Establishment, the Board of Zoning Appeals shall determine that the applicant has
satisfied all of the following conditions:
A. A Bed and Breakfast located in a single-family dwelling shall only be operated by
family members residing on the premises.
B. The Bed and Breakfast shall not alter the exterior appearance of the residence or
property or cause it to differ from its residential character in any manner.
C. The Bed and Breakfast shall not involve the exterior storage of a materials or
supplies, and storage of general waste and trash shall be screened from public view.
D. There shall be no exterior displays or signs except for one on-site unlighted sign no
larger than four (4) square feet stating the name of the Bed and Breakfast and related
contact information.
E. The Bed and Breakfast shall be limited to maximum of three (3) guest rooms.
F. Each guest room shall be provided an off-street parking space.
G. No more than two (2) adults shall occupy each guest room concurrently.
H. No guest shall occupy the Bed and Breakfast for more than fourteen (14)
consecutive nights.
I. The serving of meals shall be strictly limited to registered guests only.
J. Certification by the Township Fire Inspector that the applicant has complied with all
fire protection requirements shall be presented to the Board of Zoning Appeals before
the Bed and Breakfast may commence operation.
K. A Zoning Certificate issued under this Section is revocable and shall be revoked after
notice and hearing by the Board of Appeals if any condition of the permit has been
violated and not fully remedied.
Section 30.36 Noise
A. Application of Performance Standards
For the protection of the health, safety and general welfare of the community, all uses
shall comply with the noise standards established in this Section, unless any Federal,
State, County, or Township local ordinance, law or regulation establishes a more
restrictive standard; in which event the more restrictive standard shall apply.
B. Enforcement
Enforcement of the noise standards shall be the duty of the Zoning Administrator
pursuant to these regulations and of Article 2, Administration and Enforcement.
C. Noise
1. No use of land or real property, for any purpose whatsoever, shall create or emit
noise levels at or beyond the property line in excess of those given in the following
table. Noise level measurement shall be performed using a sound level meter meeting
the American National Standards Institute Specification S1,4-1961, or later version
thereof. Where a property line separates two zones, the lower levels shall apply. Noises
incapable of being so measured, such as those of an irregular and intermittent nature,
shall be controlled so as not to become a nuisance to adjacent uses.
Table 1
Maximum Permitted Sound
Levels SOURCE PROPERTY
RECEIVING PROPERTY
NOISE
SOURCE
TIME RESIDENTIAL COMMERCIAL INDUSTRIAL
Residential Covered by
Adopted Noise
Resolution
Commercial Daytime1
Nighttime2
60
45
70
65
70
65
Industrial Daytime1
Nighttime2
60
45
70
65
80
80
1 Daytime shall be considered as the hours between 8:00 AM and 9:00 PM.
2 Nighttime shall be considered as the hours after 9:00 PM.
2. Measurements may be taken, at the discretion of the Zoning Administrator, at the
subject property line or anywhere beyond the property line of the source property. The
maximum noise levels will be established by the receiving property or Zoning District
regardless of the proximity of the source property to the receiving property. The source
property need not be contiguous to the receiving property.
3. Exemptions
a. Any and all changes, alterations, increases, extensions or expansion of uses prior to
the effective date of this Section which result in conditions of noise in excess of
specified levels, shall constitute a violation of these regulations.
b. The following noise levels shall be exempt from the noise provisions during the
daytime only:
i. Legal blasting.
ii. Construction activity and equipment.
iii. Installation or maintenance of utility equipment.
iv. Lawn mowers, chain saws and garden equipment.
v. Firearms discharge
The following noise sources shall be exempt from the noise provisions:
i. Aircraft.
ii. Agricultural operations as legally operating under the Ohio Revised Code.
iii. Emergency vehicles and equipment.
iv. Warning devices operated by a Federal, State, County or Township.
v. The repair of utility services.
vi. Parades or other events officially sanctioned by Bethel Township.
Section 30.37 Portable Storage Units
A. Purpose
The purpose of these regulations is to regulate the use and location of portable storage
units. These types of units are used for moving, temporary storage during construction
and other purposes as listed in this Section.
B. Definition
For the purposes of this Section, the term “Portable Storage Unit” shall mean any
enclosed unit of durable construction or material, not to exceed eight (8) feet in width by
eight (8) feet in height by sixteen (16) feet long, designed for permanent or temporary
storage, which can be transported by vehicle and left on site or are delivered to site,
filled by the owner or renter, and stored off site. Examples of these types of units are
commonly known by the following names: Portable On Demand Storage (PODS) units,
U-Pack Portable Storage Units, SmartBox, etc.
C. General Regulations
Portable storage units may be permitted as a temporary use in any zoning district as
follows:
1. Location and Timeframe
a. Temporary Use for New Construction Sites
Portable storage units are to be removed within three (3) days after use of
the unit is no longer necessary for on-site storage or when construction is
complete, whichever is sooner.
b. Moving and Relocating in Residential Single-Family Districts
2. When the occupant of a property is moving or relocating, a portable storage
unit shall be located on a paved surface on the property for a period of not more
than seven (7) days or for a period of fourteen (14) total days in any three
hundred sixty-five (365) day period.
3. Portable storage units shall not be located any closer to an adjacent parcel
than the required minimum side or rear yard setback for accessory uses in the
district the unit is located.
D. Other Temporary Uses
1. When necessary to facilitate general temporary uses not described above a
portable storage unit shall be located on a paved surface on the property for a
period of not more than seven (7) days or for a period of fourteen (14) total days
in any three hundred sixty-five (365) day period.
2. Portable storage units shall not be located any closer to an adjacent parcel
than the required minimum side or rear yard setback for accessory uses in the
district that the unit is located.
2. Prohibitions
a. No portable storage unit shall be used for human or animal occupation.
b. Portable storage units larger than those identified in 30.37 B, Definition, shall
be prohibited in Bethel Township.
c. Only one (1) portable storage unit shall be permitted on any property at any
time.
d. No portable storage unit shall be located in a public right-of-way or on a public
street.
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 34– Off-Street Parking And Loading
12 June 2007
ARTICLE 35
OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING
Section 35.01 Purpose
The purpose of these off-street parking and loading regulations are:
A. To relieve congestion on the streets by requiring that parking be provide
on property and off streets in relation to the parking demand generated
by the property user(s).
B. To promote safety and convenience for people by requiring that parking
and loading areas, and associated driveways, be located and
constructed according to good standards for visibility and accessibility.
C. To protect the light, air, visual amenities, and values of residential areas
by the visual screening of large parking and loading areas.
Section 35.02 Off-Street Parking, When Required
Permanent off-street automobile storage, parking or standing space shall be
provided as established in this Article at the time of erection of any building or
structure, at the time any principal building or structure is enlarged or increased
in capacity by adding dwelling units, guest rooms, or floor area, or before
conversion from one use or occupancy to another. Such space shall be provided
with vehicular access to a street or alley. This space shall not thereafter be
reduced or encroached upon in any manner unless written approval is provided
by the Zoning Department.
Off-street parking spaces are not required for uses in any building existing at the
time of adoption of this Resolution where no off-street parking had been provided
previously unless there is a change in use or an enlargement of the building or
structure as identified above.
Section 35.03 Parking Plan Required
A parking plan shall be required for all uses except single family detached
dwellings and two family dwellings. The parking plan shall be submitted to the
Zoning Department as part of the application for the Zoning Certificate. The
same plan shall also be submitted to the County Engineer and other agencies for
consideration and recommendations. The plan shall show the boundaries of the
property, parking spaces, access driveways, circulation patterns, drainage and
construction plans, lighting plan, boundary walls, fences and a landscaping and
screening plan, as appropriate.
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 34– Off-Street Parking And Loading
12 June 2007
Section 35.04 Determination of Required Spaces
In computing the number of parking spaces required by this Resolution, the
following shall apply:
A. Where floor area is designated as the standard for determining parking
space requirements, floor area shall be the sum of the gross useable
horizontal area of all floors of a building.
B. Where seating capacity is designated as the standard for determining
parking space requirements, the capacity shall mean the number of
seating units installed or indicated for, each twenty-four (24) lineal inches
of seating facilities.
C. Fractional numbers shall be increased to the next highest whole number.
Parking space requirements for a use not specifically mentioned in this
Resolution shall be determined by using the most similar and restrictive parking
space requirement as specified by the Zoning Department based on the intended
use, the location of the use, and the expected patronage or use by individuals
operating motor vehicles.
Section 35.05 Required Off-Street Parking Spaces
The following minimum number of parking spaces shall be provided on the same
lot as the use or building they are intended to serve, or may be provided on
adjacent lots subject to other provisions of this Section.
Type of Use Minimum Number of Spaces Required
Residential
Accessory Apartment One (1) space.
Airport Landing Field One (1) space for every five (5) tie down areas
plus one space for every 500 square feet of
related office space area.
Assisted Living Care Center One (1) space for every resident room plus one
(1) space for every 400 square feet of gross
floor area excluding resident rooms.
Bed and Breakfast Establishment One (1) space for every guest room plus two (2)
spaces for the owner.
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 34– Off-Street Parking And Loading
12 June 2007
Type of Use Minimum Number of Spaces Required
Residential Uses (con’t)
Multi-Family Dwelling
Up to two (2) bedrooms
One and one half (1½) spaces for every
dwelling unit.
Three (3) or more bedrooms Two (2) spaces for every dwelling unit.
Visitor Parking The Board of Zoning appeals may require
additional spaces as necessary.
Nursing Home, Rest Home or
Convalescent Care Facility
One (1) space for every two (2) resident rooms
plus one (1) space for every 400 square feet of
gross floor area excluding resident rooms.
Residential Facility Two (2) spaces for every dwelling unit.
Single Family Detached Dwelling
Up to three (3) bedrooms Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit.
Four (4) or more bedrooms Three (3) spaces per dwelling unit.
Two Family Dwelling
Up to three (3) bedrooms Two (2) spaces per dwelling unit.
Four (4) or more bedrooms Three (3) spaces per dwelling unit.
Public and Semi-Public Uses
Cemetery One (1) space for every five (5) seats in the
chapel or meeting space area or one or one (1)
space for every 200 square feet of indoor
assembly space plus one (1) space for every
400 square feet of maintenance facility area.
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 34– Off-Street Parking And Loading
12 June 2007
Type of Use Minimum Number of Spaces Required
Public and Semi-Public Uses
(con’t)
Educational Institution
Elementary or Junior High School Two (2) spaces for each classroom or one (1)
for every five (5) seats in auditoriums or
assembly halls, whichever is greater.
High School One (1) space for every five (5) students of
design capacity plus two (2) spaces for each
classroom plus one (1) space for every five (5)
seats in any auditorium or assembly hall.
Vocational or Technical School,
College, University or
Community College
One (1) space for every two (2) students of
design capacity.
Hospital One (1) space for each two (2) beds.
Public, Semi Public and Government
Buildings and Facilities
One (1) space for each 300 square feet of floor
area or one (1) space for each three (3) seats,
whichever is greater.
Non-Commercial Parks and
Recreation Facility
One (1) space for each participant at maximum
utilization or one (1) space for each three (3)
seats, whichever is greater.
Religious Place of Worship One (1) space for each three (3) seats in the
place of assembly.
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 34– Off-Street Parking And Loading
12 June 2007
Type of Use Minimum Number of Spaces Required
Non-Residential Uses (Office,
Commercial and Industrial)
Animal Hospital or Veterinarian Clinic One (1) space for each examination room plus
two (2) spaces for each fifty (50) square feet of
reception area.
Automobile Filling Station One (1) space for each pump plus two (2)
spaces for each service bay or work area.
Gasoline filling stations with convenience retail
uses shall also provide one (1) space for each
one hundred (100) square feet of floor area.
Automobile and Recreational Vehicle
Sales
One (1) parking space for each 200 square feet
of floor area in the main display room, plus one
(1) space for each 1,500 square feet of outdoor
display area.
Automobile, Truck and Recreational
Vehicle Repair
Four (4) spaces for each service bay or work
area plus one (1) space for each 100 square
feet of waiting area.
Automobile Wrecking, Junk or
Salvage Yard
One (1) space for every 200 square feet of
office space plus one (1) space for every 10,000
square feet of yard used for the storage of junk
or automobiles.
Bar or Taverns One (1) space for every three (3) seats or one
(1) space for each 100 square feet of floor area,
whichever is greater.
Bank, Loan Office and Other
Financial Institutions
One (1) space for each 200 square feet of floor
area plus sufficient stacking space for three (3)
vehicles per drive through/drive up window.
Building Services and Supplies,
Contractors Yard
One (1) space for each 500 square feet of floor
area and yard area.
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 34– Off-Street Parking And Loading
12 June 2007
Type of Use Minimum Number of Spaces Required
Non-Residential Uses (Office,
Commercial and Industrial)
Car Wash Two (2) spaces for each washing bay plus
sufficient stacking space for two (2) vehicles per
washing bay.
Club One (1) space for each 100 square feet of floor
area.
Commercial Entertainment One (1) space for each three (3) seats or one
(1) space for each 100 feet of floor area,
whichever is greater.
Commercial Greenhouse One (1) space for each 500 square feet of
greenhouse.
Commercial Recreation One (1) space for each three (3) seats or one
(1) space for each three (3) users at maximum
utilization for athletic fields.
Commercial Storage of Boats,
Recreational Vehicles or
Construction Equipment
One (1) space for each 500 square feet of
storage space.
Crematorium One (1) space for each four (4) seats of chapel
capacity plus one (1) space for each 200 square
feet of assembly floor area.
Farm Implement and Lawn and
Garden Equipment Sales and
Service
One (1) parking space for each 400 square feet
of floor area in the main display room, plus one
(1) space for each 1,500 square feet of outdoor
display area.
Golf Course Four (4) spaces for each hole plus one (1)
space for every 400 square feet of clubhouse
and assembly floor area.
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 34– Off-Street Parking And Loading
12 June 2007
Type of Use Minimum Number of Spaces Required
Non-Residential Uses (Office,
Commercial and Industrial)
Light and Heavy Manufacturing One (1) space for each 500 square feet of floor
area, plus one for each motor vehicle used in
the business which is parked on the premises
Nursery or Child Care One (1) space for each five (5) persons of
licensed capacity plus sufficient stacking space
for five (5) vehicles at each drop off area.
Nursing Home, Rest Home or
Convalescent Care Facility
One (1) space for each resident/patient room
plus one (1) space for each vehicle used for the
complex which is maintained on the premises.
Office, Business and Professional One (1) space for each 300 square feet of floor
area.
Personal Services One (1) space for each 200 square feet of floor
area.
Professional Services One (1) space for each 200 square feet of floor
area.
Research and Development Facility One (1) space for each 300 square feet of floor
area.
Restaurant One (1) space for each 100 square feet of floor
area.
Restaurant, Fast Food One (1) space for each 50 square feet of floor
area.
Retail Business One (1) space for each 250 square feet of floor
area.
Type of Use Minimum Number of Spaces Required
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 34– Off-Street Parking And Loading
12 June 2007
Non-Residential Uses (Office,
Commercial and Industrial)
Self Storage Facility One (1) space for every five (5) rental storage
units.
Sexually Oriented Business One (1) space for every 50 square feet of floor
area.
Truck and Heavy Equipment Service One (1) space for each service bay plus one (1)
space for each 200 square feet of office space.
Trucking, Express, Transfer or
Hauling Terminal, Motor Freight
Depot
One space for every 1,000 square feet of floor
area.
Vehicle Towing Service One (1) space for each 400 square feet of office
space.
Warehouse One (1) space for each 800 square feet of floor
area.
Wholesale Distributor One (1) space for each 500 square feet of floor
area.
Section 35.06 Space Requirements for Uses Not Specifically Mentioned
The requirement for off-street parking spaces not specifically mentioned in Section
35.5 above shall be in accordance with the most similar use in that list as identified
by the Zoning Department.
Section 35.07 Accessory Parking on Adjacent Lot Zoned for Residential Uses
The Board of Appeals may permit accessory parking within an adjacent lot zoned
for residential uses, providing:
1. Such lot is necessary for the public convenience and will not have an
adverse effect on adjacent properties.
2. A public hearing is held in accordance with the procedure given in
Section 20.08.
3. All provisions of Section 35 of this Resolution are complied with.
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 34– Off-Street Parking And Loading
12 June 2007
4. No parking shall be permitted between the street line and the building
line prevailing in the zone in which the proposed parking area is to be
located. The resulting open area shall be planted in grass, or otherwise
landscaped to create a permanent great area.
5. A dense evergreen planting with a minimum height of four (4) feet and a
mature height of at least 5'6", or a solidly constructed decorative fence
shall be permanently maintained along the mutual boundary of the
restricted accessory parking area and adjacent land zoned for residential
uses except for the portion of such boundary located within a required
front yard.
6. Whenever a lot located in a residential zone is used for accessory
parking purposes and is located across the street from residentially
zoned land, that portion of the lot used for parking purposes shall be
screened from the street as specified in Paragraph 5 above except for
access drive. Such screening shall be placed along the setback line.
7. Ingress and egress for vehicles to any premises used for parking under a
Conditional Use Permit by the Board of Appeals shall be by means of
streets or alleys through business or industrial areas, not by means of
streets or alleys through residential areas.
Section 35.08 Maximum Number of Parking Spaces Permitted
In order to prevent excessive lot coverage and surface water run-off, no minimum
off-street parking space requirement in Section 35.5 shall be exceeded by fifteen
(15) percent unless good cause can be shown and approved by the Board of
Zoning Appeals. Single Family Dwellings and Two Family Dwellings are exempt
from this provision.
Section 35.09 Off-Street Parking Design Requirements
A. Size of Parking Stalls
Size of Parking Stalls
45
Degrees
60
Degrees
90
Degrees Parallel
A. Width of Parking
Spaces 14’0” 11’-0” 10’-0” 9’-0”
B. Length of Parking
Spaces 21’-6” 22’-0” 20’-0” 20’-0”
C. Width of Driveway
Aisle 13’-0” 17’-6” 25’-0” 12’-0”
B. Handicapped Parking Spaces
Handicapped parking spaces shall be in conformance with the Ohio
Basic Building Code and the Ohio Revised Code, Section 3781.11.1.
C. Striping
All non-residential parking areas with a capacity of over five (5) vehicles
shall be striped between stalls to clearly identify each parking space.
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 34– Off-Street Parking And Loading
12 June 2007
D. Wheel blocks
Whenever a parking lot extends to a property line or landscaped area,
wheel blocks or other suitable devices, shall be installed to prevent any
part of a parked vehicle from extending beyond the property line or into
any required landscaping or screening.
E. Paving
All permanent parking spaces, together with driveways, aisles, and other
circulation areas shall be surfaced with asphalt, bituminous concrete or
equivalent hard pavement material to provide a durable, dustless surface
in accordance with the standards of the County Engineer. Other
surfacing methods that are more porous than asphalt or bituminous
concrete may be considered in conjunction with review and approval by
the Township Trustees and the County Engineer.
F. Drainage
All parking areas shall provide for proper drainage of surface water to
prevent standing water and the drainage of such water onto adjacent
properties and onto sidewalks. For any off-street parking area of more
than five (5) vehicles, plans for drainage shall be submitted to the Zoning
Department for approval prior to the commencement of construction.
G. Access Requirements
Any off-street parking area accessed from a public right-of-way shall be
designed in such a manner that any vehicle leaving or entering the
parking area shall be traveling in a forward motion. Access driveways for
parking areas shall be clearly visible to any pedestrian or motorist
approaching the access or driveway from a public street, alley or
highway. The entrance and exits to the parking area shall be clearly
marked. If warranted by a traffic impact study, the owner may be
required to provide acceleration and/or deceleration lanes where traffic
volumes indicate the need.
H. Lighting
Any parking area which is intended to be used during non-daylight hours,
shall be illuminated. Lighting fixtures shall be as follows:
1. Any lights used to illuminate a parking lot shall provide at least
two (2) lumens of light per square foot of parking lot surface.
2. All lighting fixtures serving parking lots shall be of full cutoff
fixtures and shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from
the adjoining property. Such shielding shall obstruct a line of
sight to the bulb with an opaque material when viewed from the
property line.
3. Light poles used in lots designed to contain fifty (50) vehicles or
less shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height.
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 34– Off-Street Parking And Loading
12 June 2007
I. Screening and Landscaping
1. Screening
Whenever a parking area is located in, or adjacent to a
Residential District, it shall be effectively screened on all sides
which adjoin or face the Residential District. Screening and
setbacks shall be as follows:
a. Screening shall be by a wall, fence, or planting screen
as approved by the Zoning Department as required in
Section 38, Landscaping and Screening.
b. All parking areas shall be setback from property lines as
follows:
1. Parking areas shall be separated from
rights-of-way for streets by a strip of land which
shall be at least twenty (20) feet in depth unless
otherwise established. Such strip shall be
reserved as open space, landscaped, and
incorporate certain screening as required in
Section 38, Landscaping and Screening.
2. All parking areas shall be set back a minimum of
ten (10) feet from any side or rear lot line unless
otherwise established. Such strip shall be
reserved as open space and landscaped.
J. Maintenance
The owner of property used for off-street parking shall maintain such
area in good condition without holes and free of all trash, abandoned or
junk vehicles, weeds and other rubbish.
Section 35.10 Joint Use of Off-Street Parking Facilities
If the parking spaces required above cannot be reasonably provided on the same
lot on which the principal use is conducted, the Zoning Commission may permit
such space to be provided on other off-street property provided such space is
located within 400 feet of the main entrance of such principal use. Such vehicle
parking space shall be deemed to be associated with the permitted use and shall
not thereafter be reduced or encroached on in any manner.
Section 35.11 Use of Off-Street Parking Facilities
A. Commercial motor vehicle exceeding four (4) tons in rated capacity is
prohibited from off-street parking in residential districts.
B. No abandoned, unlicensed, wrecked, dismantled, or totally disabled
automobiles, trucks, trailers, aircraft or discarded furniture, appliances or
other junk materials shall be permitted to remain out of doors in an offstreet
parking facility for a period of more than thirty (30) days.
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 34– Off-Street Parking And Loading
12 June 2007
C. Residential off-street parking areas shall be designed and used only for
the parking of passenger type vehicles. Overnight parking or outdoor
storage of commercial vehicles rated greater than one (1) ton capacity,
or commercial buses, is prohibited. Such areas shall consist of a parking
space, driveway, garage, or combination thereof, and shall be located on
the premises they are intended to serve.
D. Any area once designed as required off-street parking shall not be
changed to any other use unless and until equal facilities are provided on
premise or elsewhere if approved by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
E. Off-street parking existing at the effective date of this Resolution in
connection with the operation of an existing building or use shall not be
reduced to an amount less than hereinafter required for a similar new
building or new use.
F. Two or more building or uses may collectively provide the required offstreet
parking in which case the required number of parking spaces shall
not be less than the sum of requirements for the several uses computed
separately.
G. Where operating hours of buildings do not overlap, the Board of Zoning
Appeals may grant an exception to allow the dual function of off-street
parking spaces.
H. The storage or sale of merchandise or the repair of non-personal
vehicles is prohibited on required off-street parking spaces.
Section 35.12 Off-Street Loading Requirements
Every building or structure erected and occupied for retail, industrial or other uses
involving the receipt or distribution of materials or merchandise by vehicle shall
provide a permanently maintained space for standing, loading and unloading
services in order to avoid undue interference with public use of the streets, alleys,
or required parking areas. Such off-street loading areas shall comply with the
following standards:
A. Design Standards
1. Screening
Off-street loading spaces that adjoin or are across a street from
property zoned for any residential use shall have a dense
evergreen planting, fence, masonry wall or such other screening
materials as approved by the Zoning Department as required in
Section 38, Landscaping and Screening.
2. Entrances and Exits
Off-street loading spaces shall be provided with entrances and
exits not less than twelve (12) feet in width and so located as to
minimize traffic congestion on and off site.
3. Dimensions
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 34– Off-Street Parking And Loading
12 June 2007
Each off-street loading space shall be not less than twelve (12)
feet in width, sixty (60) feet in length and fifteen (15) feet in height
with adequate access to each space.
4. Projection into Yards
Off-street loading space may occupy all or any part of any
required side or rear yard space provided that no part of any
loading space shall be permitted closer than fifty (50) feet to any
residential district or closer than five (5) feet from any street or
alley.
5. Surfacing
All loading spaces shall be graded and provided with a durable
and dustless hard surface of asphalt, concrete, or other suitable
materials capable of withstanding 1,000 pounds per square inch
(psi). A gravel loading space is permissible if all driveway
aprons and access points to the loading space are constructed
of concrete or asphalt and are at least twenty (20) feet in length
as measured from the street curb cut.
6. Drainage
All loading spaces shall provide for the proper drainage of
surface water to prevent standing water or drainage of such
water onto adjacent properties and onto sidewalks. Plans for
drainage shall be submitted to the Zoning Department for
approval prior to the commencement of construction.
7. Lighting
Lighting fixtures for off-street loading spaces shall be as follows:
a. Any lights used to illuminate an off-street loading area
shall be so arranged as to reflect the light away from the
adjoining property.
b. All lighting fixtures serving off-street loading areas shall
be of full cutoff fixtures. Such shielding shall obstruct a
line of sight to the bulb with an opaque material when
viewed from the property line.
c. All lighting shall comply with all other applicable
standards of this Zoning Resolution.
B. Amount of Loading Space Required
The minimum amounts of off-street loading space shall be provided to
prevent the obstruction of parking and circulation areas on site. An area
adequate for maneuvering, ingress and egress shall be provided in
addition to required loading space.
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 34– Off-Street Parking And Loading
12 June 2007
This Page Intentionally Left Blank
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 36 – Sign Regulations – September 2018
Section 36.01 Purpose & Objectives
Section 36.01 Intent
It is the intent of this article to establish reasonable regulations governing the
size, character, and location of signs within Bethel Township in the interest of the
public health, safety and morals of its citizens, business concerns, and other
affected sections of the Township. Within this framework, these regulations are
adopted to achieve the following objectives:
A. To minimize the possibility that sign size, location, or character will
create hazards adversely affecting the public safety.
B. To establish sign limitations which allow a reasonable capability for
advertisement, but which prevents the escalation of sign competition to
levels, which are non-productive and create unnecessarily high
entrepreneurial costs.
C. To provide sign regulations, which are directly related to land, use and,
therefore, to the functional and economic need for signs of varying sizes,
types, and locations.
D. To create a more aesthetically pleasing environment without
unreasonably limiting the right of individuals to employ signs in the
legitimate use of their property.
E. All types of signs are permitted unless specifically prohibited in other sections of
this code. All signs must comply with all other provisions of this code.
F. Electronic signs shall not flash and messages shall change no less than eight
seconds.
Section 36.02 Scope of Regulations
The regulations herein set forth shall apply to and govern signs in all districts:
A. All signs shall be erected or maintained in compliance with the
regulations governing size and height for the district in which it is located,
unless such sign is otherwise specifically regulated by a temporary
permit, or variance granted by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
B. All signs shall be erected in conformity with the respective zoning district
yard requirements unless otherwise specified. No sign shall be erected
so as to prevent free ingress to or egress from any door, window on any
other exit way required by the State of Ohio or Miami County Building
Code, and amendments thereto, or by other adopted codes or
regulations.
C. Signs which become obsolete due to cessation of the business, activity,
product, or service advertised thereon for any other reason shall be
completely removed from the premises within sixty (60) days after such
obsolescence is established by the Zoning Administrator, unless said
sign is converted to another lawful and contemporary use within that
sixty (60) day period. The supporting structure for obsolete signs must be
completely removed with a sixty (60) day period after obsolescence is
established unless a new and lawful sign is established thereon.
D. Where illumination of signs is permitted, such illumination shall be
neither flashing nor intermittent and shall be designed and constructed
so as to concentrate the illumination upon the area of the sign and
prevent glare upon the street or adjacent property. Such illumination
shall be turned off no later than 11:00 p.m. or at the end of the business
day, whichever is later.
E. No sign shall be erected at the intersection of any streets in such a
manner as to obstruct free and clear vision, at any location where, by
reasons of the position, shape or color, it may interfere with, obstruct the
view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal, or devise,
or which makes use of the words "stop", "look", "drive-in", "danger", or
any other words, phrase, symbol, or character in such a manner as to
interfere with, mislead, or confuse traffic.
F. It shall be unlawful for any person to display upon any sign or other
advertising structure any obscene, indecent, or immoral matter.
G. Any sign is limited in subject matter to the name, design, picture, or
trademark of the owner, operator, builder, sales agent, managing agent,
lessor, or lessee of the premises or of the activities (including
merchandise handles or services rendered) on the premises on which
such sign is located and does not include any general commercial
advertising unrelated to or extending in substantial degree beyond the
enumerated permitted subjects.
H. Signs either free standing or wall shall be designed as to be similar in
character with regard to materials, color, and size to conforming signs
designed or located on the same lot and on adjoining lots in order to
equalize the attention they are meant to attract and to produce an overall
unified effect, all in accordance with the other requirements of this
Article.
I. All signs must be maintained in good repair and appearance by the
owner at all times.
Section 36.03 Measurement Standards
The following standards shall be used to determine the area and height
measurements for all signs in the Township:
A. The area of a sign shall be computed by means of the smallest square,
circle, rectangle, triangle, or combination thereof that will encompass the
exterior display limits of a sign, but not including any supporting frame or
bracing.
B. The sign area for a sign with more than one face shall be computed by
adding together the area of all sign faces visible from any one point.
C. In the case of irregularly shaped three-dimensional signs the area of the
display surface shall be measured on the plane of the largest vertical
cross Section.
D. The height of a sign shall be determined by measuring the vertical
distance between the top part of the sign to the elevation of the ground
beneath the sign prior to construction, excluding additional elevation
added by creation of berming or mounding. If the grade prior to
construction cannot be determined, the elevation of the base of the sign
shall be computed using the elevation of the nearest point of the crown
of a public street or the grade of the land at the principal entrance to the
principal structure on the premises, whichever is lower.
Section 36.04 Prohibited Signs
The following types of signs are prohibited in Bethel Township:
A. All blinding, flashing, or intermittent lighting is prohibited unless by
approval of a Conditional Use Permit by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
B. Pennants, banners, streamers, searchlights, spinning and similar type
devices are prohibited except when allowed as a temporary sign.
C. Any signs, which rotate, revolve or have any visible moving parts are
prohibited. Prohibition of moving signs and signs of intermittent lighting
shall not apply to any sign performing a public service function indicating
time, temperature, stock market quotations, or similar devices.
D. No sign shall be placed in the public right-of-way.
E. No signs shall be located along any public thoroughfare right-of-way
within one hundred (100) feet of any other public thoroughfare
intersection, unless otherwise exempted.
F. No beam, beacon, or flashing light of a red, blue or amber color.
G. No bare bulb illumination.
H. No flame as a source of light.
I. No roof signs.
J. No wall signs, any part of which extends above the lowest point of the
roofline.
K. No signs shall be attached to a utility pole, fence post, fence, tree, or
accessory building nor shall any sign be erected so as to impair access
to a roof.
L. No portable street signs except when permitted as a temporary sign.
M. No signs shall be painted on a building or accessory building with the
exception of a building used for agricultural purposes unless an
application has been filed and approval granted by the Board of Zoning
Appeals.
N. Signs which contain or depict obscenity, as defined by the Ohio Revised
Code Section 2907.01(F), are prohibited.
O. Signs which contain or depict lewdness are prohibited.
P. Signs containing or depicting specified sexual activities are prohibited.
Q. Signs containing or depicting specified anatomical areas are prohibited.
Section 36.05 Exemptions
Signs that are exempt from the provision of these regulations shall be permitted,
but shall not be illuminated nor animated unless as specifically provided and shall
not extend nor be placed in a required right of way.
A. Real estate signs not exceeding six (6) square feet in area in any
Residential district (24 square feet in any other district) which advertise
the sale, rental or lease of the premises on which said signs are located
and limited to not more than one such sign per use per each street front
of the lot on which the sign is located. Open House signs may be
permitted, but shall be erected no more than 5 days prior to and removed
the day of the open house.
B. Professional or occupational name plates not exceeding one (1) square
foot in area and limited to not more than one such sign per use per each
street front of the lot on which the sign is located.
C. Occupational signs not exceeding two (2) square feet in area denoting
only the name and profession of an occupant in a commercial building,
public institutional building, or multiple dwelling and limited to not more
than one such sign per use per each street front of the lot on which the
sign is located.
D. Temporary signs not exceeding six (6) square feet in area denoting the
architect, engineer, or contractor when placed upon work under
construction, to be removed within 30 days upon completion of the
building and to be limited to not more than one such sign per use per
each street front of the lot on which the sign is located.
E. Memorial signs or tablets, names or buildings, and date of erection when
cut in to any masonry surface or when constructed of bronze or other
noncombustible materials and limited to not more than one such sign per
use per each street front of the lot on which the sign is located.
F. Traffic signs, legal notices, railroad crossing signs, and temporary
emergency signs. Non-advertising signs may be authorized by the Board
of Zoning Appeals.
G. The flag, pennant, or insignia of any nation, state, city, township or other
political unit or any political educational, charitable, philanthropic, civic,
professional, religious or like campaign, drive, movement, or event.
H. "No trespassing" signs or other such signs regulating the use of a
property such as "no hunting", "no fishing", etc. of not more than two (2)
square feet in area and located no closer than one hundred (100) feet
from another such sign.
I. Changing of the advertising copy or message of an approved painted or
printed sign.
J. No more than two (2) menu boards in conjunction with a restaurant drive thru
service window. Such boards may be illuminated internally or by
reflected light provided the source of light is not directly visible.
K. Poster signs when exhibited from inside a window.
L. Temporary political signs may be erected upon private property under
the following conditions:
1. The person or organization for the erection or distribution of such
sign or the owner, or his agent, of the property upon which such
signs may be located shall cause the removal thereof within
fifteen (15) days after the primary or special election to which
they are appurtenant unless such signs shall continue to be
appurtenant to a general election to be held within thirty (30)
days. The person or organization responsible for the erection or
distribution of any such signs or the owner, or his agent, of the
property on which such signs may be located shall cause the
removal thereof within fifteen (15) days after the general election
to which they are appurtenant.
2. Temporary political signs shall not be posted more than thirty
(30) days prior to the election to which the sign is related.
M. Parking or directional signs not over two (2) square feet in area provided
the sign contains no advertising matter and is limited to not more than
one (1) such sign per use per each street front of the lot on which the
sign is located.
N. Bulletin boards and signs for a church, schools, community or other
public or semi-public institutional building and multiple dwelling
containing eight (8) or more units shall not exceed fifteen (15) square
feet in area for a wall or ground sign with a maximum height of six (6)
feet above grade for ground signs and located not less than ten (10) feet
from the street right-of-way line. Such bulletin boards and signs may be
illuminated but only from a concealed light source.
O. A seed dealer sign provided to the dealer by a supplier, not exceeding
four (4) square feet in area and located only in the General Agricultural
District.
P. Non-illuminated residential nameplate not exceeding two (2) square feet
in area and containing one (1) or more of the following.
1. Street name and/or number.
2. Name of the family residing on premises.
3. Identification name of property.
4. Any such similar contents as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.
Q. A sign not exceeding four (4) square feet in area advertising the sale of
produce and vegetables raised on the premises where such sale is
permitted.
R. Agricultural production identification signs not exceeding eight (8) square
feet.
S. Signs erected or placed by private farmers to indicate the specific breed
of livestock being raised or kept on the premises.
Section 36.06 Subdivision Signs
Subdivision signs shall be regulated as follows:
A. Upon approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals, a permit may be issued
as a special exception to the terms of this Article allowing a land sale
sign provided that:
1. The sign shall not be internally illuminated.
2. The sign shall advertise the sale or development of a recorded
subdivision.
3. The sign shall be erected only upon the property for sale or
being developed.
4. Not more than one (1) such sign shall be placed along single
road frontage of any property in single and separate ownership,
and provided that not more than two (2) such signs may be
permitted in any single development.
5. A permit for the erection, construction, or maintenance of said
sign shall be valid for a period of one year and may be renewed
annually by the Board of Zoning Appeals.
6. Such sign or signs shall be removed upon completion of the
subdivision or any section thereof as determined by the Zoning
Administrator.
B. Upon approval of the Board of Zoning Appeals, a permit may be issued
to allow the construction of a permanent sign and supporting decorative
structure to depict the recorded subdivision name. Not more than one (1)
such sign shall be placed along single road frontage of any property in
single and separate ownership constituting the recorded subdivision.
Section 36.07 Temporary Signs
A. Certain temporary signs and attention-getting devices may be permitted
for promoting special events or activities subject to the following
provisions:
1. A temporary permit must be approved by the Zoning
Administrator.
2. Such attention-getting devices shall be limited to an exposure
period not to exceed thirty (30) days in any calendar year.
3. All other temporary signs are prohibited in all areas unless
specifically exempted or permitted elsewhere in this Article.
B. Temporary signs in business and industrial districts advertising for
employees must be registered yearly as temporary permits and may be
displayed throughout the year for no more than fourteen (14)
consecutive days and must be removed when not in use. Total square
footage for temporary signs seeking employees cannot exceed thirty-two
(32) square feet per side.
C. Churches or other non-profit organizations may erect temporary signs
without cost but must register the signs with the zoning office and cannot
display them for more than fourteen (14) consecutive days.
D. The sign when not in use must be removed and cannot exceed thirty-two
(32) square feet per side.
Section 36.08 Domestic Advertising Signs
Domestic advertising signs are permitted in any residential zoning district and
shall include such signage as: garage sale, yard sale, estate sale, auction,
vehicle or equipment for sale. The total message area of domestic advertising
signs on a lot may not exceed four (4) square feet. Because domestic advertising
signs are often incompatible with the character of the surrounding neighborhood,
they are permitted on a temporary basis only. No person shall display a domestic
advertising sign for more than a total of two (2) weeks out of each calendar year.
Signs may be considered domestic advertising signs only if they are located on
the same lot as the goods, which are offered for sale.
Section 36.09 Billboards
Billboards shall be permitted provided that they meet the following criteria and
have been approved as Conditional Uses through the Board of Zoning Appeals.
A. Location
1. Billboards may be permitted only in the A-2, B-1, B-2, B-3, F-1, I-1
and I-2 Zoning Districts and shall not be placed over existing
structures.
2. Billboards shall be so located as not to project into the public right-of-way
and shall not be placed closer than 100' from the right of way
line.
3. No billboards shall be located within two hundred fifty (250) feet of an
exit or entrance to a limited or controlled access highway.
4. No billboards shall be located along any public thoroughfare right-of-way
within one hundred (100) feet of any other public thoroughfare
right-of-way.
5. No billboards shall be located within one thousand (1000) feet from
any residence.
B. Maximum Size
No billboards shall contain more than three hundred (300) square feet of
surface area nor shall the surface area be less than six (6) feet from the
ground.
C. Construction
All freestanding billboards shall be constructed on steel or wood
supports.
D. Spacing
No billboards shall be located within fifteen hundred (1500) feet of
another billboard.
E. Obsolescence
Billboards which become obsolete due to cessation of the business,
activity, product or service advertised thereon or for any other reason
shall be completely removed from the premises within sixty (60) days
after such obsolescence is established by the Zoning Administrator
unless such billboard is converted to another lawful and contemporary
use within that sixty (60) day period. The supporting structure for
obsolete billboards must be completely removed within a period of one
(1) year after obsolescence is established, unless a new and lawful
billboard is established thereon.
Section 36.10 Business and Industrial Signs
A. General Regulations
All signs and advertising structures in the business and industrial districts
may be illuminated internally or by reflected light provided the source of
light is not directly visible and is so arranged to reflect away from the
adjoining premises and provided that such illumination shall not be so
placed as to cause confusion or a hazard to traffic or conflict with traffic
control signs or lights. Where such illuminated signs exceed fifty (50)
square feet in area, they shall not be placed nearer than fifty (50) to an
adjacent residential lot line and where such illuminated signs exceed one
hundred (100) square feet in area and face any lot in a residential
district, they shall be placed not nearer than one hundred (100) feet from
the front lot line.
B. Sign Sizes
1. B-1 General Business District
Wall or ground signs, single or double face, shall not exceed fifty
(50) square feet in area for each face. Maximum height above
grade at sign shall not exceed ten (10) feet. There shall be
permitted one (1) wall sign and one (1) ground sign. No more
than two (2) signs shall be permitted for each street front of the
lot on which the signs are located. Wall signs shall not extend
above or beyond any part of the roofline.
2. B-2 District Office/Residential District
a. The total area of all signs erected on the lot and building
of any single office use shall be within the allowable
square frontage as follows:
1. Total sign area shall not exceed one square foot
for each lineal foot of building frontage to a
maximum of fifty (50) square feet. Such sign
shall be limited to the display of either the name
and address of the occupant or the name and
address of the building.
2. Entrance door identification signs. Maximum
size shall be one square foot per business with a
maximum area for signage of three square feet.
b. Location
1. Flat wall signs may be located anywhere on the
front wall of the building as determined in
subsection (1) A. No flat wall signs shall extend
above the coping or cornice of the building,
whichever is higher.
2. Projecting signs or supporting structures shall
not project more than forty-eight inches from the
wall of a building, nor less than ten feet above
the grade. Every face of a projecting sign shall
be considered as a separate sign for the
purposes of computing allowable area.
3. Maximum height above grade at top of sign shall not
exceed ten (10) feet.
3. B-3 Neighborhood Business District
Wall or ground signs, single or double face shall not exceed fifty
(50) square feet in area for each face. Maximum height above
grade at sign shall not exceed ten (10) feet. There shall be
permitted one (1) wall sign and one (1) ground sign. No more
than two (2) signs shall be permitted for each street front of the
lot on which the signs are located. Wall signs shall not extend
above or beyond any part of the roofline.
4. I-1 Light Industrial District
Wall or ground signs, single or double face shall not exceed fifty
(50) square feet in area for each face. Maximum height above
grade at sign shall not exceed ten (10) feet. There shall be
permitted one (1) wall sign and one (1) ground sign. No more
than two (2) signs shall be permitted for each street front of the
lot on which the signs are located. Wall signs shall not extend
above or beyond any part of the roofline.
See Section 36.12 for Industrial Parks.
Billboards are permitted if they meet the requirements of Article
36.
5. I-2 Heavy Industrial District
Wall or ground signs, single or double face shall not exceed fifty
(50) square feet in area for each face. Maximum height above
grade at sign shall not exceed ten (10) feet. There shall be
permitted one (1) wall sign and one (1) ground sign. No more
than two (2) signs shall be permitted for each street front of the
lot on which the signs are located. Wall signs shall not extend
above or beyond any part of the roofline.
See Section 36.12 for Industrial Parks.
6. F-1 Floodplain District
Wall or ground signs, single or double face shall not exceed fifty
(50) square feet in area for each face. Wall signs shall not
extend above or beyond any part of the roofline. Maximum
height above grade at sign shall not exceed ten (10) feet. Not
more than one (1) sign for each street front of the lot on which
the sign is located may be used.
7. A-1 Domestic Agricultural District
Wall or ground signs, single or double face, shall not exceed
sixty-four (64) square feet in area for each face. Wall signs shall
not extend above or beyond any part of the roofline. Maximum
height above grade at sign shall not exceed ten (10) feet. Not
more than one (1) sign for each street front of the lot on which
the sign is located may be displayed.
8. A-2 General Agricultural District
Wall or ground signs, single or double face, shall not exceed
sixty-four (64) square feet in area for each face. Wall signs shall
not extend above or beyond any part of the roofline. Maximum
height above grade at sign shall not exceed ten (10) feet. Not
more than one (1) sign for each street front of the lot on which
the sign is located may be displayed.
Section 36.11 Shopping Center Signs
A shopping center located on a single parcel of land, having a minimum frontage
of two hundred (200) feet, shall be entitled to one (1) free standing ground sign
utilizing the following criteria:
A. Neighborhood shopping center (one which contains twenty thousand
(20,000) to ninety-nine thousand nine hundred and ninety-nine (99,999)
square feet of floor space) shall be entitled to one (1) free standing
ground sign not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet per face. Such
a sign shall be permitted to display both the name and address of the
shopping center, the names of its individual tenants, and periodically
changing information relative to activities, events, and/or sales occurring
within the shopping center.
B. Community shopping center (one which contains one hundred thousand
(100,000) to three hundred ninety-nine thousand nine hundred and
ninety-nine (399,999) square feet of floor space) shall be entitled to one
(1) free standing ground sign not to exceed two hundred (200) square
feet per face. Such sign shall be permitted the same contents as
indicated for a neighborhood shopping center sign.
C. Regional shopping center (one which contains four hundred thousand
(400,000) or more square feet of floor area) shall be entitled to two (2)
free standing ground signs, each of which shall not be permitted to
exceed three hundred (300) square feet per face. Such signs shall be
permitted the same contents as indicated for a neighborhood shopping
center sign. Each establishment located as a part of the shopping center
shall be permitted one (1) wall-mounted sign on the face of the building.
Section 36.12 Industrial Park Signs
For industrial parks in single ownership or under unified control, with a minimum
frontage of two hundred (200) feet, each industry shall be permitted one (1) wall-mounted
sign on the face of the building. In addition, the park shall be entitled to
one (1) freestanding ground sign utilizing the following criteria:
A. An industrial park containing a total of twenty thousand (20,000) to
ninety-nine thousand nine hundred and ninety-nine (99,999) square feet
of floor space shall be entitled to one (1) free standing ground sign not to
exceed one hundred (100) square feet per face. Such a sign shall be
permitted to display both the name and address of the industrial park and
the names of its individual industries.
B. An industrial park containing a total of one hundred thousand (100,000)
to three hundred ninety-nine thousand nine hundred and ninety-nine
(399,999) square feet of floor space shall be entitled to one (1) free
standing ground sign not to exceed two hundred (200) square feet per
face. Such a sign shall be permitted to display both the name and
address of the industrial park and the names of its individual industries.
C. An industrial park containing a total of four hundred thousand (400,000)
or more square feet of floor area shall be entitled to two (2) free standing
ground signs, each of which shall not be permitted to exceed three
hundred (300) square feet per face. Such signs shall be permitted to
display both the name and address of the industrial park and the names
of its individual industries.
Section 36.13 Conditional Use Permit
Any sign that does not clearly fit into one of the sign regulations in this Resolution
shall not be permitted except through issuance of a Conditional Use Permit
obtained from the Board of Zoning Appeals. This included all signs that have
flashing or pulsating illumination, animation, rotation, excessive dimensions or
height, temporary construction signs in excess of thirty-two (32) square feet, or
signs in excess of five (5) square feet advertising the sale, rental or lease of lots
and/or buildings.
Section 36.14 Signs Associated with Nonconforming Uses
In the case of legal nonconforming land use, the total sign area of all signs
associated with such land use shall be no greater than that which would be
allowed if the nonconforming use were located in the most restrictive zoning
district allowing such land use. Further, no new signs associated with
nonconforming land uses may be erected, except replacements, which are the
same, or smaller in size than the sign being replaced. In the event that a sign
associated with a nonconforming land use is moved, its new location must
conform to the setback requirements of the district in which it is located, as if it
were a building.
Section 36.15 Sign Permit Application and Fees
No sign regulated by this Resolution may be erected, painted, installed, or
otherwise established in Bethel Township without a permit therefore. Such permit
shall be obtained through the office of the Zoning Administrator. There shall be a
minimum fee for all sign permits set by the Board of Township Trustees and
permanently and publicly displayed in the Township House on the fee schedule.
Permit fees shall be calculated by square foot of message area. However,
permits issued for signs already in place at the time of permit application shall
bear an additional fee for square foot of message area and a minimum twice the
set minimum fee. No permit shall be required for real estate signs of five (5)
square feet or less, domestic advertising signs or temporary political signs.
Section 36.16 Enforcement Responsibility
Enforcement of the sign regulations shall be the responsibility of the Zoning
Administrator and such other appropriate personnel as may be designated by the
Trustees of Bethel Township.
Section 36.17 Removal of Unlawful Signs
The removal of unlawful signs shall occur as follows:
A. Any sign which violates the provisions of this Resolution is a public and
private nuisance, and the Zoning Administrator shall give ten (10) days
notice by registered or certified mail to the owner or lessee of the land on
which such sign is located to remove such sign.
B. If any such sign has not been removed on or before the expiration of ten
(10) days following the receipt of said notice by the owner or lessee of
the land upon which the sign is located, the Zoning Administrator or any
of his duly authorized agents may enter upon the premises and remove,
obliterate or abate the sign. The cost of such removal, obliteration, or
abatement shall be then certified to the County Prosecutor for collection
by civil action against the owner and/or lessee of the land upon which the
sign is located.
C. Notice to the owner or lessee shall not be required prior to the removal of
an unlawful sign which, in the opinion of the Zoning Administrator,
creates an immediate or potential danger to persons or property due to
structural deficiencies or inadequate maintenance, nor shall notice be
required prior to the removal of a sign which, in the opinion of the County
Engineer, creates an immediate or potential danger to persons or
property because of its location.
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 38 – Landscape and Buffer
Regulations – Updated March 2018
ARTICLE 38
LANDSCAPE AND BUFFER REGULATIONS
Section 38.01 Purpose
The purpose of landscaping and screening regulations is to promote and
protect the public health, safety and welfare through the preservation and
protection of the environment by recognizing the vital importance of plant
materials in the ecological system.
The purposes of this Article are to:
A. Promote the preservation and replacement of major trees;
B. To promote the proper utilization of landscaping as a buffer between
certain land uses to minimize the possibility of nuisances.
C. To encourage the enhancement of the visual environment, ensure
public safety, moderate the micro-climate and minimize nuisances,
primarily noise, visual pollution, and glare.
D. To protect surrounding property values.
Section 38.02 Applicability
The requirements of this Article shall apply to new property development
and any collective substantial expansion or change in land use, except for
single family dwellings and agricultural uses. Substantial expansion or
modification of the existing structures shall be defined based on the
criteria established below:
Any expansions of 500 square feet or less shall be exempt from the
Applicability Section of this Article.
When the Existing Structure is…. A Substantial Expansion
is….
0 - 1,000 Sq. Ft. 50% or Greater
1,001-10,000 Sq. Ft. 40% or Greater
10,001-25,000 Sq. Ft. 30% or Greater
25,001-50,000 Sq. Ft. 20% or Greater
50,001 Sq. Ft. and larger 10% or Greater
Section 38.03 Minimum Materials and Standards
The following describes the minimum landscaping and screening standard
requirements for all developments. Interior, perimeter and buffer zone
landscaping relate to vehicular use areas.
A. General Requirements
1. All plant material shall be sound, healthy, live plants installed and
maintained in accordance to acceptable nursery industry
procedures.
2. All fences used to meet the landscaping requirements of this
Article shall extend to within two (2) inches of the ground
grade.
3. Landscape plant materials shall be installed within nine (9)
months after a building or site is developed.
4. Earthen mounds shall have a maximum slope of three (3) to one
(1) (3:1), which is to say that three (3) feet of horizontal
space is required for each one (1) foot vertical change in
elevation. The crest or top of the mound shall be rounded
with elevation changes maintained one (1) foot off of the
centerline of the mound. Furthermore, earthen mounds or
berms shall be designed and constructed with variations in
physical alignment throughout the length of the mound or
berm.
5. When adjacent to other properties under same ownership,
landscape materials may be placed on either the adjoining
parcel or on the boundary line.
6. When adjacent to other properties under different ownership,
landscape materials may be placed on the boundary lines if
the different owners agree, in writing, to the arrangement,
and if the agreement is filed with the Zoning
Administrator/Enforcing Officer as a public record.
7. Perimeter landscaping and/or screening and buffer zone
landscaping shall be a minimum of fifteen (15) feet in width.
B. Street Tree Requirements
1. The subdivider or owner has the option of installing street trees.
The placement of trees shall not be within a public right-ofway
unless specifically approved by the Zoning
Administrator/Enforcing Officer.
2. All trees selected and planted shall be subject to approval of
plant materials by the Zoning Administrator/Enforcing
Officer.
3. No tree shall be planted directly over or under or within ten (10)
feet of a utility line.
4. The minimum spacing between trees is forty-five (45) feet for
large shade trees, thirty-five (35) feet for medium trees and
twenty-five (25) feet for ornamental trees. The recommended
maximum spacing of all street trees is sixty (60) feet.
5. If a developer elects the Township standard street sections, only
ornamental or medium trees may be used. Where the
developer elects to dedicate additional right of way, shade
trees may be used for street trees. A minimum of five (5) feet
shall be dedicated.
6. Tree limbs extending over a sidewalk shall be trimmed to such
an extent that no portion shall be less than eight (8) feet
above walks. Tree limbs extending over streets shall be
trimmed to such an extent that no portion shall interfere with
the normal flow of traffic.
C. Interior Landscaping for Off-Street Parking Areas
Interior landscaping shall include groundcover and other plant
materials located within an off-street parking area and shall be
regulated as follows:
1. Any off-street parking area, including aisles, excluding loading,
unloading and storage areas, in a Business or Industrial
District, consisting of more than 5,000 square feet of area, or
twenty (20) or more vehicular parking spaces, shall have
interior landscaping.
2. Space required for interior landscaping shall be in addition to any
required front, side or rear yard or any required perimeter or
buffer zone landscaping requirements.
3. The purpose of requiring interior landscaping is to:
a. Help reduce glare and heat build-up;
b. Promote interior islands for pedestrian safety and traffic
separation;
c. Visually reduce and break up large expanses of
pavement;
d. Reduce surface and storm water run-off.
4. Interior landscaping shall be provided at the ratio of one (1)
shade tree for every twenty (20) parking spaces or fraction
thereof. Other landscape materials, such as grass and
shrubs, may also be used in addition to the required shade
trees.
5. The minimum soil area or pervious surface area per tree shall be
the size of one parking stall or 180 square feet, whichever is
greater.
6. In order to encourage the required interior landscape areas to be
properly dispersed, no individual landscape area shall be
larger than 400 square feet in size.
7. The shortest distance to a tree in an interior landscaped area
from the edge of pavement where vehicles overhang shall
be three (3) feet.
8. To retain visibility within the off-street parking area, trees shall
have a clear trunk of at least five (5) feet above the ground.
9. Pervious surfaces not containing a tree shall be landscaped with
shrubs (not exceeding three (3) feet in height), and/or
ground cover, including grass.
10. The layout and design of interior landscaping shall be at the
discretion of the applicant but shall be approved by the
Zoning Administrator/ Enforcing Officer.
11. All landscaping shall be maintained in a healthy condition, kept
free of weeds and debris, and replaced as needed.
12. Interior landscaped areas shall be sufficiently protected damage
from vehicles.
D. Perimeter Landscaping
Perimeter landscaping shall be required to soften the edges of the
off-street parking area. Perimeter landscaping shall not constitute
“screening” of the off-street parking area.
1. In any multifamily or commercial use or district, perimeter
landscaping is required in all side and rear yards where offstreet
parking areas occur.
2. Landscaping shall include trees and a combination of: grass,
shrubs, or earthen mounds.
3. Where existing vegetation occurs adjacent to off-street parking
areas, perimeter landscaping will be subject to review by the
Zoning Administrator/Enforcing Officer.
4. Trees used for perimeter landscaping shall meet the following
spacing requirements:
a. Shade trees, twenty-five (25) feet to thirty (30) feet
on center;
b. Evergreen trees, fifteen (15) feet to twenty (20) feet
on center;
c. Ornamental trees, twelve (12) feet to thirty (30) feet
on center; and
5. Shrub materials used for landscaping shall be confined to
common planting beds. There shall be one (1) shrub for
every ten (10) lineal feet of the portion of the parking area
that the shrub is landscaping.
6. All areas not occupied by off-street parking areas, planting areas,
trees or shrubs shall be planted and maintained with grass.
E. Screening
1. Where an off-street parking area occurs in a Business, Office or
Industrial District and is located within eighty (80) feet of a
residentially zoned property or residential use in a nonresidentially
zoned property, or where an off-street parking
area occurs within a multi-family use and is located within
forty (40) feet of a property used or zoned for a single or twofamily
residential use, screening shall be installed, repaired,
replaced and maintained to a total height of not less than five
(5) feet above the parking lot grade. Such required screening
shall only be required along the sides of the off-street
parking area where viewed from the residentially zoned or
used property. The screening of off-street loading areas and
service courts shall be at least five (5) feet above the dock or
bay that it is screening.
2. Screening may consist of walls, fences, natural vegetation,
earthen mounds or a combination thereof.
3. Natural vegetation screening shall have a minimum opacity of
seventy-five (75) percent in all seasons.
4. Parking lot screening shall conform to the following standards:
a. All screening shall be installed and maintained in a neat
and orderly manner and kept free of weeds and other
debris.
b. The use of year-round vegetation with year-round foliage,
such as evergreen shrubs or trees, is required when
used as the primary screening material.
c. Screening shall be reasonably uniform in height and
opacity along its entire length.
d. When screening of live plants is installed, either alone or
in combination with other materials, the plants shall
be:
1. Mature to a minimum height of two (2) feet
at the time of installation;
2. Selected for year-round, dense foliage
adequate to shield residences from headlight
glare;
3. Selected to achieve the height and density
required within three (3) years of installation;
and
4. Maintained in a healthy, live state and
replaced as needed to comply with the original
site plan and the specifications and standards
outlined in this section.
e. When screening from a public right-of-way,
screening shall be maintained between 2 ½ and 3 ½
feet in height.
5. Screening of Industrial Uses shall conform to the following
standards:
Where a lot in an Industrial District abuts a residential district
or use, such as a residence on an agricultural parcel, a
landscape screen or buffer of forty (40) feet in width shall be
provided if no solid masonry wall is utilized. If a solid
masonry wall of at least six (6) feet in height is utilized, the
buffer may be reduced to fifteen (15) feet in width.
The arrangement of plantings in the buffer or screening area
shall be effective in creating a solid year-round screen that
screens to a height of eight (8) feet. The use of mounding in
combination with plantings is encouraged to ensure that the
minimum height is reached within three (3) years of
installation. Where mounding is not used, either dense
evergreens or a solid opaque fence shall be used to ensure
the screening is continuous at all times of the year.
Within the required landscape buffer or screened area, the
following improvements, individually or in combination, shall
be provided:
a. Shade trees shall be planted on an average of one (1)
tree for every thirty (30) feet of the yard length.
Ornamental or evergreen trees may be substituted for
shade trees.
b. Shrubs, measuring a minimum of two (2) feet at planting,
and clustered or spaced linearly to form a continuous
dense hedge. Where shrubs are used in combination
with other materials, the use of shrubs shall comprise
fifty percent (50%) of the required landscape buffer.
c. Mounding, with a minimum top width of at least two (2)
feet and a maximum side slope for front and back
sides of three (3) feet horizontal to one (1) foot
vertical (3:1). Such mounding shall not exceed eight
(8) feet in height and shall be planted with a
combination of ground cover, shrubs and trees.
d. A solid opaque fence eight (8) feet in height erected along
one hundred percent (100%) of the yard length with
appropriate landscaping, including trees, shrubs, to
soften visual elements of the fence or an interrupted
solid, opaque fence six (6) feet in height and
supplemented with landscaping in order to create a
solid visual screen along the entire yard length.
e. Areas not planted with trees or shrubs shall be maintained
as turf or other groundcover.
6. Screening is also required between:
a. Single and multifamily uses;
b. Any residential and commercial, office or industrial use;
and
c. Commercial and industrial uses.
d. Off-street parking areas and parking lots and the public
right-of-way.
Screening shall be required to be established and
maintained by the more intensive of the abutting uses (e.g. a
commercial property shall establish and maintain a screen
when adjacent to a residential use).
Section 38.04 Obstructions to Visibility at Intersections
A. To ensure that landscape materials do not constitute a driving hazard, a
sight triangle shall be observed at all street intersections or
driveways with streets. Within this sight triangle, trees shall be
permitted so long as (except during early growth stages) only their
trunks are visible between the ground and eight (8) feet above the
ground, or they otherwise do not present a traffic visibility hazard.
B. At street intersections, the sight triangle is the area measured thirty (30)
feet from the street intersection. No material shall be allowed to
grow more than thirty-two (32) inches in height above the street
grade within this sight triangle.
C. At intersections of driveways with streets, the sight triangle shall be
established by locating the intersection of the driveway pavement
edge and the street right-of-way line within two ten (10) foot
triangles. No landscaping over thirty-two (32) inches in height
above the driveway grade may be maintained within this sight
triangle.
Section 38.05 Screening of Service Structures in Non-Residential Districts
A. Generally
The screening of service structures such as dumpster enclosures,
HVAC equipment, transformer boxes, loading docks, service
courts, etc. shall be as follows:
1. Screening may consist of walls, fences, natural vegetation or a
combination thereof.
2. Natural vegetation screening, during full foliage, shall have
minimum opacity of seventy-five (75) percent.
3. Fences and walls shall have an opacity of 100 percent.
B. Service Courts and Loading Dock Areas
C. Trash Container Receptacles
1. All areas used for service and loading activities shall be
screened along the entire rear lot line and side lot line to the
building set-back line in all commercial, office and industrial
uses.
2. Where a loading area abuts a Residential District or use,
screening eight (8) feet in height is required around all
loading areas.
3. Where a loading area abuts a non-residential district or use,
screening six (6) feet in height is required around all loading
areas except when adjoining an Industrial District or another
service court.
Screening of trash receptacles and dumpster enclosures is as
established in Section 30.25, Dumpster and Trash Enclosure
Areas.
Section 38.06 Prohibited Locations and Species
A. No trees shall be planted over any storm or sanitary sewers.
B. The following plant materials are prohibited in a street right of way:
Scientific Name Common Name
Trees
Abies species Fir
Acer negundo Box Elder
Acer saccharinum Silver Maple
Aesculus hippocastanum Horsechestnut
Ailanthus altissima Tree-of- Heaven
Betula pendula European Birch
Catalpa sepciosa Catalpa
Celtis occidentalis Hackberry
Chamaecyparis species False Cypress
Crataegus oxyaxantha 'Pauli' Paul's Scarlet Hawthorn
Fraxinus Ash
Ginko bilboa Ginko
Juniperus virginiana Eastern Red Cedar
Liriodendron tulipifera Tulip Tree
Maclura pomifera Osage Orange
Morus alba White Mulberry
Pinus strobes Eastern White Pine
Populus species Poplars
Robinia pseudoacacia Black Locust
Salix species Willows
Sorbus aucuparia European Mountain Ash
Ulmus species Elms
Shrubs
Abelia grandiflora Glossy Abelia
Berberis species Barberry
Caprifoliaceae species Honeysuckle
Forsythia species Forsythia
Rosa species Rose
Spiraea species Spiraea
Section 38.07 Maintenance
A. All shrubs, trees, grass, ground covers and other plantings shall be well
maintained, properly weeded, properly pruned, mulched and kept
free of trash and other unsightly material and/or debris. Required
screening material which does not survive shall be replaced by an
owner within six (6) months after the material dies.
B. Fences, walls and other screening structures shall be maintained and
kept in good condition.
Section 38.08 Landscaping Plan Required Prior to Issuance of Zoning Certificates
and Certificates of Occupancy
All portions of the lot upon which a building or parking area is not
constructed shall be landscaped. A preliminary landscaping plan shall be
submitted by the owner or developer of the lot or tract of land at the time
the zoning certificate is applied for. The landscaping plan shall contain:
A. The location and general description (i.e. trees, shrubs, grass, etc.) of
areas to be landscaped.
B. The size, caliper and height of plant materials at the time of planting
and at the time of maturity.
No zoning certificate shall be issued until such plan has been approved by
the Zoning Administrator/Enforcing Officer.
Section 38.09 Modifications
The Zoning Administrator/Enforcing Officer may approve modifications to
the landscaping and screening requirements. The Zoning
Administrator/Enforcing Officer shall base their decision on ALL of the
following criteria:
A. The specific conditions exist which are unique to the applicant's land;
B. The manner in which the strict application of the provision of this Article
would deprive the applicant of a reasonable use of the land in a
manner equivalent to the use permitted other landowners in the
same zone;
C. The unique conditions and circumstances are not the result of actions
of the applicant or previous owners subsequent to the adoption of
this Article;
D. Reasons that the modification shall preserve, not harm, the public
safety and welfare, and shall not alter the essential character of the
neighborhood; and
E. A demonstration that the applicant has provided for a buffer that
achieves the spirit of this Article.
The existing buffers and screening provide sufficient protection to adjacent properties
such that the intent and spirit of this Article is achieved.
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 39 – Pond Regulations – September
2018
39.01 INTENT
The purpose of these regulations is to guide the development, design, maintenance and
structural integrity of ponds, lakes, wetlands, or other water detention/retention
structures. It is the purpose of these regulations to promote the public’s health, safety
and welfare by minimizing local nuisances, as well as potentially dangerous health and
safety concerns, and to further the general harmony between and amongst neighbors.
39.02 SCOPE OF REGULATIONS
The regulations herein set forth shall apply to and govern ponds in all districts: All water
impoundments such as ponds, lakes, or wetlands shall be constructed and developed in
compliance with the following standards.
A. No applicable structure shall hereafter be located, constructed, repaired, extended,
enlarged, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this resolution.
Said construction, alterations or modifications require a zoning permit.
B. “DETENTION POND” shall mean an artificially formed structure designed to hold
storm water runoff, detaining it for a period of time before ultimately slowly discharging
the water downstream. Detention ponds are designed to complement large scale
residential, commercial and industrial developments. Detention ponds must be designed
and constructed to the specifications of a licensed professional engineer and the
engineering plans must be reviewed and approved by the respective authorized
agencies. No Permit Required.
C. “RETENTION POND” shall mean an artificially formed structure designed to hold
water year round with the capacity to accommodate a limited amount of storm water
runoff. Retention ponds are reservoirs of natural water designed to enhance aesthetic
elements of large scale residential, commercial, and industrial developments. Retention
ponds must be designed and constructed to the specifications of a licensed professional
engineer and the engineering plans must be reviewed and approved by the respective
authorized agencies. No Permit Required.
D. “AGRICULTURAL POND” shall mean a natural or artificially formed structure which
serve as a reservoir of water for year-round agricultural use. Agricultural ponds are to
be used for agricultural based activities as per ORC 303.01. Agricultural ponds may
also support fire suppression due to the lack of access to municipal water services. The
use of such ponds is limited and restricted to those activities supported by the owners.
Agricultural ponds shall not engage in off-farm commercial uses or in any commercial
recreational activities such as, but not limited to, fishing or swimming. Zoning Permit
subject to agricultural exemption in accordance with ORC 303.21.
E. “RECREATIONAL POND” shall mean a new artificially formed structure over 750
square feet which is intended to serve as a permanent reservoir of water serving
aesthetic desires and /or as an activity center for year-round use. Such ponds are to be
designed for year-round enjoyment and to further such activities such as wildlife
habitats, swimming, fishing, ice skating, etc. ponds must be reviewed by the Miami
County Soil and Water Conservation District and must meet or exceed the standards
and specifications of the Natural Resource Conservation Service. Zoning Permit is
required.
1. Recreational ponds shall not be located closer than 25 feet from any lot lines or
easements and where applicable, they shall not be located closer than 75 feet from any
road right-of-way. In addition, they shall meet the current State of Ohio and/or Miami
County Health Department well and/or septic system setbacks. They shall not restrict or
block existing or future surface and/or sub-surface drainage systems.
2. Large ponds of a sufficient size, determined by the Ohio Dam Safety Law, may be
subject to review, approval and annual inspection by the Ohio Department of Natural
Resources, Division of Water.
3. The property owner and/or applicant will be required to submit to the Bethel Township
Zoning Department a copy of the proposed construction plan which has been approved
by the authorized agency and other necessary documentation for the purpose of
obtaining a zoning permit.
4. Setbacks shall be measured from the high-water line or toe dam, whichever is closer.
39.03 PERMITTING PROCESS
A. The Applicant will submit plans to the Bethel Township Zoning Department for
preliminary review.
B. The Bethel Township Zoning Department will forward the application to the Miami
County Soil and Water Conservation District for their review.
C. After Soil and Water’s review the Bethel Township Zoning Department will issue a
permit if all standards are met or exceeded.
Bethel Township Zoning Resolution Article 40 – Violations and Corrective Actions
– September 2018
ARTICLE 40
VIOLATIONS AND CORRECTIVE ACTIONS
Section 40.01 Unlawful Activity
A. It shall be unlawful to locate, erect, or construct any building or to use
any land in violation of any regulation or any provision of this
Zoning Resolution or any amendment or supplement thereto.
B. It shall be unlawful to reconstruct, enlarge, change, maintain or use any
building or to use any land in violation of any regulation or any part
of this Zoning Resolution or any amendment or supplement thereto,
except as otherwise permitted in this Zoning Resolution.
Section 40.02 Violation
Any person, firm, or corporation violating any regulation, provision,
amendment or supplement of this Zoning Resolution, or fails to obey any
lawful order of the Zoning Administrator issued in pursuance thereof, shall
be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor each and every day during which the
illegal location, erection, construction, reconstruction, enlargement,
change, maintenance or use may be deemed a separate offense.
Section 40.03 Corrective Actions
If any use is proposed to be located, erected, constructed, reconstructed,
enlarged, changed, maintained or used, or any land is or is proposed to be
used in violation of any regulation, provision, amendment or supplement of
this Zoning Resolution, the Board of Township Trustees, the Zoning
Administrator, or any adjacent or neighboring property owner who would
be specifically damaged by such violation, in addition to other corrective
actions provided by law, may institute injunction, mandamus, abatement,
or any other appropriate action, actions, proceeding or proceedings to
prevent, enjoin, abate or remove such unlawful location, erection,
construction, reconstruction, enlargement, change maintenance or use.
RESOLUTION #15-06-058
A RESOLUTION CONTROLLING NOISE NUISANCES
WHEREAS, O.R.C. SECTION 505.172 AUTHORIZES A TOWNSHIP TO ADOPT
NOISE CONTROL REGULATIONS WITHIN AREAS ZONED FOR RESIDENTIAL
USE; AND
WHEREAS, O.R.C. SECTION 505.172 PROVIDES THAT A VIOLATION OF THE
TOWNSHIP NOISE CONTROL RESOLUTION IS A MINOR MISDEMEANOR; AND
WHEREAS, NOISE CAN, AND DOES, CREATE A NUISANCE THAT MAY
ADVERSELY AFFECT THE ADJACENT OR NEIGHBORING PROPERTY
OWNERS OR PERSONS IN RESIDENTIAL AREAS; AND
WHEREAS, WHEN A NUISANCE CONDITION IS CREATED, THE HEALTH,
SAFETY AND WELFARE OF TOWNSHIP RESIDENTS IS THREATENED AND
ADVERSELY AFFECTED; THEREFORE
BE IT RESOLVED BY THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF BETHEL TOWNSHIP,
MIAMI COUNTY THAT THE FOLLOWING LEGISLATION BE ADOPTED:
Section I.
A. No person shall make, continue, cause to be made, suffer, allow, or permit within
the unincorporated area of Bethel Township, Miami County, Ohio any
unreasonably loud, disturbing or unnecessary noise or noises of such character,
intensity or duration that annoy, disturb, injure or endangers the peace, health,
comfort, safety or quiet of any individual.
B. The creation of noise or noises in the following manner are declared to be in
violation of Section A, but this enumeration shall not be deemed exclusive:
1. The sounding of any horn, bell or other signal or warning on any motor
vehicle, except as a danger or warning signal, for any unnecessary reason
or for any unreasonable period time.
2. The harboring or keeping of any dog or animal which, by loud, frequent,
habitual or continued barking, howling or yelping, disturbs or annoys any
person in the vicinity, where such noise can be heard outside the property
line of the premises at which the dog or animal is kept. Any person who
shall allow any dog or animal to remain, be lodged or fed within any
dwelling, building, yard or enclosure, which he occupies or owns, shall
be considered as harboring such dog or animal. None of the provision of
this paragraph shall apply to owners, operators, or employees of duly
licensed veterinary hospitals; or to blind persons when a dog serves as a
guide or leader.
3. The playing or permitting to be played of any music, radio, music
player, television, audio system or musical instrument or the
amplification of any sound in such a manner so as to annoy or disturb the
peace, enjoyment, quiet, comfort or repose of any person of ordinary
sensibilities, or at such volume which is plainly audible to persons other
than those who are on or in the premises in which such device or
instrument is being played and are voluntary listeners thereto.
4. The making of any unnecessary or unreasonable noises by a person or by
his operation of any instrument, device, agency or vehicle within 150
feet of any school, church or building in which religious services are
held, during school hours, or during public worship, respectively.
C. Whoever violates this resolution shall guilty of a minor misdemeanor.
Section II. This resolution shall take effect at the earliest time as permitted by law.
Section III. It has been determined that all formal actions of the Board of Trustees of Bethel
Township concerning and relating to the adoption of this resolution were adopted in open
meetings of the Bethel Township Board of Trustees; and that all deliberations of the Bethel
Township Board of Trustees that resulted in such formal action, were in meetings open to the
public.
CERTIFICATE OF RECORDING OFFICER
I, DEBORAH WATSON, HEREBY CERTIFY THAT THE FORGOING IS A TRUE AND
CORRECT COPY OF RESOLUTION # 15-06-058 ADOPTED BY THE BOARD OF
TRUSTEES OF BETHEL TOWNSHIP MIAMI COUNTY HELD ON THE 23RD DAY OF
JUNE, 2015, AND THAT I AM DULY AUTHORIZED TO EXECUTE THIS CERTIFICATE.